
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 4 August 2021

Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to today’s sitting. I have noted with concern and received complaints from Members of Parliament about the manner in which the multi-level car parking is used. Often, vehicles are parked in the driveway while there are vehicles that have visibly been parked in the same slots for unduly long periods of time. 

The parliamentary car park has a capacity of 505 parking slots; it can accommodate 505 cars. The ground level is already in use for House sittings, implying that the slots are always few. Therefore, I implore you, Members, to use the parking yard responsibly. 

In addition, I hereby direct the Sergeant-at-Arms to establish those cars that permanently occupy the parking space, making some Members not get where to park their cars.

Honourable members, as you recall, I informed you that we shall take a short recess to carry out an oversight role on the Emyooga programme. I would like to remind you that the duty to ensure accountability of public funds in the Constitution rests with Parliament under Article 164 (3). Parliament will duly monitor all the expenditure of the public funds. The funds that have been given to our people are public funds but they are not properly being used. 

I was surprised when somebody from Mbale called and said that they had been told to save a certain amount of money. They had also been told to give a commission before they are given money and to make sure that after the money is disbursed, they return it to where it was coming from. When shall we change our country if we allow this kind of thing to continue? How can a few people act with that kind of impunity? 

I am sending you, honourable Members of Parliament, to your constituencies to ensure that you take the lead in making sure the people benefit from that money. You are accountable to this country and if you do not take the lead, those same people will not vote for you. Therefore, make sure that you work for those people. 

As the 11th Parliament, like we said before, we have agreed to take the Parliament to the grassroots and ensure that the leaders take the lead in the smooth implementation of Government programmes, to ensure the socio-economic transformation of our people at the grassroots.

We are doing this because Uganda Vision 2040 aims to transform the Ugandan society from a peasantry to a modern and prosperous society. This vision is embedded in the National Development Plan III, to guide the nation and deliver aspirations of the people of Uganda as articulated in the Uganda Vision 2040. 

I urge you to get the information that you require for that oversight role, which is in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I have seen hon. Kasolo here; you need to tell all Members of Parliament how much money was sent to each district, how many groups are available in each district, how much they were supposed to benefit, how many have benefitted and what constraints they face in every district. We need that information before we break off on Friday. 

2.27 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kyeyune): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate your directive that Members of Parliament go to their respective constituencies and find out what exactly is happening with the Emyooga programme - the progress and challenges - so that we can see how best we can serve our people. 

Madam Speaker, as per your directive to supply information to the Members of Parliament, we have started doing so and I think many Members of Parliament have received this information in respect to – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we need the information. I do not want a general statement saying “many Members of Parliament have received.” We need the information before close of business tomorrow. 

MR KYEYUNE: Madam Speaker, we are going to send information in the Members’ pigeonholes before close of business tomorrow. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am also amending the Order Paper to permit the Leader of the Opposition to reply to the State-of-the-Nation Address, which was delivered by His Excellency the President on 4 June 2021. He will come in before we deal with item No. 4. 

Honourable members, it is with joy that I announce that we won a gold medal about 30 minutes back in the 2020 Olympic Games being held in Tokyo. The gold medal at the 3000 steeplechase race was won by Peruth Chemutai. (Applause) 

Also, yesterday at the Olympics, all our three boys qualified for the 5000 metres final race - Cheptegei, Chelimo and Kiplimo - which will be held on Friday. Kindly, continue praying for our team and Uganda. These athletes are holding our flag high. Congratulations, our young people who are in Tokyo. I wish to thank you for your attention. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communication. I would like to also congratulate one of us who has got a gold medal. 

Last week, I raised a matter on Ssekitoleko who was arrested upon return from Japan. You directed that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes here and explains why he kept this young man for over 48 hours in detention after he was deported. With all the good news you have given us, we have not got any statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs.

Today, I can see the Front Bench is very empty; I do not know whether he is coming. I have just heard the President on radio saying that we should be in our constituencies all the time. Members of Parliament are only meant to be in their constituencies when you give us time to go there. However, most of our work is here.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, for us to know when the Minister of Internal Affairs will come and explain why Ssekitoleko was detained beyond 48 hours? We see him on television crying every day and getting a lot of gifts. I do not know what to say regarding that. We need to know because those are the people who have managed to bring us gold medals at their own peril and Government comes in with minimum support. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NAMBESHE: Our gallant sons and daughters are flying our flag high and earning gold, silver and bronze medals. Madam Speaker, as Parliament, the best tribute we could pay to them, through your Chair and indulgence, is to prevail over Government to fast-track construction of the high altitude training centre in Teryet, Kapchorwa. 

It has taken donkey’s years and lots of money has been disbursed to construct that training facility. However, even the quality of the buildings that are being constructed have been compromised because of corruption. Therefore, it would require a directive that you prevail over Government to construct this facility or fast-track its construction because it has taken too long. At least, it should be complete by now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will have a motion when the team returns and that is when we shall have all that. There is an issue that has – Government Chief Whip -

2.33
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to make clarification on the impression created that the President has said Members of Parliament should only be in their constituencies. 

The President, while communicating the legislative agenda of Government 2021/2022 to the Prime Minister, wrote that it is very important that as much as Members of Parliament do work in Parliament, they should also spare time to go and oversee Government projects in their constituencies. Madam Speaker, luckily, this is in line with what you also guided regarding next week. 

The President is concerned that as you will send us to the constituencies next week, for example, some of us will remain in Kampala and not even go to oversee such projects. That was the issue which the President was raising.

On the issue of Ssekitoleko, maybe my colleague wanted Ssekitoleko to remain in prison so that he gets what to say here. Ssekitoleko was released. Madam Speaker, as you directed, the Minister of Internal Affairs will be coming to make a statement to that effect as long as you give him space on the Order Paper. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give the minister space tomorrow to give this House a report on Ssekitoleko. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need clarification on what happened and why he was detained for over 48 hours. We also need information from you on the stadium in Sebei. 

We are all here very excited but those young men do not have where to train from. When I see people excited here, I really pity us for what we are going through. Hon. Ssewungu, your issue has been resolved and there is no point of order.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I want to correct it. The Government Chief Whip is a lawyer. Unless he wants to assure this House that he was dodging some lectures on constitutional law, but when we talk about detention of someone, it is not about merely detention or the 48 hours but it is about his rights and infringement of his rights.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have made a ruling on that. Also, the law class you are referring to is not correct. Can you take your seat? Let us first have the point of procedure.

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate your passion, especially when it comes to the talents of Ugandans. These young men and women of Uganda are promoting the name of Uganda as a country when we are not there. 

Last week, Madam Speaker, you directed that the minister in charge of sports brings a report on how sports is going to be revamped. I am told that even the basketball players and others have failed to go to Tokyo. I also understand – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is actually Cairo not Tokyo.

MR KABERUKA: Oh yes! Madam Speaker, I am told that many people who are not participating have flown to Tokyo, leaving the young men and women behind. This is the point where we would have the minister in charge of sports to elaborate and tell the country what is going on and how they are planning to strategically improve sports and even facilitate our team, which is flying our flag high. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, for the minister to come and attend to this issue because at this point, we have “appetite” to listen to him? Thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the same vein, allow me to congratulate our young lady and the two boys who won medals for the betterment of this country. 

The information I want to give concerns the construction of the training ground in Kapchorwa. You will remember in the Tenth Parliament that Parliament approved money for this and the money was released. Some four years ago, we got information that the first money which was released was stolen and no work was seen on the ground. Right now, the Ministry of Education and Sports is running around to get more money for the same purpose. 

This is the time we need to be very serious as a country. We plan and budget but the level of corruption among our people in the higher authorities is too much. We cannot continue budgeting and planning for the same purpose. Through your office, Madam Speaker, you need to direct the ministry that this time, the place should be completed and the level of training should be done. Also, proper accountability must be brought to this House. I will take the information. 

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, hon. Olanya, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that it is not only the athletics field that has failed to be completed; we also have the same issue in the football sector. 

In the last two years, the Minister of State for Sports has been telling the House how they are going to upgrade stadia in the five regions of this country - in Mbarara, Masaka, Arua and Mbale. We are, however, seeing only one stadium in Arua being upgraded. Some people there are saying that it is a private stadium, which is being constructed using personal funding, not from Government. 

Therefore, when the minister comes to explain the progress of the Teryet Athletic Centre, he should also brief the House about the progress on those stadia that they promised. 

Today we are happy about our athletes succeeding in Tokyo but next time, you will hear about how football is failing and it will be because of the lack of playing facilities all over the country. Every game in this country is suffering, including football, boxing and others like swimming because of lack of proper facilities, yet we have appropriated some money for these facilities to be constructed. That is the information I had to give.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to make some clarification on the issue of sports. The basketballers have not yet missed like it has been put on record. They are scheduled to travel tomorrow. That is for the U-16s. Government is also doing everything possible to ensure that indeed the tickets are ready. What is missing is money for general accommodation and we are working on that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you report to this House tomorrow that these people have travelled and that you have gotten money for their upkeep while in Tokyo? 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, I will report about that tomorrow. However, on the other issues, I request that after the Olympics, you give us space to give the House a comprehensive report on the funding to the sports sector. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is very useless for you to give them tickets when they do not have what to use there. This is sports. They have to feed and sleep somewhere. Make sure you follow that up and let the House know. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, I can assure you Government cannot do anything useless. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not want us to pre-empt the discussion about the motion I have asked you to bring on the Tokyo games; unless you are saying something about the gold medallists. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add some information to your communication about the parking space for Members of Parliament. 

I have been observing, as a backbench commissioner, that in the last two weeks, Members have been going through untold suffering in the parking area in the basement. Members get stressed. Some are blocked. Yesterday, I heard of a Member who got blocked for almost six hours. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that we have parking that Parliament has already paid for at the place where we are going to have new premises. I request that you give a directive that we start using the 300 parking lots at Kingdom Kampala Hotel even before Members get offices there. Such a directive will relieve the pressure on the parking space in the basement. The other one will be for 300 vehicles. Since we paid, let us begin to park our vehicles there with immediate effect, to save Members from struggling for parking down here. That is what I had to add. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable commissioner, have you said that Members suffer to park, that when they are coming to plenary they have nowhere to park? Remember, they come here at 2.00 p.m. We should be mindful of the parking. As a commissioner, you should be mindful of the parking for Members from 2.00 p.m. onwards. We have 505 parking spaces. What is wrong with you labelling each parking slot with constituency names so that everybody knows they have a parking slot? 

What you do not know is that three-quarters of the parking area is taken up by staff of Parliament. So, if we do not act on that – Commissioner, make sure Members of Parliament have parking. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that information. However, the directive of putting names of Members of Parliament in the parking slots creates a very big insecurity issue. Unless Members agree –(Interjections)– it is very sensitive, knowing that hon. Tayebwa parks here every day -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no insecurity. Label each parking slot for every Member of Parliament. 

MR SILWANY: We are going to go ahead then. Thank you. 

MR JOHN MUSILA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to the information you have given us, I would like to speak about the Teryet high altitude facility. Like hon. Nambeshe said, it is true the pace at which its construction is going is a bit slow. 

I come from the region. I am John Musila from Bubulo East. I visited that place three days ago –  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. John Musila, can you reserve that for the debate on the motion in regard to the athletes when they come back? 

MR MUSILA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with you on the parking issue. As MPs for PWDs, we had our parking space here and it was well marked. The tent has, however, taken over that space. I would beg, Madam Speaker, that you direct that the next floor to where we are be reserved for us and be well designed. These parking slots here were a bit wide. We, however, have challenges of getting into our cars when they are squeezed because of the different nature of the disability that we wield. 

I know that your office will direct that this be done so that we are saved from running up and down. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Commissioner Silwany, take note of the fact that Members representing PWDs need offices and parking lots in the main building. 

MR JOHN TEIRA: Madam Speaker, thank you for guiding rightly that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes to explain to the House the issue of detention of people beyond the 48 hours. However, I would like to bring it to your attention that – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you mention your name first? 

MR TEIRA: My name is John Teira from Bugabula North Constituency.

There is public outcry, and all the public legal practitioners will attest to it that it is now a privilege to have a suspect released from detention within a period of 48 hours. Now that you have guided that the minister comes here and explains this matter, it should not only relate to Ssekitoleko, who was detained beyond 48 hours. It should be a general report on the continued detention of suspects in this country beyond the constitutionally guaranteed 48 hours. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government Chief Whip, take note of that. 

MR OSHABE: Madam Speaker, you had given me the opportunity but my colleague used the opportunity. However, I want to thank you.

On the matter of parking, we must appreciate that as plenary, we encroached on the parking space that we have in this Parliament. It is high time, therefore, we demanded the Parliamentary Commission to give us answers as to why our Chamber construction is lying still at such a time when the speed should be high to cater for the increasing numbers.

The Chamber is just there. The Judiciary started building theirs just yesterday and we see them moving at a very high speed. I think this House needs to know when construction of the Chamber is going to be completed. The issue of saying we are going to rent from Kingdom Hall – Kingdom Hall is almost a kilometre away from here; how are Members going to manage that? 

Madam Speaker, I think that at the right time, this House needs to know what is going on with the construction of our Chamber and when it is likely to be completed. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We will be reporting. As the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission, I will report on the status of the new Chamber when you come back from the recess.

2.52
MS BEATRICE AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to react to your communication that Members of Parliament should monitor Government projects in their districts and constituencies. 

I would like to report that the Government of Uganda has been implementing the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF) project in northern Uganda in phases, through the Office of the Prime Minister. The purpose was to reconstruct and rehabilitate northern Uganda, in order to improve livelihoods and reduce poverty in northern Uganda. However, as I speak, Government has phased out the NUSAF project in northern Uganda, yet according to the household survey report of 2019/2020, poverty has increased in the region.

In Acholi subregion, for instance, the poverty rate has increased from 33 per cent to 68 per cent. In Lango, it has increased from 16 per cent to 23 per cent. In Karamoja, it has gone up from 60 per cent to 66 per cent. Therefore, I would like to know whether Government has a successor programme for NUSAF III in northern Uganda. If it is there, when will it take effect? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank my colleague for raising the matter.

Listening to the submission by my colleague, it appears that despite the fact that NUSAF has been in northern Uganda for some good time, poverty is still there. As Government, we have come up with a new programme that seems to address most of the challenges concerning poverty - the Parish Development Model – which is the new programme –(Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, you are aware that northern Uganda went through war that took a long time and NUSAF was a rehabilitation programme. When we talk about the Parish Development Model, it is a general programme for the whole country. 

Is it in order for the minister to come to the Floor of the House and tell us that the Parish Development Model is a way of rehabilitating northern Uganda, when it is a programme for the whole country? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are aware that the Parish Development Model is for the whole country. Northern Uganda had the NUSAF project. What plans do you have for the NUSAF project that you terminated?

2.56
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, a review has been going on for the NUSAF project. Government has been meeting MPs from the regions that have been benefitting from the project and a report is going to be made. It will come to this Parliament and we will take action.

However, Madam Speaker, I want to give clarification. When planning, we plan for a country. Northern Uganda is part of Uganda –(Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I respect the Government Chief Whip. I know that he has been in Parliament for some time, so he knows that when there is a point of order, he has to sit down.

I am a Member of Parliament from Acholi subregion. Apart from that, I was recently elected chairman of the Acholi Parliamentary Group. We have never met the Government in a process of reviewing NUSAF in northern Uganda. Is it in order for the Government Chief Whip to come to the Floor of Parliament and lie that Government has been meeting Members of Parliament from the region to review the NUSAF project? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, kindly go and bring the correct information on what is happening. We want a write-up on the plans Government has for northern Uganda, in replacement of NUSAF.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. However, I want to put the record straight.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We do not want the response now.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah moved through northern Uganda for that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is not the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was in Karamoja for that and he was in Acholi for that. Personally, I went to Acholi and I met some MPs from there. So, how can someone say that I am giving wrong information –(Members rose_)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you allow the Government Chief Whip to finish his statement?

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, once the review is finished, we are going to present it to Parliament. However, if a statement is needed before we even complete the review, give us space and we shall present it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, give us a statement on what plans you have. I am giving you one week to give us a statement on the issue of NUSAF. 

You are going to finish all the time on points of procedure and order, honourable members. Why don’t we go to another item?

MR CHEMASWET: Madam Speaker, this is about the two weeks’ recess that you are giving us. How will the Government Chief Whip report to Parliament at a time when we are going for recess?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chemaswet, were you in this House yesterday? No.

MR CHEMASWET: I was around, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

2.58
MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is simple. I thank you for putting priority on the discussion of problems that our sportsmen and sportswomen face. I come from Sebei; we know all the problems that our sportspeople face, including what hon. Chemaswet and all the other Members from Sebei wanted to talk about. 

I would like to request this House to set a special day so that we can discuss all the problems faced by our runners, who are in Tokyo right now. I think that is better. Otherwise, we have a lot of problems that can take the whole day to discuss. Thank you for giving me that time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am reminding you Members to mention your names for the Hansard before you talk. 

MR CHEMONGES: All the three runners who won medals at the Tokyo Olympics 2020 are from my constituency. (Applause)

3.00
MR BRAHAN EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): I am speaking in relation to your communication. You said that the Government of Uganda is proceeding with the industrialisation of Uganda. I feel that we, from West Nile, are disadvantaged. For industrialisation to take place, we need good roads and power. 

As I talk, the road which was supposed to be constructed from Koboko to Adjumani has taken too long. Some people have been compensated, but others have not. As of now, the road is impassable. Even power has not been extended to most of those areas. I do not know whether it is going to be possible to create employment opportunities for our people as a result of industrialisation when there is no power and good roads. I pray that we do something there at least. I beg to submit. Thank you. 

3.02
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): On the issue of energy, West Nile, which is being served by West Nile Rural Electrification Company (WENRECo), had a shortfall of five megawatts last year. The Government transferred some of the thermal generators from the Tororo plant to West Nile, worth eight megawatts. As I talk now, in West Nile, we have a surplus of three megawatts from the thermal generators, which came from the Tororo plant. 

West Nile is being connected to the national grid. The issue has been the access of right of way for us to construct the transmission line –(Interruption)

MR FETA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the Government Chief Whip in order to tell a lie to this Parliament that West Nile is being served adequately?

As we speak now, WENRECo is only supplying 2.1 megawatts and Electro-Maxx is supplying only four megawatts. Is it in order for the Government Chief Whip to continue deceiving our people, when West Nile has suffered consistently, for all these years, because of inadequate electricity? It is very annoying. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Feta and the other Members standing, please sit down. Government Chief Whip, the people of West Nile are saying they do not have adequate power. [Mr Feta: “He is lying here. I want to report to this House that I am just from the constituency. There is no activity at the site.”] This is not a drinking joint. (Laughter) 

What we are saying is: The Government should ensure that West Nile has sufficient power. That is the issue that is being raised by hon. Feta. If he is telling us that what you are saying is not correct, bring a paper with figures to this House to disapprove him. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: I take your guidance, Madam Speaker. What I was concluding with was that a transmission line connecting West Nile to the national grid was funded by Parliament here to the tune of $110 million. The transmission line is being constructed and by the end of this year, West Nile will be connected to the national grid. 

In two weeks’ time, the Minister of Energy will come with a statement containing those figures to the House. 

MR BABA: The procedural issue I am raising is whether the Government Chief Whip should keep rising to explain every matter when there are sector ministers, who can respond competently to pertinent issues. The issue of electricity is a very hot matter for the people of West Nile, yet he comes and lies on the Floor when the people of West Nile have no power. West Nile Rural Electrification Company has no capacity.

Therefore, is the Government Chief Whip procedurally correct to keep jumping up every now and then to explain issues, which should be answered by the ministers responsible? Thank you. 

MR ATIMA: The information I would like to give to the House is that the power situation in West Nile is very pathetic. It is a serious matter that everybody in West Nile is agitated about. 

As I talk now, work has stalled at Olwiyo. The transmission line that is being constructed from Karuma to West Nile has stopped at Olwiyo Power Station. The compensation that my colleague, hon. Ezama, talked about has stopped. There is no power in the region. West Nile Rural Electrification Company is not even delivering any power supply at all.

Madam Speaker, the information I am giving is that West Nile is in a blackout. Even the health sector – the oxygen – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, the message on electricity has been gotten. Can we hear from the Minister of Works and Transport? I have not allowed all of you who are standing to remain standing. I only want hon. Akol and hon. Lutaaya -  

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I particularly thank my colleague, who drew the attention of this House to the plight of the people on the road from Koboko to Adjumani. When I took over the sector, I found many files and some of them indicate roads that we intend to work on. Some roads have already been committed by the signing of an understanding between the Government and the contractors. 

I know that the construction of the road from Koboko to Adjumani through Moyo is a commitment that was undertaken and we continue to look at it very strategically. It was initially supposed to be constructed through the World Bank support to refugee hosting districts. I, therefore, ask you to allow me an opportunity to go and come back with a precise statement that concerns this road - whether it is something that is supposed to be done by the World Bank or if we are looking for resources as a Government. I should be able to do that immediately we come back from recess. I will also use that opportunity to indicate to colleagues some of the major projects that we intend to undertake across the country.

The last time I made a statement here, I also did indicate that it is our plan, and we have started working with the regions. In the next few days, for example, I will be meeting the team from Bukedi, then I will go to the Lango subregion. I will go to various subregions - Lango, Bukedi, Kigezi, Buganda - to let them know what projects are obtaining there, those that are ongoing and those that are to be kick-started soon and also the resources that go to every level of Government – (Interruption.)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I am happy that you are saying you will come back to the House and talk about roads. When you do so, you also need to note that there are other roads that were constructed barely five years ago yet presently, they have potholes everywhere. The road that connects Gulu District to Bibia, Atiak up to South Sudan has terrible potholes. Also, the Karuma–Olwiyo–Pakwach Road is full of potholes. 

Let the minister also tell us the quality of contractors we currently have. A road that cannot last 10 years has doubtable quality. Honourable minister, when you return with information regarding roads, you have to be very clear on that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please finish your presentation.

MR ECWERU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like I said, I am aware of a number of challenges that are already presented to the population as regards the roads that we thought we had sorted out. We will be able to bring that comprehensive report and also suggest some of the remedial action that the sector is undertaking to fix some of the roads. I will be happy to present a report here.

3.12
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. From 31 July 2021 to date, we have had a problem in Apaa, in my constituency. There are over 150 organised groups of people who are armed with bows, pangas and axes that have invaded the place. One by the name –(Interruption.)

MR MAMAWI: Madam Speaker, is hon. Akol Anthony in order –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what issue is your point of order? What has he said? Why don’t you wait and listen to his case and then you react? He is just making a preamble.

MR MAMAWI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. James Mamawi, you see, in the Tenth Parliament, we had real war in this House. Let us not have a war over the Apaa issue. Let him present his issue and then you make a rebuttal.  

MR MAMAWI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Akol, please finish your presentation.

MR AKOL: This group is led by a LC V councillor from Adjumani called William Gabriel Izadro. They have shot and wounded one person - a male aged 21 years. They have also been burning houses of the people around there and they are constructing their grass thatched houses in the place.

After intervention by the police, 29 of them were arrested. Unfortunately, by yesterday, the 29 people had been released. When I talked to the detach commander, he said he got an order from above to release them.

This is not the first time that we have had this kind of attack organised from Adjumani side. You recall that in 2017, we lost over 14 people who were killed in a barbaric manner. Some of the people were maimed and some of their body parts, like the liver, were removed. Many people in the country saw what was being displayed on national television and even beyond Uganda. 

This House has discussed this issue of Apaa. In the Tenth Parliament, we even instituted a committee that went and did its investigations. They came and reported on the Floor of Parliament and Government also came and gave a report. Unfortunately, there was no discussion on this issue until we closed the Tenth Parliament.

My prayers are:

The Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness should go and help the people. Right now, there are people who have been displaced for almost two years and are living in Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) camps as their homes have been occupied by this same community. Again, recently, many people have been displaced and are living in IDP camps.

I would like to request that, if possible, you order for the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) to reinforce the police and drive these people back to where they came from. This is because they are occupying the homes of people who are now displaced.

If possible, the report on Apaa, which the committee worked on using the resources of this Government, should be discussed so that that issue is concluded. We are tired of discussing the same thing all the time. If we can resolve the issue on this Floor, it will be better.

Madam Speaker, I have pictures of people who were shot with bows and arrows. You will even see that the bows are still in the bodies of the people who were taken to hospital. I have the tools which these people came with and pictures of those who were arrested by the police and then released. I also have pictures of the huts that they are building in the place.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay these on the Table of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will give that to the committee that will come to the ground. The Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness should follow up on this and the Minister of Defence, hon. Jim Muhwezi – I can see you chatting – should follow up on this issue. You will need to reinforce the police and find out exactly what the problem is. The problem of Apaa is the politicians themselves. Let us have hon. Mamawi.

MR AMOS OKOT: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to hon. Akol is still related to the same matter of Apaa. This afternoon as – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okot, I had given the Floor to hon. Mamawi. Can he speak before you?

MR OKOT: Okay.

MR MAMAWI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Apaa is in East Madi Wildlife Reserve, which is in Adjumani District, where my constituency is.

His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda visited the place and made a pronouncement. One, he said that Apaa is in Adjumani District and there are issues, which need to be followed by the Government and that Government was to pronounce itself on them. 

Two, the Minister of Local Government at that time, hon. Tom Butime, went to that place and pronounced himself clearly after survey reports from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. He said that the place is in Adjumani District – 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of order I am raising is that when His Excellency went to Apaa and met the leadership from Acholi and Adjumani, he did not make any pronouncement that Apaa is in Adjumani. I can see how other NRM Members of Parliament are trying to tarnish the President’s name in this matter – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, can you remove NRM from the Apaa fight? 

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I am saying this because he is a Member of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am saying, can you remove “NRM Members of Parliament” from the fight of Apaa? 

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I remove those words but there are other Members who are trying to bring the President into this matter. The location of Apaa has never been in Adjumani. That is why the President instituted a committee, which started its work perfectly but up to now, the report has not yet been tabled. 

Is the honourable Member in order to come to this august House and lie as well as misled the House that the President made a pronouncement that Apaa is in Adjumani? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order in the House! Members, you are both not in order. Why? Nobody has ever pronounced where Apaa is. There is a report on Apaa and it has never been debated. I am ordering you not to discuss Apaa. I have already told the minister to handle it and give us feedback. 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, I have a procedural matter but it is not to impeach your guidance on the Apaa matter because I was in Parliament when Members of Parliament almost flexed on the Floor over this matter, which occasioned Parliament to put up a committee to investigate this matter. 

Madam Speaker, just like you have guided, the last time I checked, there was an entity called “government” in this country, unless it went into exile. The last time I checked, there was a committee instituted and the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition (LOP), there is still a government in this country. I know you as a very civilised LOP; there is still a government in this country. 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I take note, and it has taken your guidance to remind me that there is a government because I was noticing an entity in deep sleep and I was trying to awaken this Government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let it be on record that there is a government in this country. 

MR MPUUGA: Yes, which is why I said, “the last time I checked”, and I have been duly reminded that it is still in existence. 

Madam Speaker, please order, with timelines, that the report on Apaa comes to the Floor so that we can know how to help our people and avoid these fights over borders. We have a government, leaders and Members of Parliament so your order on timelines will save the situation so that we can help our people who are dying. We owe a duty to the citizens to settle them in tranquillity so that they can go about their lives and business. 

3.23 
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for your ruling that the Government should come back here and give a statement on the issue of Apaa. I promise that we shall do so as soon as possible. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How long will that take? 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: In a week’s time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What we first need is action on the ground to save the people. For your information, the report on Apaa is in this Parliament. What is left is the debate on that report, and during the debate we are going to ask the Apaa team not to start boxing themselves in the House. We need action on the ground first. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Okay, Madam Speaker. We shall do that. 

3.25
MR GEOFFREY LUTAAYA (NUP, Kakuuto County, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to make my maiden speech in which I equally raise a matter of national importance that affects a lot of people from my area. The matter I raise is about a dangerous road known as Kyapa-Kasensero, which is a 41-kilometre road that connects the communities of Kasensero Landing Site to Kyebe, Mayanja, and to the main road – the Mutukula-Kampala Highway. 

The road has been in a very bad state for more than 30 years. On that road, there is an area known as Tome. Whenever it rains heavily, Tome is submerged, making that road impassable to the extent that whoever insists on using it has to use a boat. You can imagine people using boats on the road. It has caused a lot of poverty amongst the communities of Minziro, Kyebe and even Kasensero Landing Site because most of time, those people do not have access to markets to sell their agricultural products. 

Apart from the poverty, Kyapa-Kasensero Road has caused a lot of fatalities. I will give the example of a pregnant woman called Stefania Nabuuma who tried to access antenatal care from Kalisizo Hospital. Remember, it is 77 kilometres from Kasensero Landing Site to Kalisizo. Nabuuma found the road impassable and gave birth at the roadside. She died instantly and the baby also did not survive. 

There is another case of the chairperson of Kayigwa Village, Madam Maddie Nampijja, who was also trying to access antenatal care. Unlike Nabuuma, Nampijja managed to hire a boat but she gave birth on that boat. The boy manning the boat did not have the expertise to help the struggling lady so the baby of the chairperson did not survive. 

My prayer is a request for immediate intervention from the Ministry of Works and Transport. The good thing is that the minister is around. I would like the minister to give tarmac priority for the 41-kilometre Kyapa-Kasensero Road. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Works and Transport, take note. Check on the road and get back to the House. 

3.27 
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The people of Ntungamo have sent me to add their voice in congratulating our athletes, the men and women of Uganda. They are cognisant of the fact that we are waiting for the Prime Minister to bring a detailed report on athletics. 

However, we are all aware that the Ministry of Education and Sports gave Mr Hamis Kiggundu leeway to develop Nakivubo Stadium four years ago. As we talk about athletics, we need to have a holistic approach to sports in Uganda. As we speak, Mr Hamis Kiggundu has only developed 30 per cent of the stadium whereas in the outskirts of the stadium, he has managed to develop the area 100 per cent with shopping malls and arcades. This is so hurting to the people of Uganda. They are saying that Mr Kiggundu is not the only Ugandan. If he has failed, we have other Ugandans who can develop this stadium. We need the stadium as soon as possible.

Madam Speaker, the people of Uganda are bleeding while we watch. We want to know if there are better Ugandans than others. If he has failed, let his contract be terminated because he was given a contract to develop that stadium for only two years. We need a detailed report from the ministry – (Interruption) 
 
MR SILWANY: Thank you, hon. Musinguzi, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I think when it comes to opportunities for investment and developing Uganda, we should be fair and there should be equity. If someone has been given an opportunity to develop – this project was given to Mr Kiggundu about five years ago. However, to date, he has not completed it.

Madam Speaker, if there is an opportunity, let Government come up and offer part of this stadium to another investor who can develop it faster. This will help Ugandans to benefit from the same cause like he benefited at the beginning. 

We were even promised by the Ministry of Education and Sports that they would buy land to replace where Nakivubo Stadium had been built. However, to date, that has not been done. The people who used to enjoy sports from there are stranded. That is the information I wanted to add.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you close? What are your prayers?

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I say out my prayers, I would like to point out that there was no bidding. This man sat with some people from the Ministry of Education and Sports and agreed, on a round table in Serena, to share our Nakivubo Stadium land. That is why our stadium now has been turned into shopping arcades, malls and supermarket.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were you part of the meeting at Serena?

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, the information is there; I can lay it on the Table, if you give me chance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you lay evidence on the Table that shows that there was a meeting in Serena and that there was no bidding and money was – 
 
MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, at an appropriate time, after recess, I will bring that information to the House. 

Anyhow, my prayer is that Parliament takes it up and investigates this matter. We are here thanking our athletes for raising our Ugandan flag high, so we cannot let our stadium go to waste. This is serious and if the ministry cannot give us a report, we need to investigate this. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government, we need a response on this immediately after recess. 

3.23
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter that one time I brought to the House. It concerns wildlife and its relationship with the people. 

On 1 July 2019, the President of Uganda assented to the Uganda Wildlife Authority (Amendment) Bill and it became an Act. Section 83 of the same law defines who should be compensated and how they should be compensated. My people from Kinkizi West are privileged to be living together with the climbing lions and the elephants in Queen Elizabeth National Park and the gorillas in Bwindi National Park. 

Ugandans, through legislation, laboured to provide solutions for the co-existence of wild animals and people. However, since then, this law has not been operationalised so that the people of Uganda, who are affected – Hon. Muhwezi, we share the same national park. The people of Bwambale are suffering like mine. 

We need to know if we have a minister in charge of wildlife. If he is there, he was supposed to make regulations two years after the President assented to that Bill, which was not a private Member’s Bill. To date, however, the minister has not drafted or made the regulations to operationalise this Act to let our people benefit. 

Early this year, climbing lions were killed by the people and the people are now rotting in prisons. However, our people’s gardens have been depleted - finished off by the elephants.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you state your prayers?

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence that –

The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities be compelled to come and explain to Parliament the cause of all this;

The Prime Minister should commit to this Parliament when these regulations shall be provided to serve Ugandans and the intent of the President that brought this Bill into force; and

The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should produce a circular on how to handle the people and property affected before the regulations come into being. Since the law already took effect, the people who were affected should be compensated before regulations are made. 

Madam Speaker, I so pray.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, take note. 
   
MR CHELANGAT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Works and Transport. The roadworks from Kapchorwa to Bukwo are going on very well. However, the only challenge that we have is that most of the people along the road have not been compensated yet the roadworks have reached their premises. They are supposed to be compensated for them to relocate to some other places but if not compensated, it means relocation will be difficult.

I would like to ask the Minister of Works and Transport to clarify why it is taking so long to compensate these people of Bukwo. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable minister, take note.

3.37
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank you for giving us recess because that will give us an opportunity to interact with our electorate and also monitor Government programmes. 

In relation to what hon. Lutaaya said, and like the honourable Minister of Works and Transport stated, issues and challenges relating to road construction cut across the country. Some of the contractors that are hired to handle road construction activities under Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) do not do the right work. Previously, there was a contractor who was contracted to work on the road from Kaperi via Ngora to Mukongoro connecting to Mbale. 

Last week, while I was in the constituency, I noticed that the work that has been done is totally very bad. Therefore, as we go for recess, honourable members, it will not be only overseeing the Emyooga but let us make effort to monitor other programmes.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say something about the Local Economic Growth Support Project. Some of the districts in Uganda benefitted and Kumi is among those districts. It is now over two years since the focal person from the Ministry of Local Government gave us assurance on the roads that were supposed to be worked on. For the case of Kumi, there is a road beginning from Oluwa in Kakures Subcounty, connecting to Bukedea Market. Since the time the Minister of Local Government put out an advert, information has not been given on which contractor is going to handle the works and the community is demanding to know. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Local Government gives an update on how the ministry is going to accomplish the task of having that road opened under the Local Economic Growth Support Project. I submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Local Government, we want a plan on the Bukedea Road. 

3.37
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. I am raising this matter because it is pertinent that Members of Parliament, as we sit here, sit in a healthy and clean environment. 

I raised this matter sometime early this year. You can see feathers all over this place. Some of us with big eyes are suffering because we have to keep removing these feathers from our eyes. (Laughter) 

The last time I raised it, the Clerk and the Speaker assured us that they had written to the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) to come and relocate the birds from here. However, it is now over four months since I raised the matter; the birds are still here and the feathers are all over the place. We are lucky that we are covering our noses, otherwise the feathers would be entering our noses too. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the message has been received. Hon. Silwany and the Clerk, please take it up. 

Please, Members, we shall discuss the same thing all day long. Hon. Dubai, you will speak on the State-of-the-Nation Address. I have told you, Members, that when you have a matter of national importance, come and record it. What is your matter, hon. Dubai?

MR JAMES OLOBO: Madam Speaker, among the people who are in Tokyo for the Olympics, I have my own called David Emong. This young boy went for Olympics last time and won a medal. He came back – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Dubai, we are going to discuss that together with the motion which is coming up on Olympics.

MR OLOBO: Allow me to give this information. I am even about to finish it. He came back and he was promised a house and a vehicle by Government. However, up to now, there is nothing. 

Secondly, there is the late Denis Obua who had been the president of the Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA) for some time. When he died, Mulindwa took over as the FUFA president and promised that he was going to build a stadium in memory of Obua. The district went ahead and gave land for the same. Up to now, there is nothing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For your information, the minister in charge of sports is called Denis Obua. You can bet that he is aware of it. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am raising a procedural matter. A while ago, hon. Kaberuka raised an issue on the national basketball team’s funding by Government. The Government Chief Whip came on the Floor and stated that Government had secured tickets for the team. 

Fortunately, I have a number of friends in the administration of basketball. The information I have is that Government has not secured any ticket for the basketball players. What Government has done so far is to give them an offer of free COVID-19 testing at Mulago. 

I also have information here that the money this team has so far got from well-wishers is as follows: They have got Shs 20 million from Dott Services; Shs 15 million from Stanbic Bank; Shs 10 million from Parliament; Shs 10 million from City Tyres; Shs 10 million from Ham enterprises; from Government of Uganda, free COVID-19 tests from Mulago; Shs 6 million from Madhvani; and Shs 4 million from Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA). 

Is it procedurally okay for the Government Chief Whip to come before this august House and give misleading information, that Government has bought tickets for this national team when it is the reverse? We know you can give many answers but we shall not accept misleading information. 

I know you have been asking that such information be expunged. What I am giving is indelible. He is giving misleading information, which has caused a number of Members of Parliament from West Nile to bring a lot of complaints here. I would not mind that. That is why we, in the Opposition, are quiet. The NRM supporters are crying about what is not being done, yet you are the supporters. 

The procedural matter I am raising is: is it procedurally okay to be given misleading information in front of the cameras that Government has procured tickets when it is the reverse? These people are crying. They are looking for money and nothing has been done by Government. Actually, a COVID-19 test at Mulago is something that should be done by Government for free. Thank you. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we shall need to explain to some of our colleagues what Government is. The football federation is under National Council of Sports, which is a Government institution. 

When I stood here, I said they have secured tickets. I did not say that they picked money from so and so’s pocket. When National Council of Sports secures tickets, whether money is from wherever –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I do not know if you are going to run Parliament with our colleagues behaving this way. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. National Council for Higher Education and Federation of Uganda Basketball Associations – I have spoken to the president, Mr Tashobya. 

I moved out to make a call to the Minister of Education and Sports for tomorrow’s statement. I request that you allow us to come back here tomorrow, as you directed, and then the Member can dispute whatever we present. The information I gave is factual. Our players have the tickets and they will be leaving tomorrow. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I pray that the Government Chief Whip – since I am aware that he even shook hands with the Pope - is ready to tell the truth. You were here, Madam Speaker. You even guided the Government Chief Whip that we want these people to be given facilitation, not only tickets from Government. Now, here we are and the Government Chief Whip is changing. 

We want the truth. Has Government bought tickets? Has Government supported the team -(Interjections)- You can see, the Front Bench is only answering “yes” but we the backbenchers – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will get the statement tomorrow from the minister. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Uganda Free Zones Enterprise Survey Report for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I refer the report to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for consideration and report back to the House.

MR HARUNA KASOLO: Madam Speaker, in the same vein, I beg to lay on the Table the Uganda Free Zones Authority Annual Report for the Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I refer the report to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for consideration and report back to the House.

3.49
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Parliamentary Pension Scheme bi-annual report for the period ended 31 December 2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I refer the report to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for consideration and report back to the House.

RESPONSE BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION TO THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION DELIVERED BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON FRIDAY, 4 JUNE 2021

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, you have 20 minutes or less.

3.51
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Much obliged, Madam Speaker. With your indulgence, I intend not to determine the business of the House. However, I would like to make an earnest request to you that immediately after recess, in whichever form and space, your office considers directing the Clerk to organise orientation of Members, considering how much time we have lost in a crisscrossing debate. (Applause) 

We probably could have considered a lot more business. However, I can understand these colleagues are new to the House and they need their space to represent their people. Madam Speaker, with your indulgence and direction, we could do better. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, after recess, I am directing you to have orientation for all Members.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you. Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues and esteemed citizens of Uganda –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of State for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees has a point of information to raise.

MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition. The information I want to add to his submission is that a Member is not supposed to switch on the microphone before the Speaker gives them room to speak. Every time there is interruption, we look left and right, wondering who is speaking. (Applause) When the Speaker picks a Member to speak, that is when he or she is authorised to switch on the microphone. Now when everyone is raising a point of order or procedure, it causes a bit of confusion. Let us be orderly. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They call it “catching the Speaker’s eye”. Sorry for the interruption.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, it is acceptable interruption. You have heard a free teacher and orienter for that day. She could join a team of people that are going to assist Members, without having to belabour to find who will help. I brought that up in good faith because I wish to see better and more constructive debate, so that people can present the issues of their people in a structured manner.

Madam Speaker, it is my singular pleasure to use this opportunity, officially, to congratulate each Member of this 11th Parliament upon their election and appointment to different leadership positions in this land. While we are constituted from different shades of opinion, it is our obligation, whether singularly or collectively, to diligently serve the interests of the citizens of Uganda.
 
As I mentioned when the House was notified of my appointment, efforts will be taken, whenever possible and feasible, to pursue a bipartisan approach in the spirit of accountability and service. It is our conviction that Parliament is a front that we should use to liberate the country from autocratic governance and biting poverty levels. 
 
Pursuant to rule 53 of our Rules of Procedure, I seize the opportunity to respond to the State-of-the-Nation Address delivered by the President on 4 June 2021. While Article 101 of the Constitution does not prescribe the content of the address, it is generally expected that the President would use it as a performance report card of what has been undertaken by the Government since the last address. Unfortunately, this has never been the case.  
 
The Constitution provides that the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy are the gist of the Government’s operations. They pertain to political, human rights, socio-economic, cultural, accountability, environment, foreign policy and citizen objectives. 
 
Specifically, objective I (ii) requires the President to report, at least once a year, the extent of realisation of the policy objectives and principles. The provision does not deter the State-of-the-Nation Address from being used as the reporting mechanism. Otherwise, without clear benchmarks, the State-of-the-Nation Address would tantamount to a mere speech. Going forward, for the subsequent years, we would encourage the President to conform to a structured State-of-the-Nation Address, as the Constitution prescribes in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy.

Despite the address’s fundamental structural shortfall, a few aspects highlighted by the President will be responded to and I am going to do it very briefly, to the benefit of fellow countrymen and women. 
 
The President took a lot of time to explain the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has become a cover-up for almost every Government failure. Of late, the President and his Government attribute to the pandemic the contraction of the economy, rising poverty levels, escalating public debt and poor service delivery, among others. Before the pandemic, these concerns were already manifest, Madam Speaker. 

The lifeline of the economy and indeed the Government has for long been borrowing, unfortunately. The tax revenues are insufficient to fund the Government’s expenditures. As a result, public debt has risen from $2.9 billion in the Financial Year 2006/2007 to $17.96 billion (that is equivalent to Shs 65.83 trillion) in December 2020.It has been projected that Uganda needs over 94 years to clear the public debt without acquiring a new debt.

Key sectors of the economy, irrespective of their potential, have for long been neglected by the Government. The President has referred to some of them as luxurious. It is exhibited in the budget allocations towards sectors such as tourism and hospitality. This sector, for long, has been a growth pole to our economy, generating $1.6 billion (close to Shs 6 trillion) per year, but the Government invests hardly Shs 100 billion in this sector. In other words, it has been left to grow organically. 

It is only natural that productivity in such sectors is going to dwindle. This has been the case in agriculture, education, health, information, innovation, technology, public service and trade sectors. Almost every sector of Government has been deprived except for security and physical infrastructure. Based on this, it is not surprising that the Government is gambling in its response to the pandemic. Therefore, the pandemic should not be used as a distraction from Government’s poor planning and prioritisation. 

Instead of addressing its planning and prioritisation shortfalls, the President has resorted to blaming the citizens. He attributes the worsening pandemic to citizens’ failure to adhere to the standard operating procedures. Who is responsible for controlling immigration? Are citizens responsible for the taxation regime in the country, regulation of trade, recruitment of medical workers, purchase of beds, installation of intensive care units and oxygen plants, as well as vaccination in the country, among others? Is this the duty of the citizens or the Government? It is clear that the Government has violated Article 189 of the Constitution by its dismal performance in the delivery of public services.

The President, in his address, made mention of and promoted inequalities in this country. He asserted that people who are in the middle class are not prone to what he termed as “home poverty pressure”. He said that they are the best suited for appointment to positions of authority. Based on his assertion, - Remember, the President’s word, in some circles, is law - people that have been raised from humble backgrounds are less appropriate for Government service because they work for money, but not passion.

The President has deliberately entrenched the stratification of the citizenry, according to access to power, into the rulers and the ruled, the rich and the paupers, and the privileged and the underprivileged. Instead of engaging the entire country in a dialogue on how to address the prevailing social and economic inequalities, the President assured us that the solution only lies in his children. The rest of the citizens have been reduced to a status of followers and there are deliberate attempts to preserve their deplorable situation. 

The rich and those in positions of power are competitively compensated for their land by Government while attempts are made to compulsorily acquire land from the poor, with meagre compensation. Quality healthcare is largely guaranteed to the rich in private facilities or wards in public facilities while the health of the indigents is condemned to deplorable health facilities and demotivated health workers. 

It is increasingly impossible for several children from peasant households to access tertiary education that has seemingly become a preserve of the affluent. Irrespective of levels of competencies, it is common knowledge that many people have been granted jobs and appointments based on nepotism and sycophancy. 

The recourse to the rest of the citizenry is to continue with the struggle to free ourselves from captivity of political and economic “vultures”. Only then can we blossom in a new Uganda in which every citizen is guaranteed a successful future; a new Uganda in which citizens are not discriminated against because of their economic status, belief system, cultural inclination, political affiliation, proximity to rulers or any other factor; a country in which opportunities will be accessed and granted based on merit, leaders will be appointed and jobs obtained based on competencies.

One critical factor that will make or break this country is unemployment. While the President was silent on youth unemployment in his address, it is rampant in the country. It is a serious threat that requires urgent and deliberate attention. The educated youth are increasingly getting frustrated due to lack of employment. There has been a remarkable mismatch between skills attained during education and the available opportunities. For those that are lucky to find some form of paid employment, they are barely living. Wages are too low to sustain their lives and aspirations. 

The alternative of self-employment is crowded by petty businesses, whose proceeds are insufficient to sustain and transform livelihoods. As a consequence, many remain unemployed for many years and in due course have their skills as well as knowledge eroded. This leads to a continuous cycle of unemployment for they cannot compete for opportunities that may appear in due course. Surprisingly, the Government has frustrated the passing of the National Graduate Service Bill, 2018, that sought to partly address the mismatch of skills amongst the graduates. 

Initiatives such as Youth Livelihood Programme, Youth Enterprise Scheme and Skilling Uganda, and the Youth Venture Capital Fund have failed to bear satisfactory fruits. They have failed to stimulate labour demand and uptake. Unfortunately, no comprehensive evaluations of these initiatives have been undertaken to inform effective replacements. As a consequence, the scarce public funds continue to be spent with no satisfactory impact. The funds need to be freed towards actualisation of the National Human Resource Development Plan, which has been flagged off in the National Development Plan III (NDP III). 

Government seems to have embraced externalisation of labour as an escape route in dealing with the youth, whose aspirations it has failed to fulfil. Cases of sexual harassment, trafficking, non-payment and underpayment are reported but not adequately addressed. As a result, there are many distressed Ugandan workers abroad. This is largely attributed to inadequate monitoring and inspection of recruitment firms and work stations abroad. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to put the House on notice that the left side of the Speaker has a Bill in the offing to address this gap that has been neglected. 

As regards corruption, while one may agree with the observation that corruption is an enemy to development, the resolve by the President and his Government to fight it is mere rhetoric. The President indicated that he had established that corruption started from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development through the development of bloated projects - huge projects that are bloated in terms of funding requirements. 

The bloated projects are the main drivers behind the continued securing of debt or loans, which the country is not ready to absorb. This has not been helped by the entrenched procurement entrepreneurship by some Government officials. Consequently, the stock of public debt has risen, like I observed. It has increased in the last 10 years by 84 per cent. Presently, each citizen, whether young or old, was unwillingly allocated a debt burden of over Shs 1.6 million. 

Why dangle such a burden on the lives of people who cannot afford medical care, quality education for their children and feeding their families? Millions of people have become secondary citizens in their own motherland. Corruption is responsible for trimming their aspirations to survival instead of prosperity.

Unfortunately, almost all the ministers responsible for the bloated projects the President talked about were never dropped in the newly formed Cabinet. Instead, they were reappointed and some transferred to other dockets. These have joined others that were censored and convicted for corruption. Is this how the President wants to fight corruption? Surely not. 

In our absurd case, corruption is rewarding. Probably, the President would like to share with the country if indeed his fight is not dispirited or indeed, he is not a captive of the corrupt. The anti-corruption agencies have domineered public posturing instead of curbing corruption. We have had parades, press conferences and security convoys to service the egos of the agencies. They never pursue the corruption. Instead, they loyally follow their directions for seemingly vindictive investigations towards those that have fallen out of favour. 

It is high time that an audit is instituted into the Presidential appointments and creation of convenient parallel anti-corruption outfits. Subsequently, appointments to the anti-corruption agencies should be subjected to open vetting. 

Insecurity

The President made lamentations about the insecurity in the country, irrespective of the billions of shillings that have been committed through domestic and external debt to finance the security sector. 

Notwithstanding the massive classified expenditure we all know, there has been a spike of mysterious and unresolved murders of Muslim clerics, women, police officers and army officers, among others. Instead of lamenting, the President as the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces should account for the funds so far spent on bolstering the security apparatus in the country. 

While addressing Parliament in 2018, the President proposed measures to contain the insecurity in the country. Apart from some form of progress registered regarding the CCTV and forensics laboratory, the rest of the measures are yet to be implemented. I am aware that Parliament has supported the security sector with a lot of funding, including supplementary budgets over time. We are yet to realise what the President lined up as solutions to what seems like eternal insecurity.

Criminalisation of the Opposition 

The State-of-the-Nation Address was the first by the President immediately after the most violent and most fraudulent elections since independence. The election was conducted in a disgraceful and shameful manner never seen before. All state agencies were pitied against the Opposition. It became an indictable offence in the eyes of state machinery to profess opposition. 

Many were arrested and held in illegal military detention centres without charge while others were held on politically motivated charges by all manner of operatives without a clear line of command. Security forces have tortured, maimed and killed citizens in an attempt to curtail political dissent. This was done under the full knowledge and tacit collusion of the official state security machinery. 

This was the year of the notorious “drones.” Did the President immediately forget about the notoriety of the drones, bought by the taxpayer and used to vest suffering on the same people? That he made no mention of the killings and disappearances, maiming vested on citizens tells a lot about the official direction of the state –

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, try to summarise.

Mr mpuuga: As I summarise, security structures, particularly the court martial, try civilian citizens in disregard of civil courts; the Government is encouraging the rule by law and not the rule under the law, through tramped-up charges.

Glossing over the grave injustices of the last 10 months should concern and cause worry to every peace-loving Ugandan especially leaders at this level, as Parliament. The growing levels of intolerance for divergent political views is not only bad for our fragile democracy but a recipe for disaster. We have so many families whose loved ones disappeared since last year. They were picked up by security operatives in drones and all manner of means availed to the state apparatus as part of settling political differences. 

We have a mass state party. After 35 years in power, it is full of political cowards presiding over the state. We need to remind them of our political history for them to respect the choices of citizens. It is a great shame.

The State-of-the-Nation Address did not offer any assurance for justice to the affected families, let alone a humble mention and admission of circumstances. I invite the 11th Parliament to summon its constitutional powers to rein in the runaway state that is acting through extra-legal means. Let the state account for all citizens that were picked up by security operatives and have since disappeared. I will mention but a few –

Kibalama John Bosco was picked from Kumukaaga, Gayaza Road, on 3 June 2019. He has not been seen or heard of since then.

Kasumba George was arrested from Kasaali Town Council, Kyotera, on 19 January 2021. His whereabouts are not known.

Mbabazi Moses was picked by armed gunmen from Kisekka Market on 7 December 2020. All efforts by the family and friends have not yielded any result.

Wangolo Shafic of Kyebando, Nansana, was picked by security operatives and his wife has been ransomed by them but they have failed to produce him.

Nalumoso Vincent was picked from Bugoloobi Market on 1 December 2020. The family was advised by informers that they should settle and organise the last funeral rites for him and move on with life.

Tella Juma was abducted from Obongi District on 12 January 2021. His family is desperate and confused up to now.
Mwangwi Henry from Adjumani was abducted from Ibirikwa Subcounty, Adjumani East.

Manjo Robinson from Moyo was picked by plain-clothed gunmen on or about 16 January 2021. 

Ddamulira John was abducted by armed gunmen from Kisekka Market on 21 November 2020. Protracted tracing by his family has been as frustrating as the facilitation they have given security operatives.

Mutaasa Alex was picked up by men in police and UPDF uniforms in November 2020 from Bwaise. 

Mubiru Hassan was abducted in December 2020 by armed gunmen. 

Jinjo Fred of Bweyogerere was picked from Owino Market on 24 November 2020. 

Mwanje Sunday of Nansana was picked from Owino Market on 24 November 2020.
Kalunda Rashid of Bukasa was picked from Owino Market on 24 November 2020. 

Muhammad Kanatta was picked from Walusubi Village, Namawojolo in Mukono District. 

Okello Syson was abducted from Orom Subcounty, Kitgum District, by armed gunmen on 10 December 2020.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to speak to these families. Somebody rise on this Floor, the people’s House of Parliament, and advise me how to speak to these families on the state of the nation. Are we preparing this country for retribution and revenge? 

Politics and political space should be occupied for a positive purpose. Our political space is laden with negativity and survival. It is dangerously occupied by self-seekers and regime hangers-on, who have become the single biggest danger to national security and political predictability. 

Madam Speaker, I will speak about the last two titles in five minutes. I know some people could have a chill down their spines but these are the realities and that is why we are leaders of our people. 

I would like to briefly bullet to the role of Government in economic recovery. We all know the current standing of our economy, given the circumstances, but it is the mastery of the President to define the economy in his style. Of course, we know that the economy can be real and vulnerable as he describes it – the money and non-money economy. He asserts that only substantial private actors, more so investors, can transform people in the non-money economy into the money economy and subsistence into commercial citizens. This is an indication that their future is only secure in a private sector-led development. 

It is increasingly becoming evident that Government has relegated almost all its core obligations to the private sector. It is ceding ground in the most critical sectors such as finance, education and health. During the previous governments, these sectors were prioritised by the Government and they made strides in developing infrastructure that delivered affordable services across the country. It is an invitation from the Opposition that Government cannot cede its duty of being the leader in these key economic sectors. 

Lastly, let me speak on Government’s involvement in the public private partnerships. Rarely, does the President own up to the botched dealings of Government. However, for once, he admitted that there was a problem in the electricity/power sector. 

On several occasions, the President has attributed high electricity costs to the poor contract of Bujagali and Umeme. These are just icebergs of a systematic problem. Poor negotiation teams: while the private actors engage the best negotiators that they can find at the best price, the state on the other hand engages inadequately paid negotiators. As a result, they have been exposed to compromised situations because at the end of the day, they pursue personal interests ahead of national interests. 

Instead of addressing the systematic deficiencies of Government, the President places the blame on the private partners/sector. No wonder, incidences of poorly negotiated public private partnerships such as SGS, Rift Valley Railways and Entebbe Express Highway, among others, are regular. Unfortunately, the legal and administrative costs associated with correction or renegotiation of the partnerships are extremely exorbitant. As a result, the country is bound to lose public resources to exploitative contracts. 

On the other hand, when an efficient and effective partnership is realised, such as Face Technologies, which was producing driving permits, the Government is very quick to take over irrespective of its inadequate preparedness. While it may be too early to make a comprehensive judgment call, more preparedness was required by the successor, that is, the Uganda Security Printing Company. Such takeovers ought to be preceded and informed by audits undertaken by the Auditor-General as required under section 30(1) of the Public Private Partnership Act, 2015. Unfortunately, such audits are rarely undertaken. You can actually now see the debacle of the company because it is everywhere.

Legislative Agenda 

As earlier noted, due to lack of a structured State-of-the-Nation Address, this year’s address did not enumerate Government’s legislative agenda. This was a clear indication that since this term was seized acrimoniously, Government was yet to develop its agenda. 

Unlike the President and his Government, the Opposition in Parliament, under the leadership of the shadow Cabinet, will spearhead the following in Parliament as highlights, not entirely: 

Justice and Constitutional Affairs

We are going to pursue legislation to amend the Constitution. Of Course, we are going to make a follow-up on the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019. We are also going to pursue other amendments relating to political representation in Parliament. 

Public Administration

We intend to initiate the Government Transition Bill, open vetting for presidential appointments, and a criterion for creating administrative bodies. We also intend to review the discretional presidential structures under the local governments.

Local Government

We intend to review the decentralisation policy. We all know that decentralisation now is a huger debacle and we want to headline this review. 

Security and Internal Affairs 

We intend to initiate amendments to the Public Order Management Act. You all know that the Constitutional Court hammered down a judgement that almost rendered this Act irrelevant; so, we intend to table a Bill to actualise the decision of the Constitutional Court on this particular Act. 

Labour, Gender and Social Development 

Like I indicated before, we intend to initiate amendments to the Employment Act. We also intend to review the externalisation of labour initiatives under the Markets (Amendment) Bill; that is a Government Bill.

Finance 

We intend to initiate an amendment to the Public Finance Management Act. We intend to introduce a Bill on the liberalisation of the retirement benefits sector. We also intend to table amendments on the status of investments; we shall review the investment Act. 

Health 

We intend to headline the restructuring of funding for the health sector and we shall engage Government agencies to appreciate our initiative, having gone through COVID-19, and seen how it has disfigured the composition of this sector and its funding.

Education 

We intend to headline reviews on the Education Act and instituting of a regulatory body for teachers as a profession. We also intend to review the criteria for the distribution of Government schools across the country.

Accountability 

We intend to headline the linking of accountability committees’ findings with intended beneficiaries, just like you said, Madam Speaker - taking Parliament to the citizens - among other issues. We intend to revisit the Leadership Code Act with the view of ensuring that it is a functional Act and not a redundant Act.

Information and Communication Technology 
We intend to make initiatives to amend the Uganda Communications Act. We also intend to initiate amendments to the Data Protection and Privacy Act as well as reviewing of the minimum broadcasting standards. We also intend to reconsider the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, which is still lying somewhere in Parliament.

Water and Environment 

We intend to review the criteria for awarding licences to commercial tree farmers in the Central Forest Reserves (CFRs), among others. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your indulgence and thank Members for your patience. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO PARLIAMENT ON FRIDAY, 4 JUNE 2021

4.30
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Madam Speaker, this being my first time to speak in this House, I request that you allow me a few minutes to talk about the people who sent me here and then I proceed with the motion - if it is okay with you. Thank you. 

I represent a population of about 200,000 people. A total of 160,000 of them are of Karimojong ethnicity while 40,000 are of Teso ethnicity. There are many issues that they sent me to bring to this House – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nakut, you will come and talk about our good people there. For now, you are here to move a motion. Thank you.

MS NAKUT: Alright, thank you. Otherwise, I thank them for giving me the opportunity to be in this House. Let us go ahead with the motion. 

The motion is for the resolution of Parliament to thank His Excellency the President of Uganda for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State-of-the-Nation Address to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on Friday, 4 June 2021. This is moved under rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS Article 101(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 requires the President at the beginning of each session to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation;

AND WHEREAS His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, in compliance with the requirements of Article 101(1) of the Constitution, delivered the State-of-the-Nation Address to this Parliament at Kololo Independence Grounds, Kampala, on Friday, 4 June 2021;

AWARE that in his address to the nation, the President highlighted the challenges that the nation faced in the last financial year, including the outbreak of the novel coronavirus pandemic, flooding in certain parts of the country, the rising levels of lakes in various parts of the country, the locusts invasion, landslides in certain parts of the country, and the emergency posed by floating islands on Lake Victoria;

FURTHER AWARE that in his address, His Excellency the President informed the nation that it still faces challenges, including insecurity in some parts of the country, a wider spectrum of variants of the coronavirus that may be more dangerous than the original outbreak, and access to adequate doses of the coronavirus vaccine due to challenges faced by manufacturers in India;

RECOGNISING that His Excellency the President informed the nation that various measures had been initiated by Government to eliminate or limit the impact of the challenges faced by the nation during the preceding financial year on the economy, the lives and livelihoods of Ugandans, which solutions have been credited for having saved the lives and livelihoods of Ugandans and laid the basis for the modest gains witnessed in the economy, which has seen it grow by 3 per cent in the Financial Year 2019/2020 and is projected to manage an expansion of 3.3 per cent in the Financial Year 2020/2021;

COGNISANT that in his address, His Excellency the President informed the nation that additional measures will be initiated to totally eliminate the challenges faced by the nation, including procuring additional doses to roll out a nationwide vaccination against the novel coronavirus, supporting the domestic development of the coronavirus vaccine, strict enforcement of the standard operating procedures developed to curb the spread of the coronavirus pandemic, expansion of the country’s manufacturing capacity of sanitisers, encouraging commercial agriculture, industrialisation, agro-processing, services and ICT; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows: – 

1.	That Parliament of Uganda expresses its gratitude to His
Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for his clear and concise exposition of the state of our nation in the State-of-the-Nation Address to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on Friday, 4 June 2021.

2. §That Parliament commits itself to the promotion of the great ideas, values and qualities cherished by His Excellency the President of Uganda in the State-of-the-Nation Address.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nakut. Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by hon. Asamo, hon. Namuyangu, hon. Kasolo, hon. Muhwezi, hon. Huda, hon. Akello Lilly, hon. Apea, hon. Opendi, hon. Jane, hon. John Musila and many others.

Can you speak to your motion.

MS NAKUT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the justification for a motion for a resolution of Parliament to thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for the eloquent and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State-of-the-Nation Address to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on Friday, 4 June 2021. 

In fulfilment of the constitutional requirement under Article l01(l) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the President delivered the State-of-the-Nation Address ahead of the opening of a new parliamentary session. As is the practice of a working and functional Government, the State-of-the-Nation Address that was delivered by the President of Uganda, H.E. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni Tibuhaburwa, was not a wish list of laws but a marching order that is aimed at giving direction to all lawmakers and the country at large on what to prioritise in the Financial Year 202l/2022.

During the delivery of the State-of-the-Nation Address, the President urged our people to join the four sectors of the economy, namely commercial agriculture, industries, services and ICT.

Under commercial agriculture, the President emphasised the Parish Development Model since at the parish, you are able to know all the homesteads. The model will see development activities planned for and executed in parishes as the lowest level unit for planning and development. This initiative aims to spring the nearly 39 per cent of households from a subsistence economy to commercial production. The idea is that the people will decide what they need in which place. 

It is a pro-people grassroots oriented planning and initiation of services which people need, as opposed to the Government using projects to think for the people. We thank the President and Parliament for allocating funds for the implementation of the model in this Financial Year 202l/2022.

On industries, the President pledged to continue dealing with the issue of costs of manufacturing in Uganda. The President noted three cost pushers. These include the cost of money -interest rates of commercial banks; the cost of transport to places like Mombasa, Dar-es-Salaam, Juba, Kigali, Ethiopia and others; and the cost of electricity.

Madam Speaker, the Government is indeed determined to reduce the cost of power, particularly for manufacturers, to 5 US cents, which is equivalent to Shs 185 per unit, from the present 8.5 US cents, equivalent to Shs 32l. It used to be l0 US cents, which is equivalent to Shs 370. The power in Kiira and Nalubaale is at 1.1 US cents per unit, Isimba power is at 4.16 US cents per unit and Karuma will be at 4.97 US cents per unit.

As we get rid of the dim power problem as more industries come on line, the cost of power will reduce substantially and this will increase grid reliability to ensure that the power delivered to the consumers is within accepted standards and in the desired amount. For instance, the implementation of the Government's long-term solution of connecting the West Nile subregion to the national grid is ongoing and the construction is expected to be completed by the end of 2022. This line will not only connect West Nile to the national grid, but will also provide power supply reliably to northern Uganda within accepted standards and in the desired amount.

On the cost of transport to Mombasa, Dar-es-Salaam, Juba, Kigali, Congo, Ethiopia and others, the President informed Parliament that the Government is handling the issue of transport costs with our fraternal states of the East African Community. For instance, the President indicated that by road, a 20ft container costs US$ 1,900 and a 40ft costs US$ 3,200 to Mombasa and vice versa, yet by rail it is US$ l,400 for a 20ft container and US$ 1,900 for a 40ft one.

Most studies suggest that there was a direct causal relationship between the building of the Uganda Railway and the development of a commercial economy. They also suggest that the key to Uganda’s material advancement was the arrival of the Uganda Railway at Kisumu, then called Port Florence, in January 1902.

The ongoing rehabilitation of the meter-gauge railway line from Gulu to Pakwach and the Busoga loop - Jinja, Mbulamuti and Busembatya – together with the development of the Bukasa Inland Port with Jinja, Port Bell and Bukakata as feeder ports will facilitate connections across Lake Victoria to Kisumu, onward to Mombasa and to Mwanza, onward to Dar-es-Salaam. This will increase access and reduce the travel time to Mombasa and Dar-es-Salaam as well as increase volume of cargo to and from these two ports. 

This will also reduce the over reliance on the Northern Corridor that links the East African economic centres to the world through Mombasa Port as its major trade route. It will also improve line stability, reduce transit times, reduce accidents and deliver more cargo. 

It should be noted that the long-term goal of the NRM Government is to build a modern standard gauge railway. This is being done with the Kenyan Government. Rehabilitating the metre gauge railway is for immediate use. When completed, the cost of transport will be much lower than road transport.

On the cost of borrowing, the President noted that the Government will continue funding the Uganda Development Bank (UDB) so that it can give loans for manufacturing, agriculture, services like tourism, medical and ICT at lower lending rates. This will indeed support import substitution, industrialisation, and agro-industrialisation – that is value addition – for our locally made produce.

Madam Speaker, to ensure that development and economic opportunities are widely distributed across all geographical regions of Uganda, the President noted that a special development fund is to be created under the Uganda Development Corporation (UDC). This will deliberately encourage location of manufacturing and other economic opportunities in each subregion of the country; for instance, Acholi, Ankole, Bukedi, Bunyoro, Busoga, Buganda, Bugisu, Sebei, Karamoja. Kigezi, Lango, Teso, Tooro/Rwenzori and West Nile. 

These industries will be adding value to what is locally produced in each subregion in the same way the Government invested in the Soroti fruit factory in Teso, Atiak sugar factory in Acholi as well as tea in Kigezi and Tooro.

The President indicated that the services sectors such as tourism, hotels, banking, music, sports, professional services and others were moving very well until the coronavirus came in. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, we were earning to a tune of US$ l.5 billion from tourism alone. This has been affected greatly as a result of restricted movements and even international flights had to be suspended at one time.

Madam Speaker, the President noted that the country had faced other challenges like rising levels of the lakes, landslides, floating islands, locusts, floods among others. It is, therefore, important to note that the President indicated that Uganda did not only manage to cope with these challenges but also the economy managed a modest expansion of three per cent in the Financial Year 2019/2020, and has managed an expansion of 3.3 per cent in the Financial Year 2020/2021.

The President further indicated that had it not been for the COVID-19 pandemic, the economy was projected to grow by 6.3 per cent and 6.2 per cent in the Financial Year 2019/2020 and 2020/2021 respectively. Unlike other countries, which have been faced with similar challenges, especially the coronavirus pandemic, the economy has not collapsed. This has been because of the firm economic policies that the NRM Government has introduced.

By controlling the coronavirus effects, our services will resurrect. We thank the President for the efforts exhibited so far in containing COVID-19. Of course, I ask fellow Ugandans to continue observing the standard operating procedures and guidelines as issued by the President and the Ministry of Health from time to time. I sympathise with families and colleagues who have lost their loved ones. May their souls rest in peace. The fight against COVID-19 is for all of us. 

On the ICT sector, the President has been urging our people in the ICT sector to take advantage of the business processing outsourcing in the world out there, such that our people, through the internet, can do jobs for companies in the USA, Canada and others. They can provide call centre services for utilities, hospitals and even audit accounts from here and be paid. 

I also implore the Government to continue using ICTs for e-education, e-security, e-governance, e-health and e-extension to deliver Government services better. The recent shooting of Gen. Katumba Wamala’s car proved to us how ICT services are significant in managing not only national security but also other sectors. The cameras that were put in place helped in tracing and apprehending the criminals that were involved.

I welcome the presidential directive of installing digital monitors on all vehicles, boda bodas and boats on the lakes. This will make it easy to know where which motorcycle, car or boat was at the point of committing the crime. 

Madam Speaker, the President indicated that to achieve these, we must fight and defeat corruption. The NRM Government has put in place the legal and institutional tools to fight corruption like the Inspectorate of Government, the Anti-Corruption Court, the Anti-Corruption Unit in State House, among others. These institutions need the support of all of us, and Parliament should take the lead in the fight against corruption as we are the representatives of the people. 

Madam Speaker, the fight against corruption is a duty of all Ugandans. Like J.F Kennedy, the 35th President of the United States, once said, “Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country.” This is a call for action to all of us. 

Lastly, I thank the President, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for the impressive socio-economic transformation, which has been achieved under the NRM since 1986. It has awakened Ugandans to meaningfully participate in wealth and job-creation initiatives. More Ugandans are embracing the urgent need to integrate into the modern money economy. They are making a positive transition from poor and subsistence living to modernity. The country is on course to attain middle-income status. 

Madam Speaker, the mantle of securing the future of Uganda is so great a task for one to bet on. It is not a gamble and can only be entrusted to President Museveni and the NRM. 

I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nakut Faith. The seconder, hon. Zijjan, you have five minutes. 

4.52
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. By the grace of God, I am the dean of the Independent Members of the 11th Parliament. I rise on this occasion in affirmation of the motion for a resolution of Parliament to thank His Excellency the President of Uganda for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State-of-the-Nation Address to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on Friday, 4 June 2021.

Madam Speaker, I will not delve much into issues of policy as contained in the State-of-the-Nation Address. My colleagues who have been here before me have done an excellent job, especially the mover of the motion.

I would like to add a brief remark by saying that the problem of our nation has never been the want of great speeches. In all, it is my view that the challenge has always been the will to implement the contents of great speeches. Having attended and listened to the President as he gave the State-of-the-Nation Address, I observed the following, which are the basis of my affirmation of the motion on the Floor:

The President began by congratulating Members of Parliament upon their election to the 11th Parliament. What I could decipher out of this was that he acknowledges the important role of this august House in matters of governing this nation, knowing that unless this arm of Government is functional, democracy would only be in name but devoid of form and substance.

Secondly, the President alluded to scripture by quoting Leviticus 23:5, which instituted the Passover feast of the children of Israel. He went on to acknowledge that he had been pointed to that by Pastor Robert Kayanja. What I could deduce out of this was that we have a President who is not governing alone as a totalitarian but governing under God and consulting other key national leaders, such as religious leaders.

Our motto remains immortal, Madam Speaker. It says, “For God and My Country”. By consulting the priesthood of our nation, it implies that the President acknowledges that he cannot govern effectively unless he relies on the supreme metaphysical, upon whom all solutions are found.

Thirdly, even while the nation’s economy has expanded from the $1.3 billion in 1986 to now $40 billion, the President did not gloat about such gains, but was quick to acknowledge the various challenges that lie ahead of us as we aim to transform Uganda to a middle-income country and ultimately, a first world country, which is our greatest aspiration.

The President went ahead to offer several solutions which, in the interest of time, I will not go over. By and large, in the President’s articulation through the State-of-the-Nation Address, I could see a President, this time, who was resolute, astute, focused and determined to turn Uganda into the envy not only of the region, but of the world. 

I would like to state, as I conclude, that great leadership must have the following: hindsight, which is perception of the past; insight, which is the acquaintance of circumstances as they may be at the time; foresight, which is a perception of what the future should be. The President exuded all those in the State-of-the-Nation Address. 

With these few, but incredibly articulate and profound remarks that I have made, I second the motion as moved by the mover. I submit and thank you, Madam Speaker. For God and my country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. David Zijjan, hon. Nakut and the Leader of the Opposition. Those are very good reports. I will open the debate for all of them. Members, everybody will speak. If we do not finish this debate today, we will push it to tomorrow. 

5.00
MS PHIONA NYAMUTORO (NRM, Youth Representative, Female): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As clearly stated and justified by hon. Nakut in the motion to thank the President for the eloquent and precise exposition of Government policies contained in the State-of-the-Nation Address, as the national youth representative of young people, allow me add my voice of gratitude. 

The President urged the youth to embrace the ICT sector such that in doing so, there is enhancement of skills, exposure to more employment opportunities worldwide, and innovation through the purposive use of the internet. It is extremely important in generating diverging forces that the young people should focus on this advice. 

Information and communication technology is also essential in improving national productivity because it has the potential to make Government and business enterprises more efficient, effective and globally competitive. Ugandans are now spoilt for choice on which telecoms, internet providers and telephones to choose. Current statistics indicate that the internet penetration in the country stands at 37.9 per cent, with over 23 million users, a majority of whom are young people. 

The NRM Government inherited a country where telephones were for the rich and services unreliable yet they existed elsewhere in the world. It is for this reason that we thank the President for prioritising and promoting ICTs as a tool and an enabler of socio-economic transformation and development of our country. 

On the side of industries, the President pledged to continue dealing with the issue of the cost of production so as to promote local industrialisation and promote foreign direct investment. Additionally, Government, through the Uganda Investment Authority, has established over 20 industrial parks spread across the country. This is projected to create millions of jobs, which will absorb the young people and spur industrial development and growth for the benefit of us all. It is on this foundation that we envision more gainful employment where economic growth statistics will directly translate to better youth livelihoods. 

Government, in conjunction with the private sector, has established a number of youth skilling centres. This is as a result of Government providing an enabling environment for the private sector and young entrepreneurs. Under these skilling programmes, the youth will embark on meaningful cottage and local industries across the region, the continent and stretch out to global markets. This will definitely help curb the problem of unemployment to a very good extent.

It is important to note that unemployment is one of the greatest issues we are grappling with as a nation, not to mention that the COVID-19 pandemic has worsened it further. Therefore, it is only prudent that any efforts geared towards addressing this cause cannot go –(Member timed out.) Madam Speaker, I beg to support. (Applause)

5.04
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have spoken before in this Parliament, but since we are still in the maiden period, allow me to take this as my maiden speech. 

I recognised that the presidential speech first elaborated the challenges related to climate change and environment. The President kept on listing the challenges - increasing water levels, flooding, landslides, locusts and coronavirus. However, all those challenges are environmental in nature. 

I take this opportunity to inform you that 80 per cent of the disasters are currently caused by climate change. However, when the President was giving a statement on this, he said that these disasters are temporary. It really touched my heart because they are temporary but recurrent. They have been occurring every year. If you went to ask the farmers and the agricultural sector stakeholders, the biggest challenge causing their poor performance is climate related. 

Therefore, when in the State-of-the-Nation Address we keep on reminding our people that we are targeting the shift from just producing for food and the market and we do not resolve the issue of climate change and take deliberate actions to address these challenges that are temporary but are recurrent in each and every financial year, I feel we are lying to ourselves. Currently, there is a proposal to come up with a disaster risk management Bill, which has not happened; it is not moving. The disaster preparedness department, which should become strong because we are seeing more disasters that should be guided by –(Member timed out.)

5.07
Ms betty aol (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since it is my first time to contribute on this Floor of Parliament, let me introduce myself as Betty Aol Ocan, Member of Parliament for Gulu City in Acholi sub-region.

Acholi sub-region is the poorest in the country. I am a teacher by profession. As such, I have very strong concern about education –(Interjections)- Well, I am also alone; so, whether I wear a mask or not –

In the State-of-the-Nation Address, I found out that issues on education are lacking, yet a country can be judged on whether it is developing or not by the quality of its people. The quality of our people keeps going down because of the quality of education. If we do not take this seriously and we look at the urban setting only while forgetting the rural setting where our children are not getting enough – We should go back to the drawing board and see how best we can have education reach all our children in the country and then say that we love our people. Otherwise, we are wasting time. 

It is already indicated here that by 2026, the population of the country will go up to about 48 million. What kind of population do we think we should have? We need a quality population. 

Looking at corruption, it has also not been elaborated properly. We know that it is corruption, which is eating up the fabric of this country. Go to health centres; there is a problem.

Let me quickly talk about the socio-economic services. We talk about Emyooga but it is not felt on the ground. We jumped from Emyooga to the Parish Development Model. It is also not properly elaborated in the State-of-the-Nation Address yet the talk right now is on that.

We decided to do away with health centres II at parish level. That means that we were now targeting subcounty level, but now we are going back to the parish. We are saying –(Member timed out.)– Thank you very much and I congratulate all of you. God bless you.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, if the microphone goes off, do not switch it on. It is controlled from the centre.

5.11
Mr gilbert olanya (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. His Excellency the President delivered his State-of-the-Nation Address. However, it should be noted that this Government has been around for more than 35 years. In the last 35 years, it is not surprising that the President comes up and almost repeats the same thing every year.

Talking of corruption, the President has been lamenting about the fight against it for very many years. I remember he once stated that he does not care whether one steals the money, as long as he invests within the country. It is quite a surprise that this Government is encouraging corruption. Look at the COVID-19 funds and the cars donated by the people. Where are they? That money was swindled but the President comes and keeps on massaging those who steal our money. The level of corruption is terrible. 

At the end of this debate, we need to adopt the report presented by the Leader of the Opposition. The current State-of-the-Nation Address is such a lamentation; the President keeps talking about the same thing.

Look at the level of democracy in this country; we ask ourselves if we have democracy. In the last elections, there were no campaigns completely for the presidential candidates. They were all not allowed to campaign. When hon. Bobi Wine, hon. Patrick Amuriat and others went to the Acholi subregion, for example, they were refused from talking to anybody. On their arrival to Amuru and Gulu, they were welcomed by teargas and bullets. Is there any democracy in this country?

I think this current Government of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) and the President in particular looks at himself as the alpha and omega, which is very dangerous. For 35 years, he still laments about the same thing. 

I think that this State-of-the-Nation Address should be discarded and next time, we should not allow him to bother us by delivering it. Let him rule the way he feels like –(Member timed out.)

5.14
Mr patrick OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have heard speeches but I fell in love with the speech by the Leader of the Opposition. His response was on point about so many issues that affect this country. 

I call upon our fellow Members of Parliament, especially those in the NRM, to read page 22 of the State-of-the-Nation Address where the President invited you to always push in the direction of fighting corruption. Always push and stop shielding any corrupt effort. I thank him for that. He specifically said, “Let the NRM Members of Parliament help us in the fight against corruption.” 

Otherwise, I have been reading through the address and that is why I thank our Leader of the Opposition. In the State-of-the-Nation Address, there was no clear plan by the President on how the people of Uganda were going to be vaccinated during the second phase of COVID-19. He never mentioned a thing. It is as if it was business as usual after a year and a half since COVID-19 attacked us. That was the time to state how we were going to handle COVID-19.

Despite the fact that we had concluded a horrible election, where we had raised matters of people disappearing in the country, the President would have been polite and kind to this nation and come out and said, “The insecurity and kidnapping of Ugandans is going to stop.” Right now, many more people are being kidnapped by state institutions. Even for Ugandans living abroad, the state institutions are going abroad to catch up with whoever has dissenting opinions against the President’s. 

On the matter of criminalising the Opposition in this country, yet the people who created our Constitution knew that there would be dissenting opinions, this House must defend the Constitution of Uganda –(Member timed out.) 

5.18 
MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo East County, Namisindwa): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me a second opportunity today. I rise to support this motion on the State-of-the-Nation Address made by the President in June. 

I wish to thank the Leader of the Opposition for his very eloquent speech, although it was emotional and sentimental. Nonetheless, I rise to thank the President of Uganda as one of the patriots of this country. 

Madam Speaker, I am aware that problems are with us to solve and we solve them as they come. The President could not have mentioned every problem on that day, otherwise we would have taken several days listening to his speech. 

As a patriot and an orator, I come up to say that the President has matured from a zealot to a statesman of this country, albeit with other issues. Yes, I am aware he did not mention a few other things – for example, he did not talk about the cracked wall of Bugisu, which is a looming disaster for landslides, but we can attend to that later. 

The matter on East African affairs is what interested me the most in the presidential speech. As a landlocked country, we need our neighbours, especially those to the east of this nation. I would like to tell you that we have had problems. In 2007/2008, we were provoked by the chaos in Kenya and you saw that most of our commodities were stuck there. The railway was cut and everything came to a standstill - I am from the border between Uganda and Kenya. The other issue was the provocation by the Kenyans, at one time, on Migingo. 

The President remained calm and he remains calm on East African affairs. As Members of Parliament, we must congratulate him and encourage him. These days, he speaks like Emperor Haile Selassie, Kwame Nkrumah and many other orators that have been on this African continent. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to rest my case by supporting this motion again. Thank you very much. 

5.21
MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this motion. 

The President, in his State-of-the-Nation Address, strongly articulated the need to support scientists through research and development. The COVID-19 pandemic has taught us not to wait for global solutions for global challenges because the global solutions may not be locally available. Therefore, we need to develop local solutions to these global challenges. 

One of the local solutions has been the development of our own vaccines and therapeutic agents and medicines. We have seen in this second wave of COVID-19 that one product known as Covidex has been developed by our very own, Prof. Ogwang. These are the local solutions that the President is strongly advocating for.

Madam Speaker, I need to emphasise that Uganda, as a country, has a huge amount of vegetation and forest cover. These forests do not just store rain but they store medicines. However, to remove these medicines from the farm to the pharmacy, a lot of investment has to be made in clinical trials and research, which many cannot afford. However, the President has ably shown that we need to support this. I, therefore, would like to support this motion. 

I would also like to emphasise today that we have recognised the sportsmen, even before they entered the plane and landed on the track; I would wish this House also recognises the scientists that have put themselves on the frontline, even when they are still in the lab, to develop medicines locally for this country in the fight against COVID-19. I beg to submit and I support this motion. Thank you. 

5.23 
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. This being my maiden speech in the 11th Parliament, I congratulate you upon assuming that office and I congratulate honourable colleagues for making it to the 11th Parliament. 

I rise to support the motion expressing –(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear about decorum and the way we must speak, and you have kept reminding Members that when a Member is speaking, others should be seated. I see Members still standing and it defeats the decorum of this House. Can we assert the rules so that Members obey the rules of this House and give it respect? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have told the Members to sit. I do not know whether I should leave the seat to go and make somebody sit down. Please, sit; you will speak. 

MS KISEMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion expressing gratitude to the President for the well-delivered State-of-the-Nation Address to this august House. 

From the State-of-the-Nation Address that the President delivered to this House, it is very clear that our internal capacity as a country to deal with challenges that we face has been improved and strengthened. It was very clear and the President indicated how the Government has been able to deal with the challenges of floods, locusts, rising levels of water in our lakes, the floating islands that nearly blocked the dams; all those have been attended to. We would like to thank the President for his wise and strategic leadership. 

Secondly, I would like to appreciate the President for his deliberate effort to promote and support Ugandan scientists, especially in the area of health. From the President’s address, it was clear that as a country, our scientists have made good strides in therapeutics, diagnostics and vaccines. Although we have not done it all, it is a good step in the right direction. Therefore, we would like to thank the President for this kind of support to our scientists. 

5.26
MS IRENE MULONI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. It is my maiden speech. I would like to join colleagues in congratulating you, Madam Speaker, and all colleagues here for your successful election to the 11th Parliament and the subsequent appointments to the various positions. 

I would like to add my voice to congratulate His Excellency the President and thank him for the State-of-the-Nation Address, which was clear, concise and down to earth, touching on issues that affect the ordinary person.

In his State-of-the-Nation Address, His Excellency appealed to all of us to join the money economy so that we can lead better lives. I would like to hail you, Madam Speaker, for having started on a very sound note by having us hit the ground running to do our oversight role, to check on some of the programmes that the Government has prepared for our people. 

The Emyooga programme is geared to delivering economic empowerment to our people, especially now that the Parish Development Model is going to take root. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us time to go and find out what is happening on the ground.

From His Excellency’s State-of-the-Nation Address, it is incumbent upon us, Members of Parliament and the Executive, to work towards effectively engaging our people and guiding them on Government programmes that have been structured very well to support them in joining the money economy. They can then work not only for the stomach but also for the pocket. 

If the ekibalo, which is the profitability assessment, can be utilised in enterprise selection in the four key sectors that His Excellency emphasised - commercial agriculture, industry, services and ICT - given the stimuli that His Excellency has really – (Member timed out.)  

5.29
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join others to congratulate you upon your election to the Speakership of this House. I also congratulate all colleagues for their election to the 11th Parliament.

I want to start by complimenting His Excellency the President for guiding the country very well on COVID-19. The situation could have been worse without the development of the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), which were developed by the Ministry of Health and well guided by him. 

Another challenge we are likely to face, now that the rains are increasing, is the flooding and landslides, which might be equal to COVID-19. I sympathise with the people of Kasese around River Nyamwamba. The people in Bududa also have a challenge of landslides. These are the things the Government must pay attention to as major disasters that we are likely to face in the coming months.

I compliment His Excellency the President for promoting and empowering our people on the money economy. The only challenge I have – Actually, the message from the people of Koboko is that the Emyooga programme will not work and the Government should use that money to buy produce from Koboko, which is the only way they can be empowered. If the money is given out as loans, it will be swindled and they shall “eat” it. So, they say, let them not bother. 

I plead with the Government to consider using Emyooga money to buy produce and provide services to the wananchi so that the money goes directly to them. 

There are some crops in this country, which can easily turn this country around. Coffee has shown its earning capacity, only that we have not reached our apex. For over 40 years, we were still at four million bags and we have just moved to seven million bags. Vietnam, which started recently, is at 40 million bags a year. We need to find out the bottleneck preventing us from hitting the 25 million bags. There must be challenges, which have not been seriously addressed.

We must add cocoa to our national strategic crops. Right now, we only export 30,000 metric tonnes of cocoa, earning this – (Interruption) – Let me end by appealing to the Government to connect West Nile to the national grid. The West Nile Rural Electrification Company (WENRECo) was given a concession for 20 years –(Member timed out.)

5.33
MR ERIC MUSANA (Independent, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Madam Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity and to congratulate Members upon their election to the 11th Parliament.

I want to be specific in debating the State-of-the-Nation Address by the His Excellency President. The President mentioned a number of issues but I would like to interest myself to the social-economic transformation agenda, which he highlighted. This directly supports and connects with the local person. 

There are several interventions by the Government that have been set aside to ensure that the common person benefits. However, there have been several gaps although the President never explained them and there are several questions. I know the biggest problem the Government has is implementation of these projects. They are set up but some of these projects are left on paper. A case in point are the projects we are talking about like the Emyooga, the Parish Development Model, Entandikwa, Vision 2040, Affirmative Action and other projects that are being set up. 

The President should ensure that these other projects are put into action. We are talking about fighting corruption, which I think is just mentioned on paper. Some institutions of Government have been put in place but we are seeing some laxity in how the Government is implementing these several interventions.

Member have commented on electricity. It is not only in other regions; my elder brother has talked about West Nile. In Buyaga East, about 10 per cent of the constituency, and even the entire district, is connected to the national grid, yet we want these people to be job creators and have a better life. This is a big problem even with the young generation.

Madam Speaker, we all know that –(Member timed out.)

5.36
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion on the President’s State-of-the-Nation Address. One of the issues that he mentioned was insecurity. I would like to add that when it comes to insecurity, let us make the best use of the cameras, because people may think they are white elephants. Let us ensure that whenever criminals are got, security should tell the public that cameras X and Y got these criminals. People may think they are just scarecrows. 

About coronavirus, Madam Speaker, the President said that we are likely to do vaccination. It is my wish that we have all the money that has been cut from our budget pushed towards acquisition of as many vaccines as possible. If need be, let us decentralise the vaccination up to health centres II. That is the most important thing. If most people are vaccinated, then we are likely to solve this problem of the coronavirus. 

About the economy, he talked of the economy not doing well and maybe it is likely to move at a growth rate of three per cent per annum. I am sure that if the parish model is emphasised, we are likely to revive our economy. 

I would like to appeal to honourable members that as we go to our rural areas and constituents, let us ensure that we sensitise them about model farming. Model farming is going to solve problems like afforestation and degradation of the environment, especially for us who come from swampy areas. Whoever has been depleting the swamp with rice growing, we are likely to end up with fish ponds, and I think that will be the right direction. 

About manufacturing, the President said that we are likely to emphasise manufacturing. The emphasis here is that coronavirus may be here to stay. I am told that sugarcane can be used in the manufacture of vaccines. So why don’t we take precaution and emphasis to the sugar growing areas, like Busoga and other parts, so that these factories are emphasised and more affirmative action is given to them to help fight coronavirus by having our locally produced sanitizers? 

The other was about railway construction to ease transportation and make it cheaper. The emphasis is that we have had a slow growth of the – (Member timed out)

5.39
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to add my voice in thanking the President for a clear State-of-the-Nation Address. 

Perhaps, I would like to ask colleagues that on such an occasion, we need to forget about our political parties because this is a matter that concerns the population. Whether President Museveni has worked or not, it is clear that he has worked. There is positivity in this country. 

However, we need not be blind about things that have not gone well; for instance, the issue of inequality. It is true that in this country, the gap between the rich and the poor is widening each day. Privatisation is good but it has done a lot of harm to this country. 

The Leader of the Opposition talked about banks. It is true the banks in this country are operating as if there is no Government. They do whatever they think and whatever pleases them. I think we need to sit and plan as a country and see how we can control them. I know that Bank of Uganda has a duty as a regulator, but I may quickly say that there is a problem there. The control is lacking. 

On priority in investment, you put money where you get profits faster and perhaps for a long time that is where you have comparative advantage. Uganda has comparative advantage in tourism and agriculture but the money we have put there is very dismal. I encourage this Parliament, in the next financial year, to help us by allocating more money to these two sectors. These two can propel other sectors of the economy. 

As I wind up, I would like to talk about corruption. Someone said that all of us are concerned and we need to fight it. That is true. However, look at the definition of corruption; it is mainly the people in authority. What do you want the local person to do about it? It is us here in Parliament, it is the Cabinet, it is us who have the knowledge to stand and say no to corruption. I encourage colleagues, because I have been here before, that we should not be part –(Member timed out.)

5.42
MR JULIUS TUSIIME (Independent, Rwampara East County, Rwampara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech. 

During the State-of-the-Nation Address, H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni clearly manifested that he is indeed a beacon of hope, that indeed he is a revolutionary leader and an agent and champion of behaviour change. 

I will not speak on many issues. In relation to COVID-19, in 1990 when Uganda was facing a high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, the President, ministries and agencies related to that came out strongly with behaviour change messages. Indeed, we realised a significant decline in the prevalence. 

Throughout the COVID-19 situation, H.E the President maintained clear messages that echoed a message of prevention and behaviour change to the local communities. I must thank all the citizens of Uganda for adhering to the message of the President. Indeed, he is a champion of behaviour change. As I speak now, the positivity rate has reduced significantly from 22 per cent to eight per cent. Who knows, as we continue to echo out the message, it will reduce further. 

Throughout the State-of-the-Nation Address, he echoed a message of hope. He said that Ugandans, even with the pandemic, ought to look at what he termed as a “pathogen economy”. He said that we look at opportunities of enhancing our incomes, even with this pandemic. As such, we have seen efforts where our doctors are doing research, and our doctors and professors have gone ahead to produce some of the supportive treatment therapies; for example, our very own from Mbarara region, Prof. Ogwang, produced Covidex. 

I would like to thank the President for having come out steadfastly and protected Prof. Ogwang. This encourages innovation and all other people out there to ease the opportunity of contributing to the pathogen economy. I would like to end there. Thank you very much for giving me the opportunity. 

5.45
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the President for the work that he has done for this country since 1986 when he assumed the leadership. 

However, there are still issues that have not been properly handled. One of which – While I appreciate the President for putting in place an innovation fund to support research, you realise that Uganda as a country has not fulfilled or met the conditions that were set by the African Union, that is, to put at least one per cent of its Growth Domestic Product (GDP) to research and development.

The President has promised to continuously increase the salaries of scientists and doctors in this country. It is not enough to merely pay them the salaries without providing funds for the research. Therefore, I want to urge the Executive to ensure that we provide the necessary funding so that our scientists can be relevant, not only in Uganda but also globally.

Madam Speaker, my second issue is on corruption that has been mentioned. The NRM Government came into power and in its 10-point programme was the fight against corruption. A lot has been done in terms of legislation and policies, but there has not been adequate political will to fight corruption. For 35 years, we cannot be talking and singing about fighting corruption, yet it is increasing day in, day out. It is now actually a service tax to the wananchi, the local people; for any service in this country, you must pay a bribe. 

According to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) 2013 National Baseline Survey Report, close to US$ 66 million is lost to bribes in this country. The country loses close to US$ 300 million and that is as per 2016. That is the report that I looked at - US$ 300 million in corruption! So, as we speak, we must be in over Shs 3 trillion in corruption alone. Of course, that affects services.

I just want to state that the fight against corruption seems to have been lost in this country. Those who fight corruption are sometimes not given the support –(Interruption)- Madam Speaker, just one minute. Let me leave that.

I end with one statement, regarding the Descendants Resistance Army (DRA). The President mentioned that he has been talking to his children and that these DRAs should take forward the work of the original National Resistance Army. We are here, Madam Speaker, to take over the work. I am not a child of the NRA but I believe that I can make a good contribution in taking forward the leadership of this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.48
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the mover of this motion. Allow me to also thank His Excellency the President for a well stipulated and visionary State-of-the-Nation Address delivered to this country on 4 June 2021.

Madam Speaker, allow me to pick one item and deliberate on it; it is of paramount interest for me as a leader in this country and for all of us here assembled. The President mentioned infrastructure on that day. A number of roads have been paved in this country. From 2016, there were a total of 3,800 kilometres. In 2020, it now stands at 3,400 kilometres. That is not a mean achievement. We applaud our President for that. However, we can still do more as a country, especially seeing to it that more roads are paved in this country. 

I also want to commend the President for putting in place a number of water transport means. There are a number of ferries on our water bodies. I particularly want to commend the President for his visionary speech when he stated that the railway line is to be rehabilitated, right from Tororo to Pakwach. This will go a long way in preparing and placing fertile ground for the industrial park expected in Pakwach. This will, no doubt, improve the cost of doing business within the region, not only in the northern or West Nile regions but even with our neighbouring states.

It will, no doubt, provide jobs for our young Ugandans who are faced with unemployment problems. From their earnings, this can be ploughed back to the economy and we shall, in a stipulated time, reach the desired middle-income status.

Madam Speaker, the railway rehabilitation to Pakwach will, as per NDP III and NRM manifesto, help to provide necessary infrastructure. I already mentioned that. It will foster regional integration, whereby most of the bulk products can then be moved up to Pakwach and transported to the Democratic Republic of Congo, South Sudan, Kenya and the rest of the East African countries. This will make us reach East African integration faster, which is most desired by this country and the neighbouring countries.

I want to state that with these, coupled with other infrastructural services such as electricity, social services like improved health and education services, we shall no doubt, within a very short period of time, reach the desired middle-income status. I beg to submit.

5.53
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have perused through the State-of-the-Nation Address and the response by the Leader of the Opposition. The difference between the two is that one has lost touch with reality and another is on the ground.

Madam Speaker, the President talks about a growing economy by three per cent. At a time when hotels, schools and malls are being auctioned and the speech is about a growing economy, you realise that there is something wrong. 

The President talks about corruption in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Constitutionally, he is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but there are people in the ministry who are corrupt and he is only lamenting.

Madam Speaker, he talks about a solution as employing children of the historicals and the rich. We know who the historicals are. Some of them are part of the scandals of corruption. So, when you employ them, like father, like son, they will just start where their fathers stopped. 

I heard one of the youth leaders talking about the internet and thanking the President. She was maybe ignorant that there are restrictions even on Facebook. There is unemployment as a result of interfering with and restricting Facebook. We were interfacing with the business community. They are having challenges as a result of these restrictions.

I think that we have some leaders who actually do not know what is happening, who think that some people must remain poor as others continue to get rich. Otherwise, I thank you and the LOP for a very good speech and response.

5.55
MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This being my maiden speech, I also add my voice to the rest who have already congratulated you. I want to thank you very much for your stewardship. I am also the Shadow Minister for Local Government.

On that note, regarding the President’ address, allow me to draw your attention to page 10 where the President mentioned, in the second paragraph of this page, the different leaders. We know very clearly that the country has different categories of leaders. We have the central Government leaders, cultural leaders, religious leaders and local government leaders. To my dismay, however, the President mentioned all leaders. Particularly for the local government leaders, we are all aware that they are really incapacitated. 

As we talk, there is no provision for capacitating and orienting them on how they are going to move around carrying out the different assignments they have. Most of us may recall that apart from the district chairpersons, anyone can become a local government leader by the mere fact that he or she is 18 years and above. It is high time that as we plan from this side, we come up with a decentralisation review as noted by the Leader of the Opposition. Let us always plan and increase the budget for local governments. I urge the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to quickly get some funding such that local government leaders get some capacity building programmes this time round.

You will realise that some of us are still learning. How about them who did not come to office with the S.6 qualification? Madam Speaker, I request that even though the President talked about all leaders, to get the point he stipulated we should plan to come up with reviews.

You realise that many offices of the district chairpersons have been overtaken by the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). It is high time the country came up to pronounce itself better on what it planned as per Article 176 of the Constitution of Uganda in the decentralisation process so that we make things better.

My prayer is when we are looking at the State-of-the-Nation Address, let us consider local leaders. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I wonder why some Members sit very far away when there are empty seats in front. Please, move nearer.

5.59
MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I also serve as the Shadow Minister for Science, Innovation and Technology. 

If you look at the speech by the President, he over emphasised the issue of salaries of scientists and research. As you may observe, it looks as if the Ministry of Science, Innovation and Technology has been scrapped. Less attention has been given to it and even the permanent secretary of the ministry was put off the Government schedule.

Secondly, let us look at the issue of agriculture. I come from Ssembabule District where we solely depend on agriculture. I would like to inform you that this State-of-the-Nation Address is too theoretical. Counterfeit products on the market and sensitisation of farmers have not been given attention.

Considering the bad roads, generally the real farmer has not gained from his sole efforts in agriculture. I would implore the President to highly consider fighting counterfeit products on the market, sensitisation of farmers and empowerment of cooperatives as a way of strengthening farmers. 

I also would like to use this opportunity to inform this House that Ssembabule is among the districts that have no tarmac roads. There is no tarmac road in Mawogola County South, a constituency that I represent. That is, greater Matete. The President promised us a few kilometres of tarmac road but up to now, nothing has been done. We have a distance of 36 kilometres of Kyabakuza-Matete Road and Ssembabule-Mbirizi Road. This would open an avenue for us to access the markets of Masaka and Mbirizi. 

In addition, as you are aware, Ssembabule has no hospital. This road helps us in transporting patients to Masaka Regional Referral Hospital. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

6.02
MR MUWADA NKUNYINGI (NUP, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to associate my submission with the Leader of the Opposition’s submission. The presidential address was deliberately silent on the values of human rights and the rule of law. I happen to represent a constituency, Kyadondo County East, where homes of political leaders like my NUP President, hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu, have been turned into illegal detention centres throughout the year. 

The values of fundamental rights and freedoms have been curtailed throughout the year and the presidential address was deliberately silent on them. Little wonder, to date, I do not hear of any appointment of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

After the election period, we went to court. The country witnessed a scenario where Justices of the Supreme Court were complaining that files were being confiscated on orders from above. Even the courts of judicature, which are the would-be sanctuary of justice, have been attacked deliberately by the despotic regime to overlap the rule of law and democracy. 

As we speak, many Ugandans who were kidnapped are still in detention centres but the President was silent on them. This kind of kidnap and detention is now being exported. I heard today that a Ugandan called Lumbuye was kidnapped in Turkey and the Government is silent. 

These deliberate and illegal attempts by the regime are continuous. We urge this Government to remember that Uganda is governed by the orders of our Constitution. The courts of judicature and the rule of law must be observed. We want to see the independence of the Judiciary and of the criminal investigative units. 

As we speak, the Criminal Investigations Department (CID) and other investigative arms are just being directed. As rightly mentioned by the Leader of the Opposition, they are criminalising all voices of dissent. It is absurd. We call upon this Government that much as the address by the President was deliberately silent on the rule of law, we must push and pursue the values of the rule of law and democracy, separation of –(Member timed out.)

6.05
MR GERALD NANGOLI (NRM, Elgon North County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join others in appreciating His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for the wonderful speech he gave us on 4 June 2021. I noted a few highlights especially on the issue of Emyooga and road infrastructure in Uganda.

There are a number of challenges that we are facing especially in the road sector. Much as we have over 5,000 kilometres of tarmac roads in Uganda, there are some areas that are still facing a lot of challenges, especially Bulambuli and in particular Elgon North County. In Bulambuli, we get Shs 214 million for road maintenance, equipment repairs and fuel, among others. This money is very little to the extent that it cannot even do anything yet we have over 1,000 local roads. Therefore, if you are concern about the highways, what about the local roads on which most of the agricultural produce we are talking about moves from the villages? How will they reach the highways to access markets?

The other thing His Excellency talked about is Emyooga. This has become a nightmare in my district. The local people formed their groups, which was very good, and they were told to pay 10 per cent of the money they intended to borrow. If you are to borrow Shs 1,000,000, you pay Shs 100,000 and you deposit that money on an account. Very many SACCOs were formed. They contributed their money and deposited it on the respective accounts in Dfcu Bank. It is now eight months down the road but these people have not accessed the seed capital. When they go to the district, they are told that because of the lockdown, they are unable to do business. They have to wait until lockdown is lifted.

It is now four days since the lockdown was lifted but still, they have not received the money – (Member timed out.)

6.07
Mr sanon bwiire (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you upon being elected to the position of Deputy Speaker of Parliament.

It was my first time to attend the presidential address and receive it as a Member of Parliament. I vividly looked at the heart and intention of the President as one which is clear and visionary. All the issues he talked about are geared towards helping the people at the grassroots.

Speaking of the Parish Development Model, I have been a district council Speaker for Kaliro District for two terms and I can attest to the fact that most of the programmes that come to local governments are office based. When you look at the design of the Parish Development Model, which is a true visionary idea of the President, you will see that our people will benefit from it. 

Most of the programmes and projects have been ending at subcounty levels. What is remaining is for Parliament to support the President, as he has always asked. The allocation of money towards this programme and project is very little; Shs 38 million is peanuts. As Parliament, we need to support this idea of the President and Government by allocating more money to the model; at least Shs 100 million can do something.

Secondly, the President emphasised commercialised agriculture targeting household incomes. When we put more money into agriculture and help our people to shift from subsistence farming to commercialised agriculture, I would like to assure you that this country will move at a very high speed to attain the middle-income status. Therefore, I would like to second the motion and congratulate Ugandans on electing this wise President who cares for his country.

Lastly, I –(Member timed out.)

6.10
Mr tony awany (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion on the State-of-the-Nation Address. I would like to particularly thank the President for giving focus to agriculture and most especially value addition and the establishment of agro-processing centres in a number of districts, including Nwoya, the county I represent.

As northern Uganda recovers from a conflict situation, we realise that Nwoya particularly, and others, are becoming the food basket for this country. The establishment of the agricultural and agro-processing centres that the President highlighted in that address are a very good step in the right direction. It is one sure way of boosting agricultural productivity for our district and the region at large.

We are also very excited about the Presidential promise to put up irrigation facilities in the district. I think this will help solve the big problem that we have been suffering from, under the hands of natural vagaries. You realise that the uncertainties in the weather have hit the northern Uganda farmers hard. 

Therefore, the pledge by the President to come up with some framework for establishing irrigation facilities for a few selected districts, including Nwoya District that I represent here, is a very good step in the right direction. We hope that will help us bridge the gap that has been created by the vagaries of nature and the unpredictable weather.

We thank the President, in general terms, for chatting out a very good way forward for administering this country in the next five years. The President has demonstrated his consistency in offering visionary leadership. We thank him abundantly and implore God’s blessings for a continued – (Member timed out.)

6.13
Mr moses kabuusu (FDC, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Madam Speaker, Members have thanked the President for delivering a good address and other Members have hailed the Leader of the Opposition for the exact response that it warrants.

When I listened to the President on 4 June, I wanted him to speak about the state of the fisheries industry that he always says employs thousands of people that would not be employed in offices. I am saying this because this country has not prioritised activities on the lake that would employ more people.

Kalangala District, where I hail from, is a cosmopolitan region where every tribe and race is found. There are a lot of efforts that Government is making, I hear, to reduce pressure on the lake and forces on the lake where our people are tortured through beatings by the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). Of late, they have revised the method of handling them for which we are grateful. 

However, there is nothing Government has done to uplift these people. We do not see these people being considered by Government as part of the agriculture and animal industry sectors - the sectors that are related to agriculture. We would like the President, maybe in the next address, to have a sector where Government must address how to stimulate the fisheries and fisheries sector to develop. They say that fish is gold because there are fish maws in the Nile Perch that fetch a lot of money on the international market but the people on the lake are the poorest. They are not attended to. They do not have water. The health systems are poor and they face hardships in accessing schools and transport. 

Next time, when the President prepares to speak, he must understand the components of the people who live on the waters, who work there catching fish and selling fish maws. Government fetches a lot of money, yet they are not rewarded. 

Madam Speaker, the last –(Member timed out.) 

6.17 
MR FRED KAYONDO (DP, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This being my first time standing here, allow me to congratulate you for having gone through the Deputy Speakership race. I would also like to thank you - although the winds are tough, you are still steering the boat in the right direction. 

I would feel right appreciating the President but I find my hands are tied because this is the same speech that the President has been making; it is only the literature that changes - from Prosperity for All to Bona Baggagawale to Emyooga, Parish Development Model, Hakuna Mchezo and so much more. Therefore, I find it hard to appreciate the President because this is the same speech that he has been delivering. 

Madam Speaker, I was happy when the President said that they expect a lot from the fish maws. However, do you know what happened? It was as if he ordered the UPDF to torture, kill and displace the fishermen. 

Members, I would like to tell you that it is hell on the islands of Lake Victoria. People are dying every day. People are being tortured by the UPDF. They are being displaced by the UPDF and those people are laughing at us here moving a motion to thank the President, who feels heartless, when it comes to them. Do you know what makes them get killed? It is because they are using illegal fishing gears, yet these people do not import these illegal hooks. These hooks are brought into the country and they are taxed –(Member timed out.) 

6.19
MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (DP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The speech of the President majorly lacked information on the way security agents are handling Ugandans. Throughout the years, the UPDF, the police and security agencies have consistently tortured, abducted and detained Ugandans without trial. 

The situation worsened during the last elections, wherein the President himself, as the Commander-in-Chief of all the armed forces, came out loudly and said that he got those commandos from Somalia to come and instil some discipline within Ugandans. Up to now, many Ugandans are missing and their whereabouts are unknown. The people on the lake and those within Kampala and in the east are complaining. These abductions went on and up to now, they are still abducting Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, this issue was even raised here, although it was missing in the President’s speech. It was raised here but up to now we are still waiting for the ministerial statement regarding the continuous abductions in this country. This has tainted the good image of this country as far as the rule of law and good governance is concerned. I rest my case at that point.  

6.21
MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. 

The President’s speech was very elaborate and I would not want to draw away myself to it. However, I would like to call your attention to what the President said. He talked about what the Government has achieved, how it is going to achieve but he raised one obstacle, which all my other colleagues mentioned, and it is related to corruption. 

In his words, he said, “…to achieve the objectives of the Government, we must defeat corruption, which has become a real enemy.” He clearly stated that it starts with finance, where the projects are designed with extras. These bloated projects go to ministries, committees of Parliament and then to the Auditor-General, where there is collusion all the way. This clearly tells us that there is a challenge in achieving the objectives that this Government intends to achieve in the coming years. 

Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity to request the Speaker to invoke rule 190. We should set up a committee that can investigate this enemy that the President talked about. We should find out who this person at the Ministry of Finance is who is passing on bloated projects to the ministries and from ministries to committees of Parliament and finally, of course, to the last person. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether that is within your powers but I request that we put in place rule 190 and form a committee to investigate this. Possibly, it will help us to remove the obstacles in achieving the objectives of the NRM Government in the coming years. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.25 
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Aringa East County, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the President for the State-of-the -Nation Address. I would also like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the alternative address.
 
I would like to say that for more than 35 years, we, as Ugandans, had never bothered to think that there were people who had sacrificed for us to bring this country back on track because it had gone to the dogs, the people we are calling veterans. If now, lastly, the President has remembered them and said that a few of their children should be employed, I think that is great. If those people had not sacrificed for us, I do not think we would be seated here deliberating for this country. Therefore, we also need to say “thank you” to those people. 

I would like to request that we join the President to support the pathogen economy. With these rampant epidemics that are evolving day and night, many scientists are making money; they are generating profits from that economy. As a country, we can support the President in supporting our scientists because that is where the money is now. 

Madam Speaker, the scientists who are making the vaccines, when it comes to the issue of who is first, they normally look for their people. As a country, I remember we had the money and we had requested for vaccines from one of the countries, but just because the second wave hit the country harder, our money became useless. What if we had made our own vaccines here; would we suffer? I do not think that even the second wave would have hit us as it has done if we had our own vaccines.

I, therefore, recommend that we look in that direction other than wait for other people to do it for us. We are also human beings and we can do it for ourselves. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.  

6.27
MR JOAB BUSINGE (FDC, Masindi Municipality, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I will give all of you an opportunity. If we do not finish the debate today, it will continue tomorrow.

MR JOAB BUSINGE: Madam Speaker, when I heard about this motion to accord special thanks to the President for performing his constitutional mandate of delivering the State of Nation Address, I was wondering - 

Secondly, I also think that it is not deserved because no one can be in office but do nothing over time. When you look at the time President Museveni has stayed in power - over 35 years - and he is talking about moving this country to the middle-income status, yet there have been other governments, like the one which was headed by the late President Magufuli, that saw to it that in only five years, Tanzania joined middle income status.

I still wonder when you talk about socio-economic transformation, yet the problem for many of our people is marketing of their products. As I talk, the sugar factory is becoming an evil. Masindi is a sugar growing area but if you look at how the group of companies are treating farmers, the time it takes to harvest their canes and the price they are giving, you find a farmer spending over three years with canes in the field, and you are talking about economic transformation.

Finally, I am also concerned about this idea of employing children of the historicals –(Member timed out.) 

6.29
MR ISAAC KATENYA (Independent, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to join my friends to appreciate the President on his State-of-the-Nation Address. 

I would like to draw attention to the issue of floods and landslides, especially in the Elgon zone. I appreciate the efforts of the President, especially on the settlement of the people of Bududa, my constituency. However, if the Government can come up with a special programme for Bugisu, especially on the issue of landslides where we can get special funds to establish infrastructure for revamping the areas, mitigation and recovery of areas, which have been destroyed by landslides and floods – As I talk, there are very many schools, which have been affected by cracks in the mountains. Roads, hospitals and subcounty headquarters have also been destroyed. 

If the Government can do something about that, we shall be very grateful. 

On the issue of commercial agriculture, if the Government is to succeed, then it should be in a position to provide subsidies to farmers. For example, tractors in most parts of the country are very expensive and they are not there. In particular, Bulambuli is a farming area and most of the people are using rudimentary methods of farming. Therefore, switching to commercial farming will become difficult –(Member timed out.)

6.31
MS BRENDA NAMUKUTA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This being my maiden speech, I would like to congratulate you for that achievement, and my fellow honourable colleagues. 

I am here to second hon. Nakut’s motion on the State-of-the-Nation Address, where the President talked about things that are pertinent to the nation, especially when he mentioned the increasing levels of water bodies and the resultant flooding. I will give a case of my own district, Kaliro, where we have the Saka Bridge that connects to Pallisa District. I have Rumbuye and Dongi swamps within my district, which connect Kaliro to Buyende District. 

This means that the State-of-the-Nation Address was not a mere rhetoric as it has been said here before, but a precursor to practical solutions. What remains is to monitor and implement to ensure value for public funds. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to submit.

6.33
MS HOPE NAKAZIBWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for attaining that seat of power, and my honourable colleagues. 

I rise to support the motion that was moved by hon. Nakut on the State-of-the-Nation Address given by the President of the Republic of Uganda. When His Excellency the President gave this speech, he did not spare the fact that he recommended a good pay to scientists. I represent the people of Mubende but I come from a science background. Therefore, I cannot go on without applauding His Excellency the President for mentioning that giving scientists a good pay is not doing them a favour. We appreciate that.

On the other note, I would like to thank His Excellency the President for looking into agriculture and industry. These are among the four sectors that we are going to put emphasis on as a country in the next financial year. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think it was a continuation of the previous honourable member’s contribution. I want to appreciate His Excellency the President for combining agriculture and industry. 

We have realised that Ugandans, especially the people of Mubende, are agriculturalists. We have been producing a lot of products but the market has been limited. This is attributed to a number of factors; a few of them are the quality of seeds, the timing of planting and maybe the roads. 

I would like to implore the responsible authorities and ministries to make sure that whenever we are to deliver seedlings to our communities, let it be timely. Our people have always prepared their gardens but sometimes, we have some organisations and agencies that are supposed to be delivering these seedlings and they come a little late. Let us not frustrate the efforts of our President. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, so far 32 Members have spoken. We have a list of all those who have been standing. We will start the debate where we have stopped tomorrow. Do not worry; I have said everybody will speak. 

6.36
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion and thank the President for always being accountable to the people of Uganda by regularly giving the status and the state of affairs of the nation. 

I have four key issues of interest. One of them is to do with environmental conservation or reclamation of wetlands that the President has been alluding to. It is the way to go. Well aware that climate change is a true phenomenon that we cannot avoid or ignore, we need to address the issue of wetland reclamation in an organised way. 

I always feel ashamed and shy when I see my own President commissioning factories and industries that are constructed in wetlands. Now, we are coming up to say that we want to evict small people who are cultivating rice and yams in those swamps, at the peril of these key foreign investors who are depleting and distorting our climate. I pray and wish that we handle these things squarely without treating others in a unique manner or a special way. 

The other issue is to do with operationalisation of a special programme for Busoga subregion. Early this afternoon, my colleagues from northern Uganda were questioning Government on the plans in place to replace NUSAF III that has ended. As they were asking this, my heart was also pumping. As we reconsider having another programme for the reconstruction of Northern Uganda, can we operationalise the promised programme for Busoga as a sub–region? This is because statistics that were recently released named Busoga and Bukedi regions as being the poorest in the country. That alone is a clear justification for us to have a special programme to enhance and put these people on board. 

I would like to thank the President for the efforts put in fighting COVID-19. He has been – (Interruption) - Thank you very much. The issue of COVID-19 requires serious recognition and salutations to the President because 24/7, the President has committed his time and his life in ensuring that Ugandans remain free of COVID-19. 

I have one concern about financial institutions that are harassing people. People obtained loans from commercial banks. The President has not come out authoritatively and clearly to tell banks to pause on demanding interest and to pause on attaching people’s property. People are developing hypertension. They are becoming sick. Their property is being taken and we have not come out clearly on this. 

Whereas the credit for fighting COVID-19 is there, here the local person has not been helped. I, therefore, appeal to my good Government and my dear President to come out squarely and save Ugandans the pressures of these loans. We do not want to get rid of COVID-19 and lose people to hypertension. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for the endurance. We should not be ending the House late since we start early. 

Tomorrow, we shall start with the MPs who have been standing. We will continue with the same debate. We will only have two debates, the one on the COVID-19 report and then finalising the State-of-the-Nation Address. Thank you very much. We will continue with what we are doing. 

I adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 6.40 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 5 August 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 


