Tuesday, 20 August 2013

Parliament met at 3.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I want to thank both the Cabinet and the committees for the work that has been going on concerning the Budget. But we are off schedule; as you know, we should have completed the budget process by 31st August. I think we are not going to beat that target. Let me just ask that you use this week to complete all the reports so that by Tuesday, we can complete the budget process. 

Secondly, I am delighted to welcome our Golden Boy, Stephen Kiprotich –(Applause)– he has done it again and the country is very happy. We also want to congratulate Mrs Kiprotich on getting a baby boy yesterday – (Applause) – that is why she is not in the gallery this afternoon. I know that at a later stage, the Minister of Education will be moving a motion to commend the Golden Boy. 

Thirdly, I have noted with concern the statements made by the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in connection with my work. I think that leaders in this country should acknowledge that we consciously took a decision to go multi-party. Multi-party means that there are many parties. 

When I took oath after you elected me, I said, “I will be a Speaker for everyone” and I want the government to understand that I am Speaker for everybody. No one should go on radio and complain that the Independents have come to my office, I am their Whip. No one should complain that the Opposition have come to my office, I am their Speaker; and no one should complain that NRM has come to me, I am also their Speaker. 

I am bothered that in the 12 years Prof. Nsibambi was Prime Minister here, he never went to radio to speak about the Speaker – for 12 years; not even once! So I want the government to note that we should respect one another – yes, we agreed to go multi-party. Let us accept it and ensure that it works better. (Applause) 

Now, honourable members, because we have been on recess for some time, there are a few Members who have some small issues. I will give them three minutes each. So hon. Mawanda, hon. Mpuuga and hon. Ebil, you have three minutes each then we will go back to the Order Paper.

3.15
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Last Tuesday, in the evening, hailstorms destroyed some parts of the constituency I represent with hon. Mary Okurut. It destroyed various things including animals, plants, churches, secondary schools and other things. There are about three villages, which have no shelter and food. 

So I have come here to urge Government to extend relief assistance to my people to ensure that we come to their rescue. I request that the ministry comes up to assist my people so that they can have something to survive on. 

Madam Speaker, the areas that have been affected are Nyambirizi, Nyakihorera, Nyamiyaga and all these are in Igara East Constituency, which is my constituency. About 115 families have been affected. So I call upon the government to come to the rescue of my people. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of Government Business is taking note of the problem in Igara East. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, some time back, before there was a hailstorm in Bushenyi, and hon. Kabwegyere was the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, he took food there where there was no disaster. I do not know what he will do now when there is disaster. (Laughter)

3.18
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Nandala for having a vivid memory. There are things to remember and others that should be forgotten. But I think falsehood must be forgotten –(Laughter)– and I do not think that it is a laughing matter. 

I have heard very attentively; when people are in distress, they need to be helped. Actually, I would have wished hon. Mawanda to talk to hon. Karoro and myself before coming here. I say this very seriously because talking in the House alone cannot help. If I had known before I came here, I probably would have taken action to help those people rather than now when time has been lost. 

Those of us who have been involved in handling disasters know that the sooner you intervene, the better. Report so that action can be taken and then come to the House to announce your contribution. 

Madam Speaker, I obviously like Nandala very much, but I also do not like his fickleness. 

3.20
MR MUHAMMED MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, last week, my constituency was honoured to host the Head of State, His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda and a couple of senior ministers. 

I have two bones of contention but first, we thank him for coming to Butambala. Most critically, however, I was saddened and I want the entire country to know this. During the President’s address, he quoted the biblical story of Moses and his uncle and thereafter, he introduced, I think a full mini-bus of senior army officers who have zoned this country from West Nile, border to border, and each area is being allocated to a specific senior military officer to take over as in charge of poverty alleviation.

This to me is very disturbing. Have we lost confidence in local civilian administration and in the civil service, in CAOs and NAADS? I must contend that I marked a clear distinction that if it was only for veterans, it would be okay but it is for poverty alleviation for the whole country. So are we back to military rule? Have we in the civilian authority totally failed and now generals are taking over? How does it contend with the UPDF Act, most fundamentally?

Also, under which budget allocation are these generals going to draw money? The programme is headed by Gen. Salim Saleh assisted by Nalweyiso, whose rank I do not know, in the President’s Office. Brigadier -(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kivumbi for giving way. The information I want to give is that it was three weeks ago, when His Excellency also visited Atiak Sub-County in Amuru, where he said that this was the area where he used to plan to launch attacks on the sitting government then. He also went with very many generals and gave each of them an area that the particular general was to control. He said their major role is to fight poverty in those particular areas.

We are now wondering the role of the local government in those areas. Does it mean that the activities of local governments have been overtaken by those of the generals? That is the information I wanted to give you, honourable. Thank you so much.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, that has caused concern in the Ugandan administration. Also, on a serious note, I received an invitation from the Office of the Prime Minister under the directives of His Excellency the President. As a humble citizen and knowing the part I represent in the Democratic Party, I honoured the invitation and attended but I was saddened to note that my presence at that function turned into an occasion for particularly, hon. Byandala and the President to take turns in insulting an elected leader who had honoured an invitation to attend in a civil way. 

I want to contend that if that is the way we are going to be treated at functions where the President is in attendance - for senior ministers to take opportunity to virtually abuse – (Interjections) - I cannot repeat what he said. I am civil enough not to repeat what hon. Byandala said at that function and if I do, you will all find me at fault. However, I am hesitant to attend any other function on the invitation of the President officially writing to me as a leader in that area - (Member timed out.)

3.25
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my brother, hon. Kivumbi, for appreciating the visit of the Head of State to his area but I am taking the Floor briefly to put the record correct. Veterans, by the law that governs the national Army, and up to a certain age, remain connected to the main body of the national Army. In this particular incident, the President has been going around the country to ensure that some attention is given to the veterans in so far as poverty alleviation is concerned.

So, the programme is targeted at the veterans. In the course of what they will do, they may also be an example to other citizens where they live. They are certainly not taking over the work of NAADS or of the local administration. I want to assure this House and I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.27
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to bring a matter of national importance on the Floor of Parliament. Less than a fortnight ago, the Electoral Commission issued a non-dated document to the effect that they are carrying out a countrywide exercise of demarcating electoral areas and re-organising polling stations in preparation for the 2016 general elections.

We all look forward to this particular election and we pray that it comes to pass. The concern I am raising is that, the manner in which this particular exercise is being handled is very worrying. In the first place, the Commission unequivocally outlines the intention, namely, to reduce numbers above 900 voters per polling station, reduce on the distance covered by voters to polling stations, re-name polling stations, relocate polling stations and ensure that villages are correctly placed in polling stations where they belong.

Before I came to raise this matter, I interacted with a number of colleagues here and many are flat footed on what is going on. We are talking about renaming polling stations but the Electoral Commission has not involved leaders in understanding what they are up to and the talking points are, what is the magic around 900 voters? Why not 500 or 1,000? Because part of the problem over the last couple of elections was that it is doubtable as to whether we have that particular number of voters on the voting roll.

Two, we have not had registration of voters or even a census. How do you tell whether numbers are actually above 900 or below? The report I got from my constituency today was to the effect that they are going ahead to meet people who are not even informed as to how this should be done because they are not their leaders. On top of that, the Electoral Commission recruited people, in what was dubbed a “re-organization exercise” in  a matter of two or three days - advertising, recruiting and deploying. The whole exercise is suspicious.

Mr Speaker, why this must concern everybody is that we all have heard about disenfranchising voters on polling day – renaming, moving voters and stations but leaders are not involved. I rise to seek an explanation from Government as to whether this is part of an earlier warning of potential electoral fraud or actually it is intentional that the Electoral Commission works this way. I am worried about what this is all about. I seek an explanation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have hon. Fred Ebil while the Attorney-General gets ready.

3.32
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Madam Speaker, I stand to inform this House about a disaster that occurred in my area yesterday, 19 August 2013, especially in the parish of Balakalu in Akalu Sub-County, Kole District.

Heavy rains combined with hailstorms destroyed a lot of crops that included cassava, maize, beans, sim-sim, groundnuts, among others, especially in the villages of Adakangol, Abutabel, Agerinon, Abolokom and Rwoch.

I stand to request the honourable minister for disaster, through the Office of the Prime Minister, to urgently respond to the needs of my people. This is because as we talk, there is looming hunger that my people are going to face. I appeal to the always fast-responding minister for disaster, to respond urgently. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I now invite the Attorney-General to respond to the issues on elections. But we also expect answers on the disaster reported and also what transpired when H.E, the President visited Butambala.

3.33
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I indeed appreciate the submission made by hon. Mathias Mpuuga about the exercise being conducted by the Electoral Commission. 
Just last week, I attended a meeting of the National Consultative Forum, of course, where all the Opposition and the NRM sides are represented. In that meeting, the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission made a statement to that body. That statement was discussed but I believe that more needs to be done.

So, May I, Madam Speaker, request that on Thursday this week, I also come with a statement and present it to Parliament regarding that exercise?

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, that matter is very important because it is about the right to representation; the right to stand for elections. So, it is important for everybody in this country. Okay, let us get the statement on Thursday. 

Now, can we receive information? Hon. Todwong, are you going to speak about the issues of Butambala?

3.35
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (POLITICAL MOBILISATION) (Mr Richard Todwong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of Butambala, I can only confirm what my colleague, hon. Chrispus Kiyonga, said here. This is because I managed to attend two of these rallies - and definitely the President does not visit secretly like other party leaders that we have. Wherever the President goes, people gather. His visits have been very specific to the veterans. The mobilisation to attend these rallies is done in that way. The ones I attended were in Awere Sub-County in Omoro County and one in Atiak, which is hon. Olanya’s constituency.

Madam Speaker, the President was categorically clear that the purpose of his visits was to meet veterans. He also wanted to experiment his initiative with the veteran community to see whether the rest of the community can borrow a leaf. That is why he is moving with many army generals and other army officers. It is not necessarily about taking over the activities of local governments. I remember he was very categorically clear that the initiative was not to overtake the work being done by the local governments. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I want someone to speak about the insults to hon. Muwanga Kivumbi who had been officially invited to accompany the President to this meeting. 

3.37
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, first of all, I am sorry I wasn’t in that meeting and so am not privy to what happened there. But being the open, free and democratic country, any aggrieved person in the society is free to go to court - (Laughter) – for redress – yes!

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, first, thank you for giving me this opportunity. We are all elected leaders in our various capacities, which is the more reason for us to treat one another with courtesy. I am sure this is not going to be the first and last time that H.E, the President traverses this country. Next time, he might be in Terego or Adjumani. So, I think it is only fair that the President, as an elected leader, respects all the lower elected leaders like the Members of Parliament.

The procedural question that I want to seek is; taking into account the utterances of my senior colleague and brother, Gen. Moses Ali, that if there is any person aggrieved by the statements which were made by the members of Parliament that were part of the President’s entourage, they can go to court -of course, he has also conceded that having not been there, he couldn’t be party to it and I appreciate that. But for hon. Gen. Moses Ali to come here and say that if such a thing happened, the aggrieved person(s) can go to courts of law when he knows this is a political matter that deserves a political response – honestly, this is not a criminal matter neither is it a civil matter; it is a matter of morals regarding how a person was brought up and it is political.

Surely, should all of us - every other time we raise an important issue of this magnitude, which touches our marrows - be referred to the courts of law when we know what is happening in these courts? We need some guidance, Madam Speaker, on this matter. We should not just sweep it under the carpet because it is a serious matter.

3.40
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is not right for any leader to abuse, not only a leader but also any Ugandan. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has raised an issue and made allegations that hon. Abraham Byandala abused him at a function. Hon. Byandala is not here. Wouldn’t it be right, like we have done in the past, that when the hon. Minister is in the House, he can make a statement to that effect? We are not sure whether he did that. If he did it, he would be able to explain what he meant. We should not create an impression that hon. Byandala was sent by our party to abuse a member of the Democratic Party -(Interruption)

MS ALUPO: Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the observation and comments from the hon. Member for Butambala. I have risen to give this House information because I have been part of the team that has been moving with His Excellency, the President in all the areas of Uganda where there are veterans who have been identified. The purpose for the President interacting with them is to involve them actively in the fight against poverty as the hon. Kivumbi has clearly articulated. 

I would like to restrict myself to the occasion when His Excellency, the President was in Butambala District. I was in Butambala District and I articulated very clearly the programmes on education in Butambala in the presence of Members of Parliament from Butambala. Hon. Irene Muloni was in Butambala and she articulated very clearly the programmes of energy to the public. The hon. Dr Nyiira was there and he articulated very clearly matters and the programmes on agriculture. The hon. Byandala was in Butambala and he articulated very well the programmes on roads. It is also true that when he was articulating, he was speaking in the local language -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order Members.

MS ALUPO: Hon. Wadri, whenever I am seated, I listen to you very keenly. I am surprised that a senior legislator and my mentor like you is even standing up -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order against the Minister for Education whom I am very happy acknowledges that I am her mentor. In no way will I, therefore, undo all my good records -(Laughter)- by destroying my own that I have mentored. Is the hon. Alupo, the Minister for Education, whom I have known for a very long time even before she became a politician and before she joined the Army, in order to insinuate, before all the people in this Chamber, that I am distracting her when she is making her important statement, when I am quietly seated here? Is she in order? How is she hearing my voice? Is the hon. Member, whom I have mentored to be what she is, in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think she has admitted that you are her favourite person; that is why you are on her mind. I do not think she meant anything wrong. (Laughter) But what did hon. Byandala say about hon. Kivumbi in Luganda?

MS ALUPO: Madam Speaker, “Simanyi Luganda”. (Laughter) I just wanted to propose – (Interruption)

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, who is a Member of Parliament for Butambala and Buganda, was at a function where the hon. Byandala spoke in Luganda, a language he fully understands.  He has raised an issue that he was insulted in Luganda, which the hon. Minister has confessed she does not actually understand. Is she therefore in order to come and defend hon. Byandala who made the statements in a language she does not understand? (Laughter) Is the minister in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, since the minister does not understand Luganda, she cannot defend hon. Byandala. But on a serious note, Prime Minister, I think it is not fair to brush off this matter by saying, “Go to court.” In my communication, I reminded all of us that we, as a country, agreed to go multiparty. So, if we agreed, why don’t we accept that we have multipartism in this country and treat one another with respect? I want hon. Byandala to come and explain what he said in Butambala. Yes. And also I think we need an undertaking from the government that we are going to treat each other with respect. I think it is necessary.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, procedurally, I am convinced that it would be better if hon. Byandala was to come to the House very aware of what insult, if any, accusation if any - is known to the House. Let me put it this way. If the hon. Member finds it very difficult to state that insult here on the Floor of the House, he would confide in you that insult and it is communicated to hon. Byandala so that he comes to make a statement on something he well knows. Because if now he has got to imagine what he said and so on and so forth, then he comes here to say what? So I think procedurally, it would be better to proceed the way I have proposed.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kivumbi, what are the offending words which were said? No. Say them in English; we cannot record in Luganda.    

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, to be sure, it is good that the hon. Minister for Education was there and if I am to tell a lie, she will confess because even Members of NRM tried to tell hon. Byandala to go to the microphone and apologise but he refused. You remember. They told him, “Please, you cannot insult our leader this way. Go to the microphone and apologise.” But I was brought up differently and there are certain words I do not normally want to use. But to call another leader a fool! “Oyo musiru, mwalonda waaki? “Tategeera; tamanyi na kuteesa mu Parliament” (He is a fool; why did you elect him? He does not even know how to debate in Parliament.) “The only job he does in Parliament is to abuse the President and insult people and fellow MPs.” Have I, any single time, ever stood in this House and insulted any single Member of Parliament or used language that demanded me to even apologise? Not a single time! Therefore, I took it –(Interruption)

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much for giving way. I am a Member of Parliament for Bukoto South in Lwengo District. When the President left Butambala, on Friday, he was in Lwengo District. I did participate in organising for his visit to Lwengo District, together with hon. Ssejoba, hon. Nakabira the Woman Member of Parliament and unfortunately on Friday personally, I did not attend because my daughter was admitted in hospital. When the President was in Lwengo District, he used the same words that Byandala used in Butambala. He said that the people of Bukoto, whom I represent, elected a person who is more or else as the words earlier used. 

You all know how I came to this House; I came through a by-election which was a tough battle. A president who is a leader, who knows I may have played a part in bringing him to my constituency and he uses the same words - the Prime Minister,  who is the leader of Government Business –(Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order to ask the hon. Member, who said that the President used the same words that he used on Kivumbi and the point of order which I am raising is which words are those? How can you say the President used the same words when you are not uttering them? Is he therefore in order to lie?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the question which the Attorney-General asked has been answered. The words have been said in English. They will be passed on to hon. Byandala and we want an explanation. If it is true that it is being done in other places, I want to ask the Prime Minister to address that issue together with the Minister in Charge of the Presidency. We have finished with this matter for now.
 
MR BIREKERAAWO: Madam Speaker, the Leader of Government Business, Gen. Moses Ali, whom we respect, said that whoever is aggrieved should go to court. When leaders are going through our constituencies, I want to say that we also have capacity to organise our people to abuse them if it is a question of abusing. But some of us, especially you people who have been here, the way we were brought up whether in Opposition or not, tells us that we are leaders in this country. So is the Deputy Prime Minister, who is Leader of Government Business right to say that if we are aggrieved, we go to court yet you are moving around?

I want to warn and I am very serious about this; we have the capacity and I repeat, we have the capacity for anybody who is going around abusing leaders who are elected by people to also organise our people and reciprocate in the same manner!

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want hon. Byandala now that he knows the words used to come and make a statement about what he said in Butambala and then we shall discuss those other issues.

In the meantime, hon. Members, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of St Catherine Day and Boarding Primary School represented by hon. Ruhindi and hon. Naggayi. They are in the gallery. You are welcome! (Applause)

Also, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Nkozi Sub-County. There are various schools in Mawokota South represented by hon. Sarah Nakawunde and hon. Bbosa Kiyingi you are welcome. (Applause)

3.56
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. Abuses exist, let them continue like that.

Two weeks ago, I moved a motion under Rule 48, “oral notice of motions” for notification and the Speaker then gave me leave of House to go and prepare the motion and I did. I am looking at the Order Paper and I cannot see it yet I put it to the Clerk and the Office of the Speaker that this motion is very important to us.

This motion is about the conduct of the Deputy Speaker of Parliament and hon. Member of Parliament for Omolo and how he violated our rules especially Rule 78(2) of our Rules of Procedure. The procedural point I am raising is on what happened to the motion not appearing on the Order Paper.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think I will have to check the Hansard and see what transpired and then I will respond to you.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE HIGHER EDUCATION STUDENTS’ FINANCING BILL, 2013
 
3.58
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Higher Education Students’ Financing Bill, 2013” be read the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: I beg to lay it on the Table.  It is attached with a certificate of financial implications.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is sent to the Committee on Education for perusal and report back. Because of the importance of the students’ financing scheme, I will be very strict on the 45 days. I want that Bill back in 45 days without fail.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as hon. Chris comes, I want to see the Minister of Local Government; I am in trouble in Kamuli because the bicycles for LC I leaders have not come. I am really in trouble; to every village I go, they ask me for their bicycles. Hon. Onzima, where are the bicycles for Kamuli and other places?

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, as the minister comes to clarify on the matter of bicycles, we would also be interested in knowing when the elections of the LC I leaders will take place because as we speak, the LCs we are giving bicycles are illegal.

I am not opposed to LC chairpersons getting bicycles but I want the bicycles to be given to the right people. When are the elections of the LC I chairpersons taking place?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. They were not only LCIs; there were town councils that were created and I remember last year, even the dates were set for the elections and the candidates even went ahead to print posters but it has ended up becoming wasteful expenditure. 

So, when are the elections of the new created town councils and some LC III or sub-county chairpersons going to be conducted? We also have those who passed on but they have not been replaced. Could we please know when this is going to take place? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nabbanja, before the minister answers.

4.07
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. For us in Kibaale, we are a bit lucky that we received some bicycles. Out of 1,740 villages, only 1,410 got bicycles while the rest did not receive their bicycles. Even the money –

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MS NABBANJA: The Shs 120,000 that is usually given to the LCs –(Interjections)- yes, 1,700 are in one district.

I am wondering whether the Ministry of Local Government has information of how many villages some districts have. Do you have a data base? Where do you get your information from to send more or less? 

Madam Speaker, let me use this opportunity also to ask the Minister for Health - 

THE SPEAKER: No, no.

MS NABBANJA: Bicycles - Madam Speaker, please allow me as it is a matter of national importance. (Laughter)
 
THE SPEAKER: No. You will raise that one tomorrow.

MS NABBANJA: It is very urgent because people are dying there. Madam, just allow me - it is very simple. 

Madam Speaker, when the President came to Kibaale, he launched a health centre III and that day, we had health staff and people were treated for a day but after he left, they closed the health centre. (Laughter)

I am asking the honourable minister because people are dying, my dear Speaker. Why do you dupe the people of Kibaale? You duped us with a district and now the health centre? What is it?

THE SPEAKER: Now, the bicycles - (Laughter) - hon. Onzima, the minister, please respond.

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Alex Onzima):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad that all these issues have been raised and I do confess that I cannot give a comprehensive answer on the issues raised. So, I request that I come back here on Thursday to give a comprehensive answer to all the issues raised ranging from bicycles to elections. Madam Speaker, I beg to request.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, on the question of bicycles, do not stop at the people who have voiced. Give us an update for the whole country on who has got bicycles and who has not. Thank you. 

Hon. Minister for Health, on the disappeared health centre.

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The health centres III and IV are under the district local government. The staff of these health centres are recruited by the District Service Commission based in the districts. Ours is oversight but I have taken note of her concern. 

I wish she had first raised the matter with the district leaders like the CAO before raising the matter on the Floor of the House. Even if the President launches it, it is still under the district local government. However, since she has raised it, I can only make a follow up with the CAO and the district chairperson to find out why the situation is like that and especially aware that we recently advertised vacancies for all health centres III and IV and we expect the districts to have recruited the staff for these health centres. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the bigger matter is why anyone would want to fool the President to come and officiate at a launch and leave the population believing that they have a health centre and when the President leaves, they also take off. It is very serious. Okay, let us have some answers please. Hon. Baryomunsi.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.11
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The leadership of Parliament has been engaging with leaders from various local governments at a regional level to bridge the gap between Parliament and the people. Through these outreach programmes, issues are discussed particularly the local government leaders raise issues for Parliament to note but also Parliament explains how it functions. I take this opportunity to lay on Table the various reports for the various meetings that have taken place over time.  

I beg to lay on Table the launch of Parliament's Public Outreach Forum held at Tropical Inn Masaka from the 25 to 27 September, 2008 and attached to the report is an extract of the recommendations from the Masaka Parliamentary Outreach Forum. I beg to lay.

Secondly, I beg to lay a report from the Western region Parliamentary outreach meeting held at Mountains of the Moon Hotel in Kabarole from 21 to 22 December 2011 and attached to the report is an extract of the recommendations from the Fort Portal Parliamentary Outreach Forum. I beg to lay on Table.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a report of the Parliamentary Public Outreach Forum for the Eastern Region held at Mbale Resort Hotel from the 19 to 22 April 2012 and attached to the report is an extract of the recommendations from the Parliamentary outreach meeting held in Mbale. I beg to lay.   

I beg to lay a report of the Parliamentary Public Outreach Forum held at Moroto between the 25 and 27 April 2013 for the Karamoja and Teso regions and attached to the report is an extract of the recommendations arising from the Karamoja Outreach Forum. I beg to lay.

Lastly, I beg to lay a report of the Parliamentary Public Outreach Forum for the island districts held at Sesse Habitat Resort in Kalangala in May 2013 and attached to the report is an extract from the recommendations from the Kalangala Outreach Forum. I beg to lay and thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The outreach programme is very useful. It really brings the Parliament nearer to the people. 

The guidance I need to seek from you is, in my capacity as the Chairman of the West Nile Parliamentary Group, may we also know when the people of West Nile will access Parliament closer to them so that they can also be able to put across to Parliament the issues that affect them. If that date is given, I will appreciate that we are also given ample time and the Members of Parliament from the region are also able to get time and be there to receive you and the Parliament of Uganda. Can we get clarification on that, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to confirm that the next outreach will be in West Nile. Last time, we took you to Gulu but it became so big. We are going to give you your own time and we shall let you know early enough so that you can attend it. So, hon. Members, I would like the report sent to all the committees especially the Committee on Local Government because one of the issues is inadequate funding. 

In the island constituencies, we found something very unique; that a parish is made of several islands. So, they need special programmes for health because you need to use a canoe to go to hospital in one of the 10 islands or 20 islands. So, I want the Committee on Budget and the Committee on Health to take an interest in that but of course it is availed before the Members for all to study.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for taking Parliament to the people. I am sure the reason hon. Dr Baryomunsi is presenting these reports is because they want to make an input in the budget we are about to pass and I will be happy that Members look at them, especially local governments. 

Madam Speaker, every day, we have reports in the “Notice of Business to Follow” and we have reports from accountability committees. Some of them and even others from sectoral committees, I think, are now making a year. I want to plead that for now, all these reports be laid on Table so that Members can go and read them and we prepare time when we can discuss them. For example, accountability committees have been accused of not doing work but even some of their reports, which had earlier appeared in “Notice of Business to Follow” have been removed. If they had been delayed, the problem would be with the House and not with the accountability committees. So, I want to suggest, Madam Speaker, if you do not mind, that tomorrow all reports from whichever sector be laid on Table. They might also be an input to the budget process we are holding.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want also to clarify that it is not true that we have not been placing these matters on the agenda. If you recall, before we closed the session, I called one of the committees and on three occasions, the chairman was not here, the vice-chairperson was not here and nobody offered to present. That happened here before we went on recess. So, it is not true that we have not been doing it but we shall facilitate their being handled. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of reports is very important in the sense that some of these reports are time bound and when they take long before receiving attention, they are overtaken by events and they become obsolete. Even the issues and recommendations which are made therein fall along the way. 

I would appreciate, Madam Speaker, through your guidance, if some of these reports could be debated and disposed of. Otherwise, it is also demotivating to find out that we have put a lot of energy and time to produce the reports and at the end of the day, the issues are not brought forward and you find people discussing the issues in pieces and bits and over the radio stations. So, really, let these reports not become obsolete because they are being overtaken by events. Otherwise, at the end of the day, the whole institution of Parliament will be seen to have been impotent because it will not help.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This issue was raised the other week on the Floor of this House and the Speaker required all chairpersons of the accountability committees, save for one who was not around, to give the status quo of the reports that they have. And the Speaker then guided that the Business Committee should sit urgently so that they can find time, given the constitutionality of some of the reports, to ensure that adequate time is given for this House to consider these matters. Whereas expediting to lay them in advance would be good, the proposition made by the Speaker then would have provided the best solution so that specific time is allotted for the House to know that we are going to debate a series of committee reports for us to make fundamental recommendations because some of the recommendations of the committees impact on the subsequent allocations and on how best the funds should be utilised. So, the earlier we do it, the better, but that is how the Speaker guided last week.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I remain concerned of your concerns and we shall make the necessary arrangements to have them. All the work of Parliament is important but I think also Members should be available when we need them to present their reports. But we shall facilitate it. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE NATIONAL ATHLETE AND ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT OF PRISONS, STEPHEN KIPROTICH, FOR WINNING, IN THE NAME OF UGANDA AT THE 2013 WORLD ATHLETIC CHAMPIONSHIP IN MOSCOW, A PRICELESS WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP GOLD MEDAL IN THE MARATHON EVENT IN A TIME OF 2:9:52

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as the minister comes to move the motion, of course, our Golden Boy is there. He is accompanied by Mr Namawerere, the Uganda Athletics Federation Public Relations Officer; Mr Peter Omala, the Commissioner Physical Education in the Ministry of Education and Mr Apolo Musherure, the General Secretary, Uganda Athletics Federation. They have come to listen to the debate. I understand Members want the Golden Boy to stand up. Please stand up, Mr Kiprotich. (Applause) 

4.16
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, the concern of Members is that last time, he sat in the corner there and they had a chance to shake his hand.

THE SPEAKER: What is the proposal? The reason we put him there is that it is the VIP Gallery and this one here is the Treasury Bench. 

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate Stephen Kiprotich for winning a gold medal at the 2013 World Athletics Championship in Moscow and this motion is moved under Rule 47. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, objective XVII, mandates the state to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Stephen Kiprotich was among the Ugandan team members to the 2013 World Athletics Championship held in Moscow, Russia and indeed participated in the men’s marathon;

AWARE THAT on Saturday, 17 August 2013, Stephen Kiprotich won the World Athletics Championship gold medal after trouncing all the other world athletes in the championship marathon event by emerging the first and winner in a time of 2:09:51 seconds;

FURTHER AWARE that this is Uganda’s second IAAF World Championships gold medal, the first having been won by Dorcus Inzikuru in 2005 in Helsinki, Finland, in the 3,000 metre steeplechase women event and the only African nation’s fourth medal ever;

FURTHER AWARE that at the London 2012 World Olympics Games, Kiprotich Stephen became the only Ugandan after the late John Akii-Bua to win an Olympics gold medal for Uganda;

RECOGNISING that Stephen Kiprotich’s victory presents a rare and unique opportunity and platform for national unity, patriotism, national consensus for future development and for the advancement and promotion of physical education and sports in Uganda;

NOTING that the Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, has been at the forefront of promoting recreation and sports in the country, supported by Parliament;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved that:
    1. Parliament of Uganda thanks, applauds and congratulates Assistant Superintendent of Prisons, Stephen Kiprotich, for winning the Men’s Marathon at the 2013 World Athletics Championships held in Moscow, Russia.

    2. Parliament of Uganda increases budgetary allocations to the sports sub-sector to facilitate development of physical education and sports countrywide.

    3. Parliament calls for more support from the government to be allocated towards sports and recreation.

    4. Individual Members of Parliament in a very good gesture contribute towards the corporate drive to raise funds for Stephen Kiprotich in appreciation of the priceless gold medal he won for Uganda.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Yes, it is seconded; you can now justify. As you come to justify, Mr Kiprotich, has got some admirers from Kasese who have come to observe the debate, Merylyn Nyangoma and Patience Kanyere, there are two young girls in the gallery. They have come to support Mr Kiprotich. (Laughter)

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, Stephen Kiprotich was born on 27 February 1989 in Kapchorwa in a village called Cheptilyal and he is the youngest son of the seven children of Mr James Kipoi and Mrs Kokop Cheptum Kipoi.

Stephen Kiprotich started running in 2004 while at Sebei College Tegeres when he was a student there. He is married to Patricia Cherop and they are blessed with three children – including the new one. (Laughter)

I would like to appreciate that on top of what Kiprotich won on 17 August 2013, he had always been winning some awards, including in 2011, when he won the Enscheda Marathon in the Netherlands and he came in first position, within a time frame of 2:07:20, also setting a national record. In 2012, Kiprotich won in the Tokyo Marathon in Japan and he came third with a time frame of 2:07:50. He also won in the Summer Olympics Games in London in 2012 when he became a gold medalist.

In February 2013, he won a half marathon in Spain and in August 2013, he won the World Championships Gold in marathon. And that is the reason I am moving this motion.

We would like to appreciate the support that Uganda Athletics Federation has always offered to Kiprotich. I also appreciate their efforts in enhancing and strengthening Uganda athletics in totality. I beg to move. (Applause)

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate Stephen Kiprotich for winning a gold medal at the World Athletics Championships in Moscow. 

Kiprotich not only won a gold medal; in 2012, during the London Olympics, he made a record, putting Uganda back on the map after 40 years since Akii-Bua won the same. He did not stop there; just after a year, he has set another record of 2:09:51, winning another gold medal. This has not only put Uganda on the map, it has marketed the beauty of Uganda because he is promoting Uganda’s image that was formerly damaged. He is also promoting sports in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, there were 212 countries which participated in the World Athletics Championships. Of these, 38 countries got medals and Uganda was among them – thanks to Stephen Kiprotich! Of the countries from Africa which participated, Uganda came third. (Interjections) We have a record, so you can check. Imagine competing with Kenya and Ethiopia which have been known - but here is Stephen Kiprotich who set a record by winning two gold medals within two consecutive years. That is a very big achievement for a fellow Ugandan worthy to be recognised by this august House. And among the 38 countries that won medals, Uganda was the twelfth. That is again an achievement. 

With those few remarks, since, Madam Speaker, you gave me three minutes, I would like to urge my colleagues to recognise the achievements of Stephen Kiprotich by putting Uganda on the world map, marketing it and also - (Hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose_) – I have finished. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is: The minister is saying that Mr Stephen Kiprotich put Uganda on the world map; how then do you bring in individual Members of Parliament? Did he put Members of Parliament on the map of Government of Uganda? 

MR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, I want to answer my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, that Uganda as a state has three arms: there is Parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary. So the three arms of the State must be proud of what Kiprotich has done – (Interjections) – last year, we gave Stephen Kiprotich a car and built him a house; it is on record. 

4.30
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join the government and the rest of the country in congratulating national athlete and Assistant Superintendent of Prisons, Stephen Kiprotich, for winning a gold medal at the World Athletics Championship in Moscow. 

But as we celebrate, we should recollect the following. We have sold all our athletics and football pitches to investors. This must stop so that we can have more Kiprotiches. Secondly, there should be an increased budget for extra-curricular activities in schools so that talent identification starts at the grass-roots.

Thirdly, the construction of the high-altitude training ground in Kapchorwa should commence immediately. We even have 1962 stadiums all over the country, including Moyo Stadium. Moyo Stadium was built in 1962 and up to now, it has not been reconstructed. Others like Mbale, Masaka and others should be reconstructed so that we can get more talent. 

Madam Speaker, I am ready to champion the athletics – (Interjections) – allow me to finish. We have football and netball in Parliament. And we thank you very much for facilitating us with the gym at the basement. So I am ready to become the chairperson for the athletics group in Parliament – (Laughter). 

And on that basis, we want to form our association and every year, we should have championships in which winners must be rewarded. Prizes must be given to those MPs who excel to beat obesity and reduce on these stomachs – we do not want to die of high blood pressure, hypertension and so on.

Lastly, a healthy mind lives in a healthy body; prevention is better than cure. Madam Speaker, on Sunday, I know you are coming to launch the race at the Air Field when we run for Cancer. Thank you very much.

4.33
MS SYLIVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join you and the entire House to congratulate Mr Kiprotich, because the victory is not his alone but it belongs to the whole of Uganda. I support the motion moved by the minister. 

In the motion, the minister talked of her ministry being at the forefront of promoting recreation and sports in the country. I doubt that the Ministry of Education and Sports and indeed Government is at the forefront in promoting sports. On the contrary, Government has quickly jumped on the band wagon when medalists come back home with Olympic and other gold medals. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports no longer organises competitions in schools as it used to. The only way we can support sports is by supporting children in primary and secondary schools to do sports so that we can have more Kiprotiches in this country. So when the minister says that they are at the forefront, I highly doubt that. Actually it is the private sector; companies like Coca Cola and MTN are the ones at the forefront – even Members of Parliament are at the forefront of this initiative. 

When the minister says that Parliament should increase the budgetary allocation, I think Parliament has no problem raising the budget. Parliament appropriates what Cabinet proposes and given this proposal by the minister, we should stand over her budget and wait for all her proposals so that we can see how much she proposes to allocate to the sector. The budget allocation for sports this financial year has gone down. Last financial year, Government allocated Shs 5.2 billion to sports. This financial year, it is Shs 4.97 billion. So it is the government which is not making the right proposals for Parliament to appropriate. 

So given these proposals, I think the minister should come up with new proposals for increasing her budget and unless she does so, then we should not appropriate her budget. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we are paying tribute to the Golden Boy, I want to welcome hon. Jane Francis Kuka, former MP for Kapchorwa. She is in the gallery; she has come to support Kiprotich. I want to welcome James Musobo, Deputy RDC Kapchorwa, they have come on the same mission. You are welcome. (Applause)

4.40
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the young people of Northern Uganda and particularly on behalf of the young people of Koboko, I would like to join you and the Members of Parliament to congratulate Kiprotich who is a youth like me. 

There is a saying that “When children play, the world wins”. I want to say, “When Kiprotich runs, Uganda wins”. I am so proud of Kiprotich. I watched Kiprotich running on TV and I happened to move away to take care of the little baby. Then Kiprotich won suddenly and my husband called me, “Darling, darling, where are you, Kiprotich has won” – (Laughter) - when I came and found that Kiprotich had won, I got so excited and jumped in jubilation. 

But my disappointment came when I heard the commentator say, “Kiprotich of Uganda, made in Iten of Nairobi-Kenya.” I was so disappointed. Iten is a training centre where Kiprotich trains. He actually admitted that he was made in Iten in Nairobi. So we cannot help to share the jubilations with the Kenyans. I know it is the spirit of East Africa, but we have got mountains in Uganda – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information I want to give my colleague is that last year, when Kiprotich won, hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Alupo said they were going to build a training institute in Kapchorwa. They promised this in the House and I am sure they are aware. They are now the same people telling us that they want us to appropriate money for them when they are the ones who promised and now he has to go to Kenya. So are these people: hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Alupo, who are supposed to have worked on this long ago, serious?

MS ANITE: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Madam Speaker, the spirit in which I am making this appeal is that it was not very nice for us to watch on TV that our Ugandan Kiprotich was not made from here. Yesterday, the Minister of Education and Sports praised Ugandans on TV and said they are going to commence construction and are already doing the ground breaking of a high altitude stadium in the name of Kiprotich. Can we hurry this up? As opposed to putting it up to the end of the year, let us push it to next month, have the ground breaking and build because we want many more like Kiprotich to win in this sport.

Lastly, to Uganda Prisons, can we elevate Kiprotich of Uganda to become the Commissioner for Sports? This is my wish and prayer for him. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know in some ways, the commentator may have been right because when Kiprotich won the first gold medal, he had been training in Ndebe in Kenya and I think it is well known that, that is where he trains from. So Kenya has made a contribution but he is ours.

4.45
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Mary Okurut): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Please protect me from hon. Wafula Oguttu. I also stand up to support the motion and I take this opportunity to congratulate Stephen Kiprotich. Thank you so much, you have done Uganda proud and we are proud of you. I also take this opportunity to congratulate him and his dear wife upon having won another monumental domestic marathon by getting a baby.

Again, Mr Kiprotich has managed to manage success. Hon. Members, managing success is not a small issue but Kiprotich has managed to manage success and for that, we are proud of you. You are a priceless gem to all Ugandans. Indeed, you have been the resilient tree and you have been perennially hard working, focused and you are a visionary like some visionaries here in Uganda who have led this country to great heights.

Madam Speaker, I just want to appeal to Members of Parliament that it is our collective responsibility to ensure that wherever we see talent, we identify and we bring it up. So do not throw it to the Ministry of Education. It is incumbent upon all of us that if you see a genius or a sportsperson, those people should be taken to a very special institution so that they can be nurtured. The minister will answer but it is coming up.

On this note, and as I conclude, because we cannot say everything about what he has done for us as he has painted this country in primary colours that will pass the test of time, his stable and calm life actually tells us that we need stable families. I want to congratulate and I am looking for this woman in Soroti who bit off the tongue of a would-be rapist, chewed it off and threw it out of her mouth. May all rapists have their tongues bitten off - (Laughter) - we need stable families. Once again, I congratulate you, you have done us proud and may God bless you always.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, there was another young girl who defended herself well by pouring very hot water on the private parts of a rapist.

MRS OKURUT: Madam Speaker, we shall come here and document all those actions. We need to actually pour oil on the private parts of those so-called men.

4.49
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to also congratulate Kiprotich for the pride he brought the people of Uganda. You should have seen the excitement of the people and when you look at the nature of this motion, it demonstrates the excitement of the minister when she could have provided something better.

This is a hurry to say thank you for a job well done but as a Parliament, we would have expected to get a plan of action from the minister telling us where she wants sports to be because of this achievement. She is asking for support but support must be backed by a plan stating where we want to reach, what the targets are and the resources needed. Whereas we shall sympathise because of the MTEF figures provided, I also want - (Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, honourable, for giving way. The quick information, which I need to chip in very desperately, is that I listened very carefully to our gallant hero, Stephen Kiprotich, at State House where he paraded the team and said, “Look, I am a man of action not words, I am not a politician. Look at this team, we are only 11. If we had been 50, maybe we would have won more gold medals.” 

I was watching when he urged the minister and the Prime Minister to invest more in sports. These were the words coming from this gentleman. He added that he had said this before and will continue saying the same thing. Now the minister comes and she is offering the same statement she did last time. 

I think it is high time that as Parliament, we resolved this matter that the education budget be reviewed so that we find the monies, which we should allocate for sports like we are trying to do for teachers. Let us have the same spirit for the sports people.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I wish the honourable member had asked for a substantive contribution -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, two minutes. That was smuggling.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I want to congratulate the minister. She must be a very lucky lady because during her tenure of office as a Minister for Education, she has been able to earn two gold medals. We need to congratulate her. However, she has one responsibility that before she leaves that office, she must lay ground work that will ensure continuity in achieving gold medals.

Madam Speaker, if you read the newspapers yesterday, you must have read a story where Kenya has instituted a board of inquiry on how Kiprotich has suddenly come to dominate an area where Kenya has been the sole bull in the region. If they can do that, how much more must we do to ensure the same is progressively propelled ahead to ensure that Kiprotich succeeds?

I want to thank the honourable members. However, there is an issue on which I will reserve my comments, but upon which I think we will be laying a bad precedent. Parliament appropriates money, which must be provided to the taxpayers. This business of wanting Members of Parliament to make contributions is okay, but the people who contribute – the President does not contribute money from his personal money; he contributes money from the State coffers. And so, Members of Parliament should as well contribute money from the State coffers. That is the way things should be done and so, we should not mislead the people of Uganda by laying very bad precedents that will be very difficult to defend. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.54
MR PETER OKEYO (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also want to join my colleagues in congratulating Mr Stephen Kiprotich, upon this success.

On behalf of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, which supervises the Ministry of Internal Affairs where the Uganda Prisons Service falls, I want to join my colleagues in congratulating, Mr Stephen Kiprotich, and I thank you very much. However, I have a few comments to make.

The Uganda Prisons Service is one of the underfunded departments at the Ministry of Internal Affairs; actually, year in, year out, the Commissioner General of Prisons is always crying for more funding. So, I want to thank him for using the little funds that are always given to him to promote athletics and Kiprotich in particular.

Let me say something about physical education. As a former teacher, I want to say that this subject has been scrapped by most schools in Uganda. There is no longer the teaching of physical education in schools. So, when the minister says that we should appropriate more money for physical education, but which does not exist, then I don’t get what she is trying to say. However, I want to urge Government to ensure talents are identified, but also try to copy from our brothers across.

I recall one time the President of Kenya visited the team and offered  the money. He also promised that whoever got a gold medal would get $2000. That was a good gesture. That is why I am saying we should copy from our neigbhours in order to promote – because we have the same talents that the Kenyans are using; they are the very ones that we have in Kapchorwa, Bukwo and even Namayingo. Let us promote this for the good of our country. I congratulate Mr Stephen Kiprotich, but also urge the Uganda Prisons Service to do something for him; he should be promoted to some higher rank. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.57
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also join the honourable colleagues to sincerely thank my brother, Stephen Kiprotich, for the wonderful achievement. This is a pride not only to the people of Sebei sub-region and Uganda, but also to the people of East Africa as a whole.

When we got the news that Mr Stephen Kiprotich had won the marathon in Russia, I was in the constituency attending a funeral, but I can tell you that the mood there turned into jubilation. People forgot that they were at a funeral because their own had made history.

But the comment I would like to make is: It is now evident that we have a granary of athletes up there. Only one gold medal by Stephen Kiprotich pushed us to the 12th position. If we had slightly more, maybe two or three, we would have been somewhere, at least not more than position five. The Ugandan Flag could have been raised several times.

There are three issues that came up – you know it is always natural that whenever there is something good, there are opportunities to dig out the negatives. Many people in the region were not able to watch Mr Stephen Kiprotich                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         as he qualified, save for less than 1 percent who can access DSTV; the rest could not watch the marathon. This is simply because in the entire Sebei sub-region we don’t access signals for UBC Television and even Radio. People are in a black-out. They keep watching Citizen Television for Kenya and KBC. But for how long shall we continue like that? When shall we be part of this country? How will these people be motivated?

Two, the people in Bukwo, during that day would have wished to come and welcome Mr Stephen Kiprotich; but they had no way out. I personally had to sleep on the way to Kampala because the road is extremely bad. I know that Government is doing something, but can we have something more than that being done to expedite the process of making that road passable? Many people wished to come to welcome their own, but they couldn’t. I personally missed the function yesterday not because I wanted it that way, but because of the bad road.

The other issue is about training. I must thank one colleague who talked about the issue of competition. If you were in Bukwo or in Sebei entirely and there is a competition where athletes are brought, you would not know who Stephen Kiprotich is and who is not; we have many more in stock.

I thank the minister for the achievement. She knows that place quite well. So, it would be good to harness this rare talent that has been given to us by God, so that we can get more gold medals and have Uganda mentioned more than once in such big events. I sincerely congratulate you, Kiprotich, and wish you good health. (Member timed out.)

5.00
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween District): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also want to join colleagues in congratulating, Mr Stephen Kiprotich, for this achievement. I want, on behalf of the people of Kween District and Sebei sub-region, to sincerely congratulate you for this wonderful achievement. I watched the race and when it came to 30 km, I watched again what was happening and throughout the period I kept asking myself whether you were really determined to win. But at 35 km, I noticed that you went ahead, but towards the end at 2 km, I saw you, the son of the soil tearing through; I started jubilating even before you won. I want to say, you have made us so proud, and we are so proud of you. But as the minister was saying, we are also proud as Ugandans though as Sabinys, we are much more proud of you, Kiprotich. Thank you so much.

However, I want to bring it to the attention of this House the fact that we have so many people with talents like those of Kiprotich in the Sebei sub-region. When you look at the team that travelled, you will realise that they were 12; among those, 11 come from the Sebei sub-region. We really have the resource and the potential.

But we have also realised that with sports everyone comes as a patriot; we are all Ugandans when it comes to games and sports. We all aim at one thing. Now, what must we do so that we really have so many? I want to say that for any project to succeed you have to invest in it, and it depends on how much you invest. In any business, the more you invest the more you receive. I want to call upon the ministry - I am a member of the Committee on Education - to ensure that we invest in sports -(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you honourable member for giving way. Madam Speaker, I want to be specific on one issue. The information I want to give is that in the Committee on Education, we asked the ministry, “Can we look at only the sub-counties and provide some materials for sports: javelin, shot put, discus?” a few things; maybe about four sets. This is because what helps an athlete to perform better is practice. In every sub-county there are playgrounds where schools meet at least once in a year. So, because we do not have money and we have to look for that money, let us provide those items to every sub-county in Uganda so that our children can be able to use these items to perform. That is the information I wanted to give. 

MS CHEKWEL: Thank you so much for the information. I also - (Member timed out.)

5.04
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating Kiprotich on getting the gold medal that he has gotten; but most importantly to congratulate Uganda as well because this medal is for Uganda. The irony is: How much has Uganda contributed for Kiprotich to attain this medal? And this is where the actual question is. (Applause)

The second issue would be, from a submission from the previous Member. Shs 5 billion was allocated to sports in particular. In my constituency, for example, I buy most of the balls and nets for the primary schools. So, what has this money been used for? I think we need to get accountability from the ministry because most of these soccer tournaments are either sponsored by Coca Cola or someone else. What has that money been spent on? I think we equally need to know that so that we can have less pressure as Members of Parliament.

Finally, I would like to congratulate Kiprotich - I did not know that he had gotten a baby boy recently. Surprisingly Kiprotich managed to run 42 kilometres in only two hours and nine minutes, but he only has three children. That is a little bit - if there were some more incentives, like free education for his children, in order to replicate and we make the talent move on, we should encourage him to have more than 15 children -(Laughter)- and give free education to his children so that the genes can continue. We should not limit him in any way. So, Kiprotich, I want to encourage you to put the spirit in every single aspect of life, not only in running. (Laughter) Thank you.

5.06
MS PHYLLIS CHEMTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of the Members of Parliament to support the motion to congratulate Kiprotich on the wonderful performance in Moscow. Kiprotich is a true son of the soil of Kapchorwa District. (Laughter) So, while he is keeping Uganda as a country on the map, he is also putting Kapchorwa District on the map. Sometime back, many people could not differentiate between Karamoja and Kapchorwa. (Laughter) But since we started getting the gold medals, Kapchorwa has been known to be different from Karamoja. Kapchorwa is a special district. It is a blessed district. It is a district of gold medals. Kapchorwa District has the capability of bringing more gold medals to this country.

I would like to inform the Ministry of Education that Kapchorwa would be the best place for you to start from, especially to support athletics. It is true that Government has pledged to do so many things for Kapchorwa. The first pledge is the high altitude training centre. I must say little has been done so far. What has been done is that at least they have marked where the electricity poles for the high altitude training centre are going to pass. (Laughter) 

The ministry is also relocating the school which was formerly occupying the site where the high altitude training centre is supposed to be and they are constructing the school. I think those are the two things that I have seen with my naked eyes. Otherwise, I request the ministry to expedite the construction of this high altitude training centre. I know they have promised so many things, such as water, a three-star hotel, a swimming pool and so forth. All these are still promises - since last year. But one thing that I must inform the House is that they have put it on the budget for this year. I hope something will be done.

One concern about the training of Kiprotich in Kenya. Kiprotich has been training from Kenya, but really why should we celebrate for a gold medal which has been earned from Kenya? (Member timed out.)

5.10
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just like the young people are very excited about the victory of Stephen “Kiptorich”. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I have chosen that word specifically. Uganda has become rich in the golden title. I would prefer to call him “Kiptorich”. 

The presentation of the Minister for Education deflated my excitement. Yesterday it took my driver three and a half hours to arrive at Entebbe and it took me four hours to travel from Entebbe to Kampala. Why? Because the congestion on the road to show the excitement of Ugandans receiving the golden boy was so high that even hours after Kiptorich had passed, the excitement was still there. So, I got caught up in that excitement and I was also shouting. (Laughter) 


This is the second time that this Parliament is congratulating the golden young man of Uganda. The previous speaker said he is a true son of Kapchorwa; I would rather say he is a true son of Uganda. There is no other way. This young man is promoting the image of Uganda and that is very important. In fact, he should be promoted as a tourist attraction -(Interjections)- so that people know that in Uganda there must be something unique which makes us win gold medals. I am also proud to associate with Lango because Akii Bua was the first to get Uganda the golden medal.

Madam minister and other male ministers in your ministry, if you were really serious, you would be following up from the recommendations we gave you in the last debate. You should have told us, this is what you recommended, and this is what we have done, and this is yet to be done. That is what I would have expected.

On behalf of the people of Lango sub-region; year in, year out, we have been promised that Akii Bua Stadium would be constructed and up to now the work has not even started; ground-breaking has not even been done. Now that this is still hot, can you make sure it becomes a reality. We hope that from there the issue of Akii Bua Sports Stadium will also follow. 

Finally, for the minister to say that Parliament must increase the budget shows that the Cabinet needs sensitisation on what the budget process entails, and we would be too happy to train Cabinet on how to manage the budget process. We are waiting from the ministry to tell us how much they want, for what and Parliament would just be too happy to finance their activities.

Secondly, with sports you have to start training when the children are still young. It is important that places like Lango and Kapchorwa where you have spotted talent, you should begin to invest in young children in secondary schools. You do not wait until I become too old like Mrs Ogwal and hope that one day I will win a medal; that will be too late.

I beg the Government to be serious and to honour their words and make sure that this golden boy be facilitated. We all came to know about Steven Kiptorich when he won the first golden medal. 

If Government was facilitating him, how come he openly grabbed the Ugandan flag from fans? There should have been a Government official to follow him up, to track him and blow the whistle of celebration. But you wait until the young man has earned himself a golden medal and then you come with your sacks. They wait until the young man has won the medal then they come with their sack of money. That sack of money must be invested - institutionalised not personalised.

5.17
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): On behalf of the people of Ayivu County and the youth whom I shadow on the Cabinet of the Opposition we want to congratulate our hero, Mr Kiprotich Stephen, for doing Uganda proud in the recent Moscow campaign.

I will be brief and to the point. I remember very well in 2005 when Dorcus Inzikuru won a gold medal in the 3000 steeple chase in Helsinki; she was welcomed by the President; she  was received by this august House and promises were made on the Floor of this Parliament to build a national stadium in memory of what Inzikuru had done for this country. But to-date, I am sad to report that not even a budget or a plan has been drawn for Dorcus Inzikuru Stadium. 

This year – 2013, the best boy and best girl in primary athletics championships held in Mukono, came from Arua, and particularly from my Constituency. That is to show you that there is talent in West Nile, but the talent has been suppressed because of failure to put up infrastructure that Government promised.

Yesterday, we had the Prime Minister name the high altitude centre in memory of Kiprotich Stephen. Last evening, I saw the Minister for Education answering questions on NTV and telling the whole country that they have extended electricity, but  the woman MP of the area has told us that they have only marked the places where to put the electricity poles.

So, really, we should learn to take this august House seriously by speaking the truth and nothing but the truth and make statements that will in turn motivate our young people to take some of these achievements seriously. Otherwise, Kiprotich will stand up there and watch us tell lies and making a fool out him yet he has made a contribution which this country has failed to make.

We remember very well during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, Government spent billions of shillings to promote the image of Uganda, but Kiprotich did it in a period of two hours, free of charge; but we are here making false promises. 

My appeal is to the minister and to the Government that whatever we say when somebody has struggled to make this country proud, let us make sure what we promised comes to pass. 

I await Dorcus Inzikuru Stadium in Arua and Akibua Stadium in Lira. We have heard of stadiums being promised or being built in areas that have never contributed to gold medals. (Member timed out.)

5.21
MR WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much Madam Speaker and dear colleagues. I stand to support the motion and to congratulate our golden boy Stephen Kiprotich.

There is something special about Kiprotich; twice our spirits were so low as a nation. In London, we were very low, and we were going to come back with no medal, and on the last day, he saved the nation. Our image was saved, we thank you Kiprotich.

The same thing happened in Russia; our team had performed badly, and it was him again to save the name of our nation. That is the hero.

We have heard many heroes, some of them you hear about them for the first time being given medals. But the heroes are people like Stephen Kiptorich, who everybody knows that they are heroes because they are achievers. We thank you, Mr Stephen Kiprotich.

You are now the most famous Ugandan of our times. Your name is Uganda. I remember when I was a young man and I was studying abroad and Akii Bua won a gold medal, and all of a sudden, Uganda was known because of Akii Bua.  So, now it is Kiprotich, but I would like to say that I have been to Ethiopia and I see people who run like him, and they have done very well economically. I think that they have been advised – there is a whole street that is dominated by properties of one of the marathon runners of that country. I wish to appeal to you, Mr Kiprotich, that you find a manager - because you are going to make a lot of money while you are still young – find a manager for your money and invest it well.  

In our country, we have had sports people being up there and eventually ending up as paupers because they are not advised well. We hope you can invest your resources properly so that you remain a rich person forever.

You are very honest; last night, I listened to you when you were addressing Government before the Prime minister and you definitely pointed out that they supplied air. So far they have supplied air; they promised what they have not achieved and it is a shame that the minister is presenting her paper saying the Government is at the forefront. It is not true; even Mr Kiprotich's statement yesterday indicated that it is not true. What you promised is not what you supplied. I wish the name Kiprotich would be everywhere in Kampala and so that we can see it. I wish we could get a place named after some colonial master who was ruthless to us and we rename it after Kiprotich. [Hon. Member: “The stadium.”] –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nyakikongoro, hon. Lubega, hon. Santa Alum and then hon. Wadada

5.25 
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to join the rest of Ugandans to congratulate Kiprotich and more specifically I am bringing greetings from the people of Sheema. You have so any fans in Sheema who were very excited when you won the gold medal. 

Madam Speaker, my issue is on Ugandans and specifically on how the Government appreciates sports. It seems we appreciate sports when the person wins. I want to call upon Government, particularly through the Minister for Education who has represented here that we should start re-skilling - like you are promoting re-skilling Ugandans and building the talents of our young Ugandans right from the word go. 

Another concern is on the issue of taxing the income of these sportsmen and others who struggle on their own. They sponsor themselves in most cases by investing their own resources. They borrow from left to right to promote their talent and at the end of the day when they are awarded the money, they tax it. Why should Government really tax this money?

The other time, Parliament resolved that Kiprotich's money should not be taxed, and I believe this time this money is not going to be taxed.  I heard the minister saying that we should contribute for  him. Should we contribute this money so that it is taxed?  And it is not about Kiprotich, we heard about other sports women who have done great wonders like the Super Lady, Susan Muwonge.  We were here appreciating her, but you know they buy their own vehicles and they are taxed and when they win, we celebrate their winning. 

I call upon Government and Parliament specifically that whoever wins and is awarded some money, this money should not be taxed, because they toiled and invested this money on their own and they put us on the map.  

Madam Speaker, Ugandans forget very quickly, and I want to thank my brother who brought up the issue of Inzikuru. Now, who talks about Inzikuru these days? She is out of circulation these days and completely gone and yet Inzikuru has been a role model to most girls. I wish we could continue supporting Inzikuru so that even these girls that would be putting us on the map can learn from Inzikuru. But the moment that gold is here, we celebrate, dance, pose and take photos with the “gold people” and that is the end of it and we wait for that gold man or gold lady to go and toil and then we come back and celebrate.

I was so touched when my colleagues in Kenya called me and said that you know Rosemary - I have friends in Kenya - you have stolen our gold medal. I asked why, and they said they were the ones training this man Kiprotich. Madam Minister for Education, I want to add my voice that this Teriete High Altitude Training Centre, I wish it could have been worked on as early as yesterday. 

Madam Speaker, if we are going to promote talent in Uganda, we need to walk the talk –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lubega, hon. Santa Alum, hon. Wadada, hon. Kasibante and then I come here.

5.28
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I strongly support the motion and I have two major recommendations.

First of all, I would like the ministry or the Government to facilitate this gentleman so that he can visit every part of Uganda. Wherever you go, you find his pictures and this means that they are in need of him and are missing him and yet he is still a young man. We want him to move in every part of Uganda so that people can see what they have benefited from him.  

Secondly, I also recommend that some other incentives be given to the upcoming athletes and sportsmen countrywide. People are there struggling, but they are only recognised when they are winners, while others are discouraged by the way we treat those who try and fail. So, I would like to see the ministry encouraging young men by putting proper incentives in place.

Let the family of this gentleman enjoy his struggle. He has worked for the ministry, what will the ministry do for his children? Why don't you identify good schools like Seeta so that they join and feel big because their father has done a lot for the country.

With those remarks, I would like to thank the ministry for the struggle and the Government has done a lot. I personally recommend him to be appointed as a Presidential advisor in the field of sports and games so that he can really be recognised by the whole country. Thank you very much.

5.31
MRS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to congratulate Mr Kiprotich for giving us the second gold medal for Uganda. This has been a very short time that we are receiving gold that we had lacked for more than 40 years.

I congratulate you, and I would like to say this, that it is very clear that we are lacking facilities in Uganda. If it is talent, we have talent everywhere. You remember 40 years ago Akii Bua gave us gold and we have Kiprotich; we have Inzikuru from West Nile and that means that gold is distributed throughout Uganda.

For us to identify this, I would like to take you back as a country. When I was growing up as a child in early primary school, I remember there used to be sports activities whereby all primary school children would participate in sports and music. There was a song which was sang when I was I think in P1 or P2, and my colleagues here who were in school then can still remember. I was not part of the school choir but by just watching, I can still sing the song called, “Oh Peter, go them bells, I heard from Heaven, I wonder where my sister Mary has gone.” This was so moving and I am asking the Minister for Education to go back and revise what we used to have. 

You have said that you are at the forefront of promoting recreation; honourable minister, I do not think that this is true, because during those days, for sports, athletics, netball - and Madam Speaker, you know I play in the parliamentary netball team - this is not just by mistake, but when I was in primary school, I used to play at that level. 

Finally, I would like to urge Government that let us stop this idea of rewarding and welcoming. Let us be practical by having the Kiprotich Academy, not in words but by putting it into practise. Even at district level, let us have stadiums so that at least right from primary school, they have playgrounds. What we lack are the balls and the goal posts. For example, we have a tournament in my district, but I am the one trying to put up the poles and buy the balls yet these are Government facilities and these are the things which can help our people, but they are not there.  So, I urge the Minister of Education that if you are to move a little bit further than what Stephen Kiprotich has done for us, then play your part. Work out a budget and a work plan so that we can see where we can help you. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.34
MR FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. A friend of mine once told me that if you cannot appreciate somebody in Arabic, then it should be in your native language. So, Mr Kiprotich, I will say keitabon; it means thank you so much, in Kupsabiny. 

I was in Sebei College and I am proud to say Kiprotich is my old boy. I was his Head Girl. Kiprotich, through hardships, you have made it. He trains at the neighbour’s and when he wins, he becomes ours. When will Uganda ever learn to utilise its own? We really appreciate somebody’s efforts after using whatever little resources and a lot of hardships to attain it and then we jump and shout and we own it. “It is ours, Kiprotich is ours.” Where were we when he was training? We do not even know whether he was training or whether he was sleeping, but when he comes home with gold, we own it, which means that we want the gold and not him. 

Ugandans and our Government, where are you? Are we going to have only one Kiprotich? We should have so many of them; after all, the world has grown and you keep saying you are encouraging everybody including the women, but I see in most spheres, things are failing.

Look at the health sector; we run to the private hospitals and that is where we get our medical care. Our Government has failed. Look at our schools. Kiprotich, in the countries that you go to, I do not know whether they interview you in your native language. Our pupils here are learning in their native languages. When you run and attain that gold, in which language do they interview you? Do you answer in your native language? Why do we encourage our people to learn in their native languages and moreover it is English that we use afterwards? Please, Government of Uganda, take note of this. You are killing our country. 

Today, I will request Kiprotich that next time, please do not go to Kenya. Sironko has three quarters of high hills. You can come and train there –(Laughter)– we are so hospitable. Being neighbours, we will really take very good care of you. Mr Kiprotich, we congratulate you and we thank you for taking heart to go and run and come back home with happiness.

5.38
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As a teacher, we used to say to the most excellent students that, “keep it up”. I wish to begin by saying that, “Kiprotich, keep it up”. However, I wish to supplement on a number of issues raised concerning the habit of tagging ourselves to success and distancing ourselves from failure. The team that went to Moscow had 11 athletes. It is only Kiprotich who came with a gold medal. Kiprotich won, but Uganda failed. As a teacher, in terms of percentage, one out of 11 is 8 percent. There is no school or level that can take an achiever with only 8 percent. Kiprotich is 100 percent a winner, but Uganda is only 8 percent. 

Madam Speaker, some of us who have traced the background of Stephen Kiprotich know that he is totally a self-made achiever. The Government of Uganda today has got a very big challenge as far as sports is concerned. It is actually becoming a donor, if not a Good Samaritan to its own. When the Uganda Cranes is playing, the Government of Uganda, which owns the national team, becomes the donor and eventually in the press, it is a Good Samaritan to its own. Madam Speaker, we must stop that habit. 

In my constituency and generally all around Kampala, most of the playgrounds are on sale. Kitante Hill School playground is on sale; Namungoona playground is on sale and most of the playgrounds of the communities around Kampala are on sale. That is the negative contribution that the government is giving. With that kind of contribution, the minister would instead be giving us an account of why the other 10 out of 11 had to fail with all the contribution the government is making. 

But this is what I want to state lastly. Stephen Kiprotich is a winner because he graduated from the habit of singing achievements made last year. He was actually focused. The habit of the NRM Government is to tell us achievements that were achieved in 1986 – “We won the battle”. We are looking forward and not backward. That is why Kiprotich is today a celebrated Ugandan. Thank you very much. 

5.42
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to join my colleagues in requesting Parliament to congratulate the national athlete and the Assistant Superintendent of Prisons, Stephen Kiprotich, for winning a gold medal for the people of Uganda. 

As a sports lover and as the Parliamentary Netball Captain, and on behalf of the people of the “Mountains of the Moon”, I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate the “Mountain Boy” for winning for Uganda a gold medal. (Applause) We are proud of you; you are our hero and you make Uganda the “Pearl of Africa”. We thank you, Mr Kiprotich.

Madam Speaker, in most cases, when children misbehave, people often ask, “Who are the parents?” “Who is the mother?” “How was he brought up?” But when they register an achievement, nobody asks about the mother; he becomes the “father’s boy”. In Kiprotich’s case, no mention is made of the mother. But I want to take this opportunity to congratulate both parents who brought Kiprotich into this world. (Laughter) Mr Kiptoi and Mama Kokop Cheptum, as well as Mrs Kiprotich, who have given him a helping hand to ensure that he earns Uganda the gold medal we are celebrating today. (Interruption)

MRS JOY ONGOM: Thank you, hon. Kiiza for giving way. As a matter of information, I thank you for recognising the wife, the mother and father of Kiprotich. I wish to inform this House that Ugandans recognise the achievers, but forget those who bring them up. It was only yesterday that we buried the mother to the late John Akii Bua. And yet Uganda does not know that the mother of the first gold medallist died. We are very sorry about that. May her soul rest in peace.

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I thank the women of this country, and most especially the woman who makes life better for my brother, Stephen Kiprotich. The saying has always been true that besides a successful man is a strong woman – to give him a shoulder to lean on. Mr Kiprotich, your wife deserves credit and she deserves another title. She is a wife of a two-time gold medallist; how I wish she could own another title of “Nalongo”. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I wish to encourage those in Government who do cadre-identification for the President, to target these young men and women who excel in different aspects of life – not only in politics – because if we used the likes of Kiprotich to identify other young cadres and let them love sports and their country, and you sponsor them and give them the money which we have been carrying in bags, I think that can help us to move forward and win more medals. This would make Uganda go higher and higher, and we would come here to celebrate more and more gold medals. I beg to move.

5.47
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take the Floor on behalf of the people of Mbale to congratulate our neighbour, Stephen Kiprotich, for the gold medal he has won for this country. Mr Kiprotich, I congratulate you for being a very simple man. And when they were handing that flag to you, you did not brag around; you encouraged your colleagues and you recognised them, saying that they were going to give you a push. I congratulate you for that.

Secondly, Mr Kiprotich, you are self-made, and when you won the gold medal, our friends on the other side jumped up saying, “We were at the forefront.” But I kept asking myself the question: Surely, what forefront? What did they do for you? You made your own name, and I want to thank our Kenyan neighbours for allowing you to train on their grounds. Whenever I would read the names of those people who were winning medals, their names were similar to yours, and I kept wondering why people with similar names in our country were not winning. But I am glad that you have worked round the clock, trained and toiled, and your hard work has achieved a gold medal for this country. 

Now, why should we talk of patriotism; why should this country distribute medals to various people? These are the people who should be decorated with medals and be called patriots. You can find even thieves getting medals while people like Kiprotich are not being recognised. So, I call upon Government to recognise such people.

Madam Minister, I was in Kapchorwa during elections, and I saw electricity poles being dropped along the roads. After the elections they were taken away. Can you imagine! (Laughter) Yesterday I heard the minister saying that they had taken water and electricity there. But are those things really there?

I thank Stephen Kiprotich for bringing smiles on our faces today in this House. Two weeks ago, Ugandans had terrible looking faces in this House and the whole country was mourning; it was a black Tuesday. But today there is laughter on both sides of the House because of you. You know what befell this country two weeks ago – Madam Speaker, you were away, but it was a sad Tuesday –(Laughter)– but today we are very happy. I thank you once again. You are clever; somebody asked you to put the money you have won into constructing a training centre and you said you would know what to do with your money. But Government should this time stop talking and telling lies; we want them to build a training centre on the slopes of Mount Elgon so that we can train more of our own people to bring gold medals to this country.

I am happy that you are here, listening to the good words people are talking about you. But in most cases, they wait until one has finished his work on this earth then they talk – (Member timed out.) 

5.51
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we congratulate “Ambassador, His Excellency -” -(Interjection)- I am going to qualify it. His Excellency, “Kipro-rich” – not because he is my namesake, “Stephen” who was the first martyr, but because Kiprotich is marketing Uganda without a need for an invoice. He is, therefore, an Ambassador. We have non-performing ambassadors who are called excellencies, but this is a performer; Uganda has been marketed for two years at no cost. I would like to request Government and KCCA’s Madam Jennifer Musisi, at an appropriate time if possible, to rename Acacia Avenue – I do not know what it means. But I wish it could be called “Kiprotich”. Or they could name any other street after Kiprotich.

Madam Speaker, I do not want colleagues to lose – this motion by the minister has already forgotten all other team players. Kiprotich, while at State House, mentioned that he wanted to show the team. Madam Speaker, can we, at the right time amend the motion and recognise the other team members, because they also contributed; and the spirit should be to promote others. This motion has also forgotten the other sports; we are now only talking of the highland training. One time we were told Namboole was going to become a university of sports in Uganda. Why don’t we think big?

I want to thank Ambassador Kiprotich for proving to us who are delaying the East African Federation and Integration that we are already a common market with free movement of people. Why should anybody complain that a Ugandan trained in Kenya when Kenyan students are studying in our schools? Kiprotich is only confirming that we are actually in the East African Community, and that is why the Speaker has the flag there and that is why these days we sing the East African Anthem. I am surprised that even Parliament has forgotten that we are in the East African Integration. 

But that is not to say that I am apologising for the failures of Parliament. Parliament is responsible for appropriation. How much do we appropriate for sports? (Member timed out.)

5.54
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Busongora South, let me take this opportunity to congratulate Stephen Kiprotich for having won the second gold medal for this country in the marathon race. Congratulations, Kiprotich. 

Kiprotich has set history for this country and we need to learn a lot from his victory. It is the expressed goal of this country not only to support sports financially, but to also play an integral role as the highest standards of sportsmanship within our sports programme. 

But we have not realised our expectations as Government. If you look at Inzikuru, she is nowhere to be seen at the moment. Kipsiro, who also won a medal, is nowhere to be seen. We should not forget Kiprotich as a country; our hero, Kiprotich. In such moments – there is a saying; “You eat from your sweat and your sweat shall be your sweet.” Let the sweat of Kiprotich be his sweet. 

In such a moment, Government normally warms up to receive taxes from such activities. We have seen Government exempt very many companies from taxes. I would request that Kiprotich be exempted from taxes; let him enjoy his sweat and let it be his sweet. Once again, I congratulate Kiprotich for his second gold medal victory. Just getting this far is a big accomplishment. I wish you happiness and more gold medals in the years to come. (Interruption)

MR AYOO: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give to my colleagues and the House is that, when Kiprotich left for Moscow, most of our athletes had lost their ground in the competition. Many Ugandans had lost hope that this time round, we would get another gold medal. Many had settled for the one gold medal Kiprotich brought us from the London marathon. But when Kiprotich came here last year and we were paying tribute to honourable members, he promised to get us another gold medal. So, we thank him for keeping the promise that in hardly one year, when  many Ugandans thought that the next gold would come after 40 years like he got his after Akii Bua, he has brought another within one year.

So, we should note that Kiprotich has been able to keep the promise he gave to Ugandans within a period of one year. Thank you –(Interjections)– honourable minister the information is that he has kept his promise. So, why doesn’t your ministry also keep its promises? He is going to bring the third gold before you keep any of your promises. 

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Rebecca Otengo): Thank you Madam Speaker. I want to begin by thanking your Chair for accepting us to move this motion in good time. 

I support the motion moved by the Minister of Education, and I would like to bring a congratulatory message from the people of Alebtong where we buried the mother of the late Akii Bua yesterday; they congratulate you. 

The people of Alebtong are happy that by the time we buried the mother of Akii Bua, we had three gold medals; two from the Olympics. I would like to correct the record that yesterday the Government was represented with a message from the President, and we got good support from the President. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the Minister of Education for this motion and for the good work she is doing in sports; just in two years she has brought us two gold medals. More especially, I thank her technical team, headed by the Commissioner of Sports, Mr Omara Peter and the Prisons Department leadership. I thank you so much.

Madam Speaker, I believe we have got a lot of talent in the rural areas. Just yesterday, they introduced to us a young girl who is a national champion in the 200 meter hurdles from Alebtong District. I believe that the ministry has taken it up to look for those talents from the rural areas. I believe we still have many of them.

May I also thank the Department of Prisons for accepting our golden boy to train from anywhere and yet remain their staff, and for accepting to promote him again? 

Madam Speaker, for me the success of Kiprotich lies also in his character. I believe he is a boy who has been well-brought up; he is not wild, and that is why he is able to perform well. He is a good example to the youth, that once you have a good character and choose the right peer group, you can succeed and you can get the right talent, and I believe that is what the Ministry of Education is talking about when they talk of skilling Uganda. 

I would like to thank the different corporate organisations like MTN, which was mentioned. But I think they are able to contribute because the Government has given them favourable environment to do good business in Uganda –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I give you half a minute.

MS OTENGO: Madam Speaker, the forty years we took in the wilderness without a gold medal was partly because of instability. I, therefore, pray that all Ugandans take the peace that we have got seriously so that we develop more talent. Thank you.

6.03
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO ( POLITICAL MOBILISATION) (Mr Richard Todwong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and to add my voice to those that have been heaped here as we congratulate Stephen Kiprotich. Definitely, he has brought smiles to Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, when my colleagues were making their submissions, I realised that failure is an orphan and success can be claimed by many. I can see that my colleagues from the other side are disowning Kiprotich by alleging that he is only supposed to be taken care of by the government.

Madam Speaker, in Acholi we say that, “The elephant’s tusks cannot defeat the owner.” Definitely, Government will take it up and Kiprotich will be fully catered for.

Stephen Kiprotich was born in 1989, just about four years after the NRM Government had taken over power, and because of the peace and stability ushered in by the government, Kiprotich found it easier to train and succeed. We thank him so much and we would like to congratulate the NRM Government for this wonderful achievement.

For a long time, Uganda was known as a country that has been nurturing wars. If you travel outside Uganda, for those that have travelled, the only thing that was known about Uganda was Amin. We are aware of the many demonstrations that Uganda was known for; we are known for child sacrifices, witchcraft, robbery, corruption, indiscipline and tribalism. Stephen Kiprotich’s gold medal today is calling Uganda into an assembly to say, sports is one of the avenues that if we use carefully, can unite this country.

I would like to add my voice to those that have called for unity. Uganda is extremely divided along tribal and ethnic lines and so many other petty issues, but through the promotion of sports, through clarity and through openness of minds and hearts, we can see Uganda getting united through sports.

When Kiprotich was running the final lap, I could see people everywhere in Uganda jubilating and clapping in excitement, even in taxis. That is what we need for this country; unity of purpose and unity for a particular time and I pray that definitely, Government will have to promote sports to nurture unity among Ugandans -(Member timed out.)

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr John Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion moved by my minister here to congratulate our golden boy, Stephen Kiptorich. I want to thank and congratulate him for the love he has for his country. I observed, wherever he was, a boy who has love for his country. He was breathing Uganda; he was moving like a Ugandan; and having a swagger like a Ugandan boy. I thank you, Stephen.

I thank Stephen Kiprotich for very many things, but the most important is the clear and loud message to all Ugandans that time spent sporting is not wasted time. In this country, many parents continue to discourage their children from participating in sports, drama, music, name it, in the name of trying to look for best academic grades. 
In this country, we still have teachers who make very discouraging statements to students who are trying to promote their talents in sports, music and drama. We also have schools that have written off the sports timetable, even when they have the sports grounds.

Stephen Kiprotich is sending a very loud message to all Ugandans, and I was very happy when I saw Ugandans at Entebbe in such big numbers. I think I will find it much easier this time, when I go out to talk about skilling Uganda, to convince Ugandans that sports is one of the skills where money oozes from.

If you ask Ugandans, even Members of Parliament, why do you want to take your child to school (x) and not school (y), the answer is always one; academic standards. I think Kiprotich should change his name to Kipro-rich. When I saw and heard -(Member timed out.)

6.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Rt Hon. Speaker, I have no legal opinion to give. I want to speak in my representative capacity as the representative of Nakawa Division, where I have had His Excellency, Ambassador Kiprotich work, and I want to speak from my heart on two things. 

I have heard colleagues say this again and again, and I want to simply emphasise it, and of course this is in support of the honourable minister’s motion, that it is your character basically that has brought you thus far. A successive gold in this short time is simply by virtue of your character. I find your emotional intelligence way above average. 

What we lack most is humanity (obuntu). This expression of ‘obuntu’ is an expression, which runs across Africa up to Cape Town, simply meaning that your humanity and my humanity resides in the humanity of others.

When I saw you going to the podium and I heard the National Anthem of Uganda being sung, I am sure there were tears of joy in many Ugandans. We want to thank you for that humility. Let me give you an example - I am sure if there was to be trouble, there would have been some tear gas but there was none.

Madam Speaker, allow me to give this simple example. One time, Mandela received a dignitary on invitation at his residence and he invited him for lunch. Both of them went to the table and he asked him, but there were two of you, where is the other person? The so-called dignitary said, he is a mere driver. Mandela kept quiet and after two or three minutes, he stood up as if he was going to the bathroom, and went and told the driver,“Your boss is inviting you for lunch.” Thereafter, both of them entered the house. The three got seated on the table and enjoyed the meal. After the meal and as they were going out, the driver fell down for his so-called boss and said – actually literally crying thus: “You have never done this for me, and moreover to do it for me in the presence of Madiba…” (Laughter) If you were that boss, how would you feel? Taking the credit that wasn’t yours! 

I am telling you what we lack is humanity. This gentleman, Stephen Kiprotich has that humility and humanity. (Applause) I want to thank you and the people with whom you work. I want to thank your family and I, as a Member of Parliament for Nakawa Division, will keep on encouraging and supporting you in every way possible –(Applause)– to do the best for this country. May God bless you all.

6.14
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this last opportunity. Yes, almost everything has been mentioned. But there is one more concern. And before I mention that, allow me to take this rare opportunity, on behalf of the people of Bundibugyo, and on behalf of the people of the Rwenzori Region where there is Mount Rwenzori, which is a similar mountain to the one where my colleague Stephen Kiprotich comes from - to congratulate, His Excellency, Ambassador Stephen Kiprotich, for making this country proud.

The point of concern, however, is: We have seen people being welcomed at Entebbe Airport. Last year, the same Kiprotich was welcomed at Entebbe Airport with the convoy of escorts and many people. But after paying a visit to Parliament, he was left to go without any security yet he was carrying gold.

This time, he has brought in another gold medal. Gold is money. Gold is a security problem. I stay near Democratic Republic of Congo border with Uganda where people mine gold. Where there is gold, there is a problem; there is death and there is a threat. 
So, how has Government protected Stephen Kiprotich with his two gold medals? How has he been protected? I wanted to mention this while the Minister of Defence was still here. Unfortunately, he has gone. Anyway, it is good the Prime Minister is still here. Yes, the Minister of Internal Affairs would also answer this, but the Prime Minister is here. Can we protect – we have been giving lead cars to people who don’t even matter.(Laughter) You know we have been giving vehicles with escorts and so forth – we now have Stephen Kiprotich in our midst – what security are we giving to our best in the world? Thank you so much.

6.17
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like, on behalf of Government, to thank everybody in this House and outside for appreciating what Mr Stephen Kiprotich has brought to this country, and many others who have done so before. We hope we shall have more gold medals in the future.

I would also like to thank colleagues who must realise that Mr Stephen Kiprotich has realised and has taken advantage of peace in the country to bring this gold. He has taken positive advantage of the peace, which many people are taking for granted –(Interjections)– yes, without peace, I don’t think there can be any chance for somebody to fail. So, taking positive advantage of the peace in the country has enabled him bring us two gold medals, for which I am very proud.

But for those of us who take the negative advantage of peace – then you bring also teargas - making us to spend more for nothing. That means people have taken the peace for granted and the negative past. So, we must spend on teargas to maintain this peace –(Interruptions)

MR WAFULA OGUTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am aware that the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister and an Army General once upon a time took up arms to fight an elected Government. He caused the death of so many people, which was worse than teargas. But here is the same Deputy Prime Minister seemingly pontificating about peace. Is it really in order for the Deputy Prime Minister who took up arms and caused death of Ugandans to be talking about peace? 

THE SPEAKER: I think let him explain what he meant.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I respect my brother here. One day we met somewhere – I don’t want to mention where. (Laughter)But when you want peace, you must fight -(Laughter)- yes, that is right. So, now that there is peace in the country, those who want to spoil that peace will have to be handled by use of teargas. Yes - (Interjection)- there is peace, what do you want? There is peace for everybody with people driving here at night to the borders and so forth. So, what other peace do you want? It is our duty, as Government, to maintain this peace by all means including the use of teargas. (Laughter) So, for that matter, people must realise that this peace must be enjoyed positively, like Kiprotich did –(Interruptions)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, the Rt Hon. Gen. Moses Ali, is our leader, as far as the West Nile Region is concerned. I know for a fact that even after he had served as Minister for Finance in the Idi Amin’s Regime, when the going got tough, the tough had to get going, and continued with the journey. He is very instrumental in the history of this country, for having linked up the NRA with the former President of Libya, Col. Muammar Gadafi, for them to receive military aid. 

Gen. Moses Ali is also on record for having gone all the way to Pakistan to solicit for arms to help with the gorilla activities fighting the elected Government of H.E., the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote.

Today, we are in a multiparty dispensation. It is on record, Uganda claims to be a democracy, but the utterances that the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister has made and which have gone onto our official record of Parliament, will not be limited to our own consumption; the international community, with the modern technology of accessing every information any time, certainly within the shortest possible time, will access our Hansard and get to know that whereas we say we are a democracy, we are saying, dissenting voices must be fought hard, of all things with teargas if need be, in order to keep the government of the day in power. 

Is the honourable Prime Minister, and Leader of Government Business in this House -(Interjections)- leave alone those titles - the Leader of Government Business, in order to emphasise the need to have zero-tolerance to dissenting  voices, that they must be crashed, of all things with teargas and other means if possible, and yet he is supposed to be the model, the image, the mouthpiece of this country that we are in a democracy? If the international community reads this, are we really in order to have the Leader of Government Business make such a strong statement which has gone into our official records? Is he in order? My leader from West Nile, are you in order to give the impression that people of West Nile are there in order to show military prowess and they  must crash all dissenting voices, of all things using other means and teargas in particular? Are you in order, Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we started this debate on a happy note.  We came here to celebrate the success of the golden boy and I think it would be unfortunate if the records of this House now degenerate into teargas and crashing and dealing with people. I think that is not what we came to do. 

6.25
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you Madam Speaker. I propose to move a motion for an amendment to the resolution of the honourable minister to request Government to resolve that His Excellency Ambassador Stephen Kiprotich is recognised as a goodwill ambassador for sports in this country. 

Equally, I beg to move that the budget to establish the high altitude training centre in Kapchorwa is expeditiously included in this year’s budget so that in one year’s time Kiprotich realises the existence of this high altitude training centre. 

The third amendment to the motion is that, I request that Parliament considers putting in place a mini-marathon to galvanise corporate responsibility; and all the Members of Parliament to make sure that in memory of the external gold medals Kiprotich has brought to this country, we internalise through a mini-marathon arrangement, which will see corporate responsibility so that a national sports fund is created through that arrangement so that a fund to contribute towards sports is generated under corporate responsibility rather than through individual contributions. 

I beg to request as my final submission that the question be put so that the motion of recognising Hon. Ambassador Kiprotich is recognised by this Parliament. I beg to move Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: There is something else I want us to amend under Prayer 2, that we substitute the word “Government” for “Parliament”. It is not Parliament that determines the budget allocation. I want the government to take responsibility and so, it should read, “…Government of Uganda increase budget allocation to the sports…” So, we substitute “Government” for “Parliament”.

6.26
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, as we conclude this motion I would like us to amend the heading: It should read: “The golden boy Kiprotich and the team.” We have lost the team. As a country, we need to appreciate the team. Otherwise, we have now forgotten the team. 

My final amendment is that I would like to expunge the request for individual contributions from Members of Parliament. The reason is that the sponsors for most of the sports activities you are seeing in our districts and constituencies are Members of Parliament. I had expected the minister to thank Members of Parliament for keeping some sports going on in their constituencies. I am the chief sponsor of Buliisa, and I am sure all Members do the same. So, I request that we expunge that and we go as appropriators of Government priorities that we can only appropriate using Government institutions, programmes, what Government brings to us as priorities. I thank you. 

6.28
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also propose an amendment under resolution 2, where you rightly said it is Government which should increase budget allocation. I would also like to propose that we make the allocation increase specific to become clear on what we are saying, that Government increases budget allocation of the sports sub-sector by 30 percent to facilitate the development of physical education and sports countrywide with effect from the 2013/2014 budget.

Resolution 3 seems to be a replication of resolution 2. So, I would like to propose that we reconfigure it so that it addresses the support of Government, the business community and the civil society towards athletics in this country.

Finally, under resolution 4, I would like to propose that instead of individual Members of Parliament, we re-write it to read, “Government of Uganda takes the lead in the drive to raise funds for Stephen Kiprotich in appreciation of his…” so that this drive to raise -

THE SPEAKER: Is that No.4? 

MR MAGYEZI: Yes, that is No.4. So that the drive to raise funds to appreciate our golden boy is not by Parliament and individuals, but it is by Government. I propose to make those amendments. 

6.30
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was not very far from what hon. Magyezi is proposing in No.4. However, my point of consideration would be to have a policy which defines our gratitude, our national reward for international goal achievers. That should be very clear so that before all the participants go to participate, they know what reward the country will give them when they win gold, so that they do not just simply rely on maybe the mercy of the President, defining or making promises. I thought this would be the time for us to define what international goal achievers will be entitled to as the gratitude of Uganda to the Ugandans who achieve. Thank you very much. 

6.31
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I propose that we add another prayer, particularly on promises that have been made. I propose that we introduce another prayer that will state that Government plans to expeditiously fulfil all the promises made in regard to the construction of infrastructure that will be used to tap the talent across the country, beginning with the Dorcus Inzikuru Stadium that was promised in 2005; the Akii Bua Stadium that was promised in memory of the late golden Akii Bua; and now the Kiprotich high altitude training centre. 

Madam Speaker, if you captured this as one of the key resolutions of this motion I believe in the next financial year, Government will come up with concrete plans and a budget. Thank you.

6.32
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a point which I think was left out in resolution No.1, but I hope the minister would clarify. When I was watching on TV they mentioned that Kiprotich holding the Olympic and world championship was the second person ever to hold such, but on the Internet they are talking about the first. I do not know whether the ministry can clarify, but I think it is very important that we include it. That on winning the world championship he became either the first or second person ever to hold both at the same time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was some murmuring about adding the rest of the team. I do not know whether anyone wants to speak to it.

6.33
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The spirit of the winner is that others who did not win the medal, work very hard so that next time when we have the motion it has their names, but by importing in their names, I think the spirit will be lost as my colleague was saying.

It is only important if we restrict it to this; but if there is any contribution by Government as we suggested last time - the President has been generously dishing out sacks of money - he can give them one and they share; but for purposes of the motion we can stay with this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do we agree that we leave the team out and we concentrate on the golden boy?

MR AYO: Thank you Madam Speaker, I think for purposes of this we maintain Kiprotich as the gold medal winner, but we can only have a prayer to recognise those who participated in the Moscow games.

THE SPEAKER: It should come in the body not in the title?

MR AYO: Yes.

MS BABADIRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to speak, but I was not given the opportunity. This is for the golden boy and not for those who were leading from behind. Surely, we would not be here. Let them work hard and pass like Kiprotich then we can praise them. Let us leave these things for Kiprotich alone.

MR SSEWUNGU: I want to support hon. Babadiri. In athletics there is a game called relay 4X4. There it is one team, when we saw Bolt, he was the last to finish the race and in such a case all of them were recognised because they contributed; but here we have a golden boy that took it up alone and beat others on the long distance. It will encourage them to work hard so that they can reach. I am seeing a situation where Kiprotich is going to win again. He will win again because as a teacher I can study somebody and tell. Because he is from the Prisons Service, he is likely to get all the ranks in the Prisons Service because of his contributions in athletics.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we agreed that we concentrate on Mr Kiprotich. I want to say that my plan was to only use 30 minutes, but because we are happy we have taken two hours. 

I now put the question that this House do approve the motion as proposed by the minister and as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable members and congratulations to Mr Kiprotich. But honourable minister, when Kiprotich brings the third gold, I hope you will have an update on what you have done so that we do not say the same things. Since he is going to bring the third one, we should be able to say we have now finished this and that as part of your motion.

6.37
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for giving ample time to this discussion, and I appreciate the contributions from Members.

When we came up with motion, we did not want it to be bulky. There is an attachment that clearly spells out the stages of how Government is moving in the establishment of Terieti High Altitude Training Centre, bullet by bullet. Maybe I will lay it on Table.

Dorcus Inzikuru and 21 other athletes get one million shillings every month. Government recognises them. Kiprotich is a Senior Superintendent of Prisons. Even before he won his first gold, the Prisons authorities were always giving him all the time to go out and train wherever he wished, but continue paying his salary and maintaining his family. I think that was a good gesture and I did not see any Member pointing it out.

Otherwise, we are very prepared as a ministry to share information on what we are doing in light of strengthening and enhancing sports at all levels in the country.

We invite hon. Ssewungu to Lira on 25 August where we are going to host the East African games at secondary level. Those games normally start in sub-counties and districts. We appreciate that we need to scale-up the budget of sports, and with the support of this Parliament we believe that it is possible.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should take the minister’s invitation for Lira seriously. Our Parliamentary team is doing the curtain raiser there. So, hon. Ssewungu you should put on your shoes and go there. 

Honourable members, I thought we would proceed to the other matter, but I think we should start tomorrow. So, I want to thank you so much for your participation and enthusiasm. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(House rose at 6.40p.m. and was adjourned to Wednesday, 21 August 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

