

Wednesday, 3 August, 2022

Parliament met at 2.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Last night, the country garnered a second gold medal at the ongoing Commonwealth Games. (Applause) We wish to congratulate our own, Kiplimo, and the entire country: Uganda. As I said yesterday, we will have a formal motion to pay tribute to this team. They have made us proud, as a country. 

I received a letter from the Chief Opposition Whip, re-designating the Chairperson Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) and replacing him with Hon. Gilbert Olanya, pursuant to Rule 196 of the Rules of Procedure. 

However, I am also aware the committee is in its final stages of reporting on the Auditor-General’s findings for Financial Year 2020/2021. As we do this, we need to address our minds to the precedent that has been set by this Parliament – and that was in Committee on Public Accounts (COSASE).

In the last Parliament, a similar attempt was made to change the chairperson of a standing committee and that would mean it would stay the work of the committee. We need this work to be done. 

International Monetary Fund has given us deadlines on when to get Treasury Memoranda for these committees. The leadership needs to consider that we need this work to be done. 

I wish, therefore, to guide as follows: 

Rule 196 provides for re-designation of a chairperson or the deputy chairperson at any time. The responsibility of this re-designation is vested on the whip – that is acceptable. The re-designation will be by way of a formal motion. The motion will be subjected to approval of the House – and, as we wait for that, bring a motion, but after the committee has finished the work assigned to them. For now, we are not taking the re-designation. 

Additionally, I ask all the whips to expedite the designation of Members to the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation into the standing committees by Tuesday. We would have done that by tomorrow, but I am aware the Leader of the Opposition and the whip will be away. 

2.06
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to make a very brief response to your communication in relation to the intended or impending re-designation of the Chairperson Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). Your reading of rule 196 is appropriate. 

I hasten to add that the purpose and intention of re-designation of Members as to where – and that is why the rule is clear. One, the rule had in mind the fact that we are under a multiparty dispensation and, therefore, the party whips are at liberty to re-designate their Members for efficient working of their intended objectives.

Two, the intended action is not in any way intended to jeopardise the work of Parliament. Therefore, probably, the precedent we could be thinking about was not put to strict interpretation of the rule. 

My sense is that this matter would be handled administratively as opposed to making it a contest in the House because the rule could be subjected to other laws of the land, including the Constitution as well as the Political Parties and Organisations Act and the fact that we are under multiparty system. 

I suggest, Madam Speaker, that this matter be handled administratively because if you subject it to a strict vote - it is akin to the normal re-designation of Members. There is a motion for designation and it is always taken without contest. 

I would rather that we do not engage in that contest and we handle this administratively, for the good of the House and for keeping decorum and with a mind that we are in a multiparty system and, therefore, should not appear to be causing a friction here because then, we are going to subject everything we do to strict legal interpretation. I would rather that we do not go into that territory. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. I know one person who has always respected my rulings is my good friend, the Leader of the Opposition. I am even surprised he is speaking after the ruling has been made. (Laughter) Anyway, that is for me and the LoP. 

Members, we have two Bills to pass - Yes, Mr Procedure? (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the Speaker is final but the rules require that I am referred to as “honourable member”. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju? (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, yesterday, I rose on a matter of privilege and requested to make a very short statement. You said you would allow me today. So, I am seeking your guidance: at what stage will I be making this statement?

THE SPEAKER: I can give you to make the statement after Members have raised their matters of national importance.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.

2.11
MS ANNET NAKATO (Independent, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the matter of national importance regarding the impending catastrophe or disaster in Buyende District.

Madam Speaker, Buyende is nearly surrounded by Lake Kyoga – approximately, 60 per cent of the district is covered by the lake shores. 

As we speak now, all the swamps in Buyende District are full of water – in places such as Buyende, Bumogoli, Buyumba, Nkoone, Iremerya, Nabweyo, Ikanda, Budipa and  many others. 

In 2020, the village called Nabweyo experienced the deadliest disaster. And some relief came, but it was not enough.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the disaster preparedness ministry, with immediate effect, should go on the ground and assess the situation before it worsens. In Nabweyo particularly last time, we had lots of lives lost and there is a claim that the relief items that were sent did not reach on the ground. 
I thank you and I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government?

2.12
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable member, we thank you for your matter of national importance that you have raised. As you all know, we are going through this difficult situation caused by the weather. We shall be sure to ask the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to go on the ground and look at the matter; so that we can avoid any such incidents as has happened in Mbale. We shall take note of it and immediately report back to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, you need to do an assessment for the whole country; the country is suffering. In my own district, people have nowhere to stay because the whole area is flooded. So if you are doing the assessment, first do the emergency in Mbale where people are dying. And you know my district is at the receiving end. All the water from Mbale comes to Bukedea. So you need to do that assessment throughout the whole country. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In most cases, when we present matters of national importance, there are ministries that are more specialised in this. The Minister of Environment is there. The Attorney-General - with all due respect - it is not a matter of jumping on the microphone. (Laughter) 

We would expect that some of these ministers-

THE SPEAKER: Maurice that is an un-parliamentary language. He is the most senior minister in the front bench; he is not “jumping”. I have not seen him jumping unless you saw it alone. Kindly, can you withdraw your statement?

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I withdraw the statement. However, what I am trying to say is: I am very sure my colleagues will testify that there are very few cases where we expect the Attorney-General to respond. However, in such a case which is threatening the lives of people, when the Minister of Environment is there, we would expect a statement from the Minister of Environment. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Environment can speak but the most senior person representing Government is the Attorney-General. Let us have respect for each other.

2.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the concern of the colleague, Hon. Annet. And the truth of the matter is that the whole country is now prone to the effects of climate change. Therefore, as Government, we intend to join hands to respond in the same direction. 

However, I would like to emphasise that the long-lasting solution to this must be environmental conservation. The response to disasters is going to happen and Government is doing that, but as a Ministry of Environment - because all these things are coming as a result of us destroying our environment. 

Therefore, friends, you will accept when we come with a 10-year programme of restoration that we all hold together and make sure we restore what has been destroyed and even advise our people for safety. (Interruption)

MR SILWANYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. We know that issues of emergency, especially what is currently happening, need timely action. The minister is giving us the short-term and the long-term solutions. 

However, I would like to clarify or seek clarification on how fast you are going to handle this in the short-term. For example, what is happening in Mbale, very soon you will hear it is happening in Kasese, Busoga and the Speaker is talking about Bukedea and all areas. When will you bring that statement and tells us that maybe, “In three weeks, we are going to do this and that,” so that our hearts are settled? 

That way, we shall know that at least Government has planned and is ready to handle and manage these challenges. Therefore, what are the timelines? And within what period are you going to sort out these matters, in the short-term?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we are talking about needs a multi-sectoral approach. And in this multi-sectoral approach - I liked it when the Attorney-General stood up because yesterday there was an issue of compensation for people who have lost their loved ones. So, that is where now the Attorney-General will come in.

There is the issue of the roads; I am happy the minister in charge of roads is here and the finance minister to release money. People are sleeping out and we need tarpaulins. And when you ask the other ministers, they are saying, “We have not got money,” or “There have been budget-cuts on this.” Now that the finance minister is here, we need a response to this. 

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, yesterday, we had a meeting chaired by the Prime Minister and the meeting drew critical sectors that are supposed to do first-line intervention, particularly to deliver emergency support. I would like to report to this House that emergency support in terms of food, shelter and some basic utensils that must be used by-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, can you put on your mask?

MR ECWERU: So in the discussion, we realised that the number that had been handled from the time the incident happened - from the time that disaster happened - was smaller than what needs to be handled. 

I am happy to report to this House that our partners have accepted to support the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, coordinated by the Prime Minister. My office was given a specific assignment to ensure that we attempt to open all the roads that lead to the affected communities, even if it means just doing first-line intervention to allow relief to reach them as we prepare to do a comprehensive intervention. 

I am happy to report to this House that this morning a team has left from the Ministry of Works, working with the UNRA to team up with the district leadership in the Mt Elgon Region - that is Bugisu and Sebei - so that we can draw a comprehensive intervention, particularly as far as communication and particularly roads is concerned. So that is what is being done now.

MR NAMBESHE: Honourable minister, I am seeking clarification from you. You have done well to talk about the relief food and non-food items that you are delivering. However, you know very well that the root cause of the flash floods claiming lives and property is because after the rivers emanating from Wanale Hill bursting their banks, the narrow culverts could not allow the flood water to flow under the bridges.
You are the line minister who would have worked on that infrastructure. Even up to now, the bridge on Kumi Road is still submerged. 

Therefore, I expected you, in your brief remarks, to say something about a solution to that root cause of the flash floods.

Mr musila: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this chance again. The clarification I would like to seek from the Minister of Works and Transport, if not from all of them because it cuts across the board - and yesterday, I was not able to speak because my colleagues had spoken. 

Anyway, I wish to say that the aftermath of these flash floods is going to be worse. Therefore, I wish to hear the minister speak to us about a solution on what he is going to do with the widening gaps and cracks on Mt Elgon. Already, we have had a few - we may not have lost lives but already the soil has been washed down especially in Bududa. My home, which is 200 metres away, is affected for example. 

The other issue, Madam Speaker, is about medical camps. Remember these flash floods carried away all pit latrines from the upstream down into, including in your district. You are aware that you lost two people in your district around River Sipi. 

However, the worst bit are the attendant diseases coming over later, especially the waterborne like dysentery, Cholera and the like. We should call upon the Ministry of Health, working in conjunction with other ministries, to put up medical camps in preparation for oncoming disasters, especially in the downstream districts of Butaleja, Bukedea, Namutumba and others. I submit. 

Mr ssewungu: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, could you inform this House when you last went there. What have you done and why are you here –(Interjections)- yes, I am asking the minister because this matter is very serious. Yesterday, we were here seeing everything on television. And it was clear that it were the citizens pulling vehicles out of the floods using ropes. Were those ropes provided by you, honourable minister?

We provide ministers with resources to carry out their work. You can explain to this House, when you were last at that place and who you left there to ensure work is done. 

Some Members might hide facts. Your officials like the police are not working. It is the citizens doing the work. You can bear witness, Members from that area. 

The Speaker: Honourable minister, can you make those clarifications – yes.

Mr alex ruhunda: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry that I am coming up with the anguish to speak on this matter, which should have been prevented. 

Over 10 years ago, in this very august House, issues of Mt Elgon and Mt Rwenzori were tabled and discussed. The threats to human existence in these two respective areas were very clear. And scientifically, a team from geologists and the ministries concerned did a comprehensive study on all this and gave recommendations on what was supposed to be done, to avert future calamities of this nature. 

However, it is so unfortunate that irrespective of all this scientific data and information that was provided, there are no remedial measures that were taken to avert these catastrophes. Therefore, I find it very difficult, at this point, to see us doing firefighting by some us only responding on how we can just rectify a messy situation, yet this should have been avoided much earlier. 

Madam Speaker, I think we need a very serious scrutiny. Parliament needs to go and investigate this matter deeply. It is not a matter of just ministers responding on a mere crisis, which has just happened when there are these deep-rooted problems that can be scientifically rectified. 

I saw and heard the Prime Minister say that this degradation is the cause yet 15 years ago, we have been talking the same language on how to avert this catastrophe.

The Speaker: Honourable members, before Members go to investigate, we need an immediate action that can make people survive. Like the Prime Minister was there the other day, she distributed a number of things; she did some work. What we are saying is that you ministers who are responsible, say, for roads – he is asking, when were you there? The Prime Minister was here. And truth be told, in my area, which is the end point, nobody has been there - in Bukedea. Madam Prime Minister, I also want you to go to Bukedea tomorrow. (Laughter)

2.28
The prime minister and leader of government business (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I have noted the concerns of Members. However, allow me tell you what we have so far done in Mbale because it is now the issue. The Ministry of Works and Transport, through UNRA, has mobilised all the resources and gone to fix those roads that were washed away by the floods - those that are under UNRA.

We are also using the same ministry to make sure they prevail over the districts to fix their roads because some of roads are feeder roads. The responsible units for those feeder roads are the districts.

The Minister of Water and Environment - I do not know whether he is here - the other day when we had a meeting in Mbale, their technical people have fixed back the water services in Mbale City.

The Ministry of Disaster now has officers stationed in Mbale, distributing relief food and other items. The Ministry of Health - because you are aware that when the floods attacked, they washed away even the latrines and toilets - is on the ground with an emergency team. 

The Ministry of Internal Affairs and that of Defence are also on the ground. We are using the Army Brigade to make sure we repair the drainage systems in the industrial park. Colleagues, Government is trying. We want you to appreciate. Thank you. (Applause)

The Speaker: Thank you very much although you did not respond to my call for you to go to Bukedea. (Laughter)

Ms Nabbanja: Mama, you know how much I love you –(Laughter)- and how much our colleagues do. You know how much we can support using all the means. I will definitely go to Bukedea and support you, Mum.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, let us give Government time and see. Let us do our oversight role over what is happening. Let us make follow ups. Also, Ministry of Finance, we want to hear from you. Is there money?

2.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We recently passed the budget and we are in our Q1. We provided for funding under contingency and this money has not been utilised. Therefore, in the constraints prevailing, we shall try, as much as possible, to finance this situation in Mbale and other areas where disasters are happening. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that you have already given the ministries and all the others money under Q1? I am aware that you gave them only Shs 20 billion for disasters. What is Shs 20 billion going to do?

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness was given Shs 20 billion and it is this money that we are trying to use to manage this situation. They gave us Shs 20 billion.

2.33
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance regarding the breakdown of the road leading to the main tourism area called Bwindi “Impenetrable”, where we get over 60 per cent contributions for tourism –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alex, stop disturbing the Prime Minister.

MR KABERUKA: It is not my usual practice to raise a matter which has failed to get a solution, as per your guidance, Madam Speaker. I contacted UNRA and they told me they do not have money to rectify the challenge. As I talk, a fleet of vehicles of tourists are stuck in a place called the Kakureiju, just from Butogota, a few kilometres to Bwindi Impenetrable National Park. 

Madam Speaker, this is our cash cow. Tourism is a service sector that is giving us a lot of money and a lot of foreign exchange, but I was surprised when UNRA told me that the Minister of Finance did not give them money for maintenance. That is when I said that I should raise this matter. 

There is something serious cropping up from the Ministry of Finance that we need clarification on. This is the only institution mandated for appropriation. I hear there is something to do with sectoral review of our budget. Whose mandate is to review the budget of this country? Is it the Ministry of Finance? Do we have another giant in the Ministry of Finance to review and see to it that the Ministry of Tourism gets this money, much as it is Q1? If we budgeted for money amounting to this, we projected the challenges that would occur. 

Now, if the Ministry of Finance decides to give this money because of their predetermination, is it right? I pray as follows:

As a Member of Parliament representing Kinkizi West, where I have Queen Elizabeth and the only climbing lions in Africa that are giving money to the Government, the only gorillas leading to -  We have about 18 families of habituated gorillas, which are fetching money for this country. However, the road has broken down and people are extorting money from those tourists that are stuck there. When can this road, leading to Bwindi Impenetrable and Queen Elizabeth National Park, be fixed?  

I would like to also seek clarification from the Minister of Finance now that he is here. What is this sectoral review of our budget? This is because the President assented to the Appropriation Bill and it is now an Act of Parliament. Who has the mandate to change the law to give the performing sectors little money at your determination in the Ministry of Finance?

The Ministry of Finance should be tasked to explain how roads are going to be worked on, as we are expecting rains all over the country and yet there is no money for maintenance. How do they want us to do business as a country within these months of August and September where we expect a lot of money and there is too much business?  Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, first of all, I wish my colleague had drawn my attention to this before I came here then I would have tried to do adequate consultation so that I give a very informed position. 

However, I would like this House to know - maybe to pre-empt my colleagues - there is the reality obtaining and I am happy that the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance are here. We were having a discussion with the Minister of Finance. What we did was, we had given local companies framework contracts to maintain roads in the different regions of the country. Unfortunately, last financial year, we did the suppression of 40 per cent and that did not allow us to pay those local contractors.

Our hope was that in the first quarter, there would be some adequate release so that we can pay the contractors and they start working on the different roads in the country. However, the Minister of Finance has been a little too slow in coming on in this particular matter. We are handling it with them and I can confess that the truth is, most of the roads are actually in a bad shape. They need a lot of repairs because the local contractors have kind of gone slow. Nonetheless, I wanted this House to know that we are discussing it under the chairpersonship of the Prime Minister and we hope this will be resolved. 

Coming to this one particularly, Madam Speaker, we are going to look at this one and make it at least motorable so that the tourists can be able to access the park and be vacated from the park, as we look for resources that will enable us to really do the maintenance of all the roads that are critical in the country.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this indulgence. I would like to implore the Minister of Works and Transport to be honest to Ugandans. I am happy the Prime Minister is here. The intention of the front bench is to help the Government to harmonise with the Parliament, which is a representative of the people, to see that business moves on well. 

I am a Member of the Committee on Infrastructure. When we start saying that “we are going to work on it” yet the other day, you told us that you do not have any money. Instead of saying it now here – If Hon. Elijah was here, he would be my witness. Honourable ministers, you betray us on the Floor. You come to the committee and tell us that you do not have any money to do any maintenance and when you reach the Floor of Parliament, you start dillydallying and become generic. 

I think at this point, Madam Speaker, we need clarification because they are saying that they have not gotten money from the Ministry of Finance. Now that the Prime Minister is here and she is presiding over this bench, we should get to know what exactly is going to be done; whether the tourists should be chased away. As I speak, Madam Prime Minister, people are stuck; a fleet of vehicles - even the Minister of ICT was informed this morning. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is the other question where the honourable member is asking; legally, who is responsible for appropriation and review of the budgets? After the Appropriation Act is in place, does the Ministry of Finance have powers to remove the money or review the budget? Can I have the shadow minister?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, the power to appropriate, which is done by passing the Appropriation Act that is subsequently assented to by the President, is by this Parliament. Once Parliament has passed the Appropriation Act and the President has assented to it, it becomes law. 

For anybody to revisit that law in any way whatsoever, he or she must come back to Parliament in form of an amendment Bill for Parliament to amend that Act. Once there is no amendment passed, then, no one – be it the President, the minister or the Permanent Secretary – has the authority to revisit what Parliament has passed.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General?

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with the legal interpretation of my learned friend. However, I think we are mixing up two issues.

There is the issue of cash flow. Once you have the Appropriation Bill and the Act passed, then, you have to determine how much money you have available – the person who budgets tells you that “out of Shs 5 trillion that is required in this period, I only have Shs 1 trillion.” The law is silent on who does that. So, the person in budget, then, determines what he apportions to the different committees. It is not an amendment to the Act. It is just a cash flow management issue.

THE SPEAKER: What the Attorney-General is saying is that you must accept: there is no money. Now, with the little money that is there, they are doing financial re-engineering.

However, appropriation is by Parliament. What we have appropriated to different ministries must be given to the different ministries once cash is available. That is what they are saying.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank my learned friend, the Attorney-General. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, after training as a teacher, he went for law. So, he is a learned friend. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU:  I am in agreement with both of them. However, there must be something the honourable member from Kinkizi is raising and that is what we have to address ourselves to. 

If there is any cut or change, let him inform us through you, Madam Speaker, about what he is trying to say. We know that once we pass the budget, they will release it in quarters but we expect them to meet what was supposed to be given to that particular entity. 

The way I heard the honourable member, it was as if he had evidence to this Parliament that finance is changing what was appropriated. The moment that is done, then, it becomes an irregularity and that is what we want the Member to prove. Otherwise, I want to thank my learned friend. (Laughter)  

2.45
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  You see, the trouble is that once Parliament has passed the budget – and the lawyers can help me. When we were passing the budget, Hon. Musasizi indicated the sources of funding – money we were going to borrow from domestic institutions, money that would come from outside and the money that we were going to collect as revenue. We passed the budget against that background. 

Madam Speaker, it would be bad manners on the side of Hon. Musasizi and the ministry not to return to Parliament to say, “You passed this budget and these were the sources, but this money cannot come from one or two of those sources” and then we  revise.

However, the Attorney-General, like the lawyers usually are, smartly said it is cash flow. This is indiscipline. I am the one who authorised you to go and spend after you indicated the sources. If the money is not coming, have the courtesy to return because even budget laws are revised. You return and say, “The budget was Shs 44 trillion. We are able to collect 27: can we revise?” Then, we have the budget revised.

However, you cannot go there, sit and say “because of cash flow, I will give you Shs 1trillion”. That is indiscipline. 

THE SPEAKER: Under which law are we returning the budget? 

MR KABERUKA:  I would love that when the Minister for Finance comes to clarify here, he should also synchronise his prior statement when he said that the issuance of money was based on the fiscal strategy to manage inflation. 

Therefore, in the case of that one, I want him to synchronise fiscal management with the struggling infrastructure that we are talking about. Was that money also reduced to manage inflation? He mentioned it on the Floor of Parliament and we can even retrieve the Hansard. Therefore, we need to know because we need to get clear answers other than this ping-pong.

THE SPEAKER:  Finance?

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba on the powers of Parliament in as far as appropriation is concerned.

However, we manage the cash flow. We appropriate – for example, this financial year, the Appropriation Act gives us a figure of Shs 48.1 trillion. The cash projection on a quarterly basis – for example, this quarter, we have Shs 14.5 trillion. However, the cash available is Shs 10.2 trillion. This Shs 10.2 trillion is what we are supposed to reason with and see how best the Government can keep moving. 

Madam Speaker, this is quarter one and our budget is subdivided into four quarters. We are optimistic that as we go along, we shall achieve the objective of appropriation and the objective of ensuring that all MDAs get the necessary resources to keep moving. 

Lastly, on the circumstances which Hon. Kaberuka raises and the road sector generally, we have realised an anomaly. Before this week ends, we are working around the clock to see that in the circumstances, we avail some resources to take care of the emergencies, which are happening in the road sector, Madam Speaker.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You did direct the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, having received the Attorney-General's letter stating very clearly that we cannot overrule the constitutional provision, which states that all monies collected – fines and fees as per the Road Fund – should be put under the Road Fund. 

We are here, again, talking about the road sector. This problem of funding to the road sector will continue for as long as we do not resolve that issue. The Road Fund was created specifically to deal with these issues of maintenance of the road sector and safety. 

Madam Speaker, the directive given by this House was that by the 30th of June, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should bring here regulations operationalising the Road Fund. Today is the 3rd of August and those regulations have not been brought. 

So, is it not procedurally right, Madam Speaker, to direct the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to bring these regulations as directed by this House, so that we can have the Road Fund operationalised as it is in the Constitution, but also as per the Road Fund Act? 

THE SPEAKER: Of course, the minister is obliged to respect the decisions of Parliament and the constitutional requirement. So, minister, what happened?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When this matter was presented to this House, you referred the matter to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there was a motion that was brought to this House that was chaired by my colleague and he gave you directives. Maybe, you need to go back and check.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, all these decisions were amalgamated and sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I appeared before the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, yesterday. I gave my position and the committee is in the process of reporting back to the House. 

I pray that you wait for the outcome of the committee report and we will be able to conclusively debate this matter. [HON. OPENDI: “Order.”]

THE SPEAKER: Now, whom are you ordering? (Laughter) You should just say that you are giving information, not raising a point of order. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Matia Kasaija was in this House - seated there - and the instruction from the Speaker then, was to get guidance from the Attorney-General. The Attorney-General wrote his letter, which was laid here on the Floor.

I think Hon. Matia Kasaija himself was the one who laid the letter on the Floor, and actually committed to bringing the regulations to this House. About a week and a half ago, Hon. Musasizi was there, when the presiding Speaker then, Rt Hon. Thomas Tayebwa, asked him to bring the regulations to this House. This matter was never referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

It is a constitutional matter. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should stop dilly-dallying. We cannot continue talking about roads every other time, when the Parliament then that came up with this Road Fund Act had a solution for the road sector. So, we need to operationalise this Road Fund Act as is, so that we get out of these problems of poor funding to the road sector. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you go and check what happened and then report back tomorrow?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, one point; on the regulations, what I presented to the committee yesterday, I made a commitment that we are preparing regulations; we shall take them to Cabinet and then we shall lay them here. 

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development wants to give you information.

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, we have a letter from the Clerk referring this matter to the committee. And it is about the operationalisation of the Road Fund and we are processing the matter.

However, I think I can as well report, although it is going to be a verbal report. The ministry is saying that there is a problem operationalising all other funds and that in the circumstance, it is not going to be a special case for the Road Fund. What they told us is that they are going back to Cabinet to discuss it and see how they should be moving forward. I think that is the bottom line. There is not much beyond that.

THE SPEAKER: I need a report tomorrow on the directives that were given to your senior colleague by the Presiding Officer then. Hon. Maneno? Members, let us be brief; we have very serious issues.

2.56
MS MANENO ZUMURA (NRM, Woman Representative, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the insecurity in Obongi District. 

Since last year, Obongi District has been facing issues of insecurity concerning robbery. The robbers are armed; some speak Kuku while others speak Arabic languages.

They always come and rob village savings and loans associations in Itula Subcounty and Palorinya Subcounty. They robbed a group called Gottimonye Shs 3 million. In Palorinya Subcounty, three motorcycles and Shs 3,035,000 were taken.

There was a case in Ewafa Subcounty, Alibabito Parish, where two people were shot and sustained injuries. They are currently hospitalised in Arua Regional Referral Hospital.

A similar scenario again happened in Palorinya in Pasu Refugee Settlement, where a businessman was robbed Shs 3.5 million. And this situation is alarming because these robberies are carried out using guns. 

Madam Speaker, my prayers are:

    1. Since Obongi District has few police stations in the district, I request the minister in charge to allocate more manpower to Obongi District. 

    2. I also request that the UPDF detach that was established in Mureria Village and Kali Parish should be replaced. 

    3. I also request Government to deploy police officers in facilities that were constructed by UNHCR in the refugee camps.

    4. I also request the Office of the Prime Minister to take into account that the citizens whose money was taken, should be refunded.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Internal Affairs, I have seen you somewhere there. 

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker, I have heard the concerns of the honourable member, and I request to take it up with her on the interventions she is seeking.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, I will only have one more; the remaining ones will be handled tomorrow. Can we have Hon. Samuel Opio? 

3.00
MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance on the status of disbursement of the Parish Development Model funds. 

Last year, Government allocated Shs 17 million per parish. However, some of the parishes had only partial releases, while others did not have any releases. This year, Shs 100 million has been allocated per parish, to be distributed within two quarters - quarter one and quarter three. And the rationale for quarter one was that it should be disbursed at the time when the rainy season is beginning.

As we speak, the planting season has started but funds have not yet been disbursed yet this is where we expect the farmers to get better seeds to improve productivity, high yields, to guard against climate change that we are fighting.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us the status on the disbursements of these funds. We want to avoid what has happened to Operation Wealth Creation (OWC), where materials were coming in way after the planting season had started. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance?

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, we are making arrangements to release the Parish Development Model funds. I will come back to this House with details. 

3.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the last couple of submissions by honourable members that have to do with the releases. Of course, for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, convenience of a reply has been served. 

However, I would like to arouse the curiosity of this House, to the problems in the regulations specifically the Public Finance Management regulations, and in particular, Regulation 14(2) that speaks to the powers of the Accountant-General to release funds to entities every three months, and at every time the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) pleases or determines, for that matter. I think this is the regulation, which Finance is exploiting to flimsily make funds available. 

Madam Speaker, I think this House must interest itself in amending the financial regulations that relate to the Public Finance Management Act, so that Parliament has input in the management of the Budget. This is because once we pass the Appropriation Act, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can release money the way they want. Yet we have a duty to ensure that the Budget performs. So, for Hon. Musasizi, I can understand, but there is a problem. 

Madam Speaker, it is because the regulations are so lax that the PS/ST and the Accountant-General, under Regulation 14(2), are at liberty to choose when and who receives the funds. I believe we should interest the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Budget Committee – probably the Speaker, will advise – to invite the minister and look at the practicability of these regulations with the view of making the Budget perform to the expectations of Parliament and the public. 

Otherwise, the Appropriation Act will remain a ritual for us to simply pass it but when Finance has the liberty to choose how the Budget performs. I find this problematic. You can actually substantively submit but I thought that I should raise this for the attention of Parliament because there is a problem, and the minister will always conveniently respond. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we get a status report on PDM relating to how much money has been disbursed to the parishes because while we talked of Shs 17,000,000, over the weekend when I was in the village, people said they had gotten only Shs 6,000,000. Can we get a status report on PDM? It may not be today – let us have it on Tuesday.

MR MUSASIZI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Hon. Ssemujju.

3.05
MR SSEMUJJU IBRAHIM (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to raise a matter of privilege as I requested yesterday; I will be very brief. 

Madam Speaker, I present this matter of privilege as a Whip of the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) in Parliament. In the wee hours of Wednesday, to be exact at 3.00 a.m., a night before the Soroti City East by-election, without a Court Order as statutorily provided for, people – some of them dressed in police uniform – broke into the home of Hon. Anna Adeke Ebaju, Woman Member of Parliament for Soroti District. 

They were accompanied by a one Karangwa said to be an NRM Chairman for Kayunga District. This group cut door locks using welders and other machines. They were armed to the teeth. Before entering the sitting room, they showered the whole house with teargas; they also pepper-sprayed it. They clobbered and later arrested everybody they got in the home of Hon. Adeke, including the FDC President, Eng. Patrick Amuriat, who was later driven to Dokolo where he spent three nights in police cells. 

They also stole all the FDC polling materials such as appointment letters, voter registers, and money meant to feed and transport polling agents. 

Madam Speaker, I invite this House to condemn this thuggery and criminality. The Hon. Anna Adeke, who is a Member of this Parliament, is also the FDC Deputy President for Eastern Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, that is how we woke up to participate in the by-election with our president and several agents behind bars, and with all polling materials stolen. The FDC is a law-abiding institution. Despite what had happened to us in the wee hours of Wednesday, we sought to participate in the by-election. 

On the polling day itself, some FDC leaders became endangered. Hon. Stella Isodo, Woman MP for Ngora District – a Member of this Parliament - was the next target. She was arrested at Aloet where the FDC had deployed her, and driven to Kyoga Regional Police Headquarters where she was also detained. She was released the following day and is required to keep reporting to the police. 

Hon. Joan Alobo, the Woman MP for Soroti City, was briefly detained. Her vehicle was knocked by Dr Tanga Odoi, said to be NRM Chairman for election something - (Laughter) 
	
Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, a member of this Parliament but also the Secretary General of the FDC, has a harrowing story to tell. His vehicles were vandalised and their tyres cut, with the aim of grounding him during this exercise. 

Madam Speaker, I am a Whip of FDC; that is my job. Under the rules, I am supposed to be mobilising Members to come and attend Parliament. However, these Members now have to juggle their time between police, reporting on flimsy charges. 

Madam Speaker, I have limited this to my job as a Whip and a Member of Parliament; I do not want to go into the incidents that happened during the elections, including the Prime Minister of Uganda bribing people in broad-day light. I am asking Government to tell me whether it is a crime for MPs to go and converse support for their parties, and to go and observe elections on behalf of their parties. 

Madam Speaker, I also seek guidance from you whether Members of Parliament should continue being helpless; being picked by some NRM chairmen like it used to happen under UPC; that one would go and pick MPs like they were picking suspects, and the one ordering for them to be picked is an NRM - 

THE SPEAKER: I am aware that UPC was one of the very, very good parties at that time. How can you start giving it as an example? 

MS ALUM SANTA: Yes, Madam Speaker, the UPC has a record of being a very good Government, which started this country and everybody is happy about that. Is it in order for my colleague, the Whip of the FDC, to begin tarnishing the good name of UPC which did not participate in their arrests?

THE SPEAKER: Of course, he is not in order. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to the whip of UPC-because in the 1980s I was seven years old and I saw rebels including rebel Yoweri Museveni going to Luweero to fight and they said the reason they were fighting was because the UPC had rigged elections. So, if rebel Museveni and others lied to us, I am sorry.

THE SPEAKER: You cannot afford to call the President of the country a rebel.

MR SSEMUJJU: No, I am talking about 1980; he was not a President. My prayer is for Government to tell us whether it is now a crime - If you are a Member of Parliament and you can be arrested by unknown people, accompanied by police -

Finally, from you as our leader here, how can we get the MPs protected? Because if MPs, including one who is the area MP –(Interjection)- if the Speaker can allow -

THE SPEAKER: I have not allowed the information and I protect my MPs in the precincts of Parliament. Nobody has ever been arrested in Parliament. Regarding what you do outside there, if you are arrested, it is not my responsibility as a Speaker. Can you finish your report?

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I have made the prayers so I am done.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, were all these things reported to police?

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, if your house is broken into by police, where do you report? That is why I am reporting to you for help. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The role of the police is to keep law and order. We need to report all these things because the torture of our MPs is not correct. You will find that maybe these people were not policemen. 

Attorney-General, I want you to follow up on this. Find out what could have happened to the Members of Parliament and if it was the police that acted that way - And if they acted in that way, that was not correct. I need a report on that.

3.14
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I sorry. The report indicates that the President of the FDC was in Hon. Adeke’s house at 3.00 a.m. We are wondering what the President -

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, I have given you an instruction.

3.15
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will follow up with Hon. Ssemujju on this matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, provide all the information so that we can find out what could have happened and how we can resolve this issue. We are in a multi-party system and we need to respect everybody's wish. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPRECIATE HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA ON TUESDAY 7TH JUNE 2022

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware, the President's Address on the State of the Nation was at the beginning of the session of Parliament and it is a constitutional requirement under Article 101(1) of the Constitution.

On 7 June 2022, His Excellency the President delivered his State of the Nation Address to mark the official opening of the Second Session of 11th Parliament. As you are aware, at the address, I drew to your attention rule 10(4)(a), which requires Members to listen to the address by the President in silence without a comment or question. 

The rationale of this is that an opportunity for extensive debate of the President's address will be accorded to Members in the due course. 

Honourable members, the time has come to debate the presidential address on the state of the nation. I further wish to guide that after the motion has been moved, I will open the floor for debate. I will also accord the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament an opportunity to officially reply the President's address and that is pursuant to rule 53(1) of the Rules of Procedure. I now therefore invite Hon. Emely Kugonza to move the motion.

3.17
MR EMELY KUGONZA (NRM, Buyanja East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to appreciate His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address to the Parliament of Uganda on Tuesday, 17 June 2022. The motion is moved under rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It reads: 

“WHEREAS Article 101 clause (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda requires the President to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation at the beginning of each session;

AND WHEREAS His Excellency the President, in compliance with the requirements of Article 101 clause (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, delivered the State of the Nation Address to this Parliament at Kololo Independence Grounds on Tuesday, 7 June 2022; 

AWARE THAT in his address to the nation, the President highlighted the challenges that faced the nation in the last Financial Year 2021/2022, including rising fuel and commodity prices caused by the Russian-Ukrainian war; 

RECOGNISING THAT His Excellency the President informed the nation that due to the correct ideology of the National Resistance Movement, rejecting the sectarian ideas of the past actors, insisting on patriotism, Pan Africanism, socio-economic transformation and democracy, the country has attained middle-income status; 

FURTHER RECOGNISING that His Excellency the President informed the nation of the implementation of the Parish Development Model, whose end result is tapping into the production capacity of agriculture by relying on seven high value commodities namely coffee, fruits, dairy products, poultry, pigs, fish farming and food growing;

COGNIZANT THAT in his address, His Excellency the President called upon Ugandans to fight corruption, which is the danger to Uganda's rapid socio-economic transformation; 

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this Parliament as follows: 

1. 	That Parliament expresses its gratitude to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for his clear and concise exposition of the state of the nation in the State of the Nation Address held on 7 June 2022.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Hon. Emely Kugonza. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Silwany, Hon. Baroda - by everybody in the House. (Laughter) Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MR KUGONZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to give justification for a motion for a resolution of Parliament to thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for the eloquent and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State-of-the-Nation Address to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on Tuesday, 17 June 2022. 

Madam Speaker, in fulfilment of the constitutional requirement, under Article 101(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the President delivered the State-of-the-Nation Address ahead of the opening of the Second Parliamentary Session of the 11th Parliament. 

As it is the practice of a working and functional government, the State-of-the-Nation Address that was delivered by the President of Uganda, His Excellency Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni Tibuhaburwa, was not a wish list of laws, but a marching order aimed at giving direction to lawmakers and the country at large on what to prioritise in Financial Year 2022/2023. 

During the State-of-the-Nation Address, the President informed Parliament that the Government is set out to build an independent, self-sustaining and integrated national economy by creating backward and forward linkages in our economy. 

The Government will continue promoting the four NRM principles of patriotism, Pan-Africanism, socio-economic transformation and democracy. 

On the economic front, the President urged Ugandans to join the four sectors of the economy, namely; manufacturing, commercial agriculture, ICT and services. His Excellency the President informed the country that despite global, regional and national challenges, our economy has continued to grow. 

The President highlighted – at the time – that Uganda’s economy stood at $45.7 billion by the exchange rate method and $131.6 billion by the purchasing power parity method. This means that the GDP per capita is now at $1,046, hence surpassing the entry point for the lower middle income status. 

Madam Speaker, under commercial agriculture, the President emphasised the development of mega irrigation schemes of the Mubuku type. Irrigation will enhance and stabilise agriculture productivity by immunising it against the negative effects of erratic rainfall. 

Currently, 150 solar-powered water pumps have been imported. By the end of next year, 600 - that is the current financial year – 687solar-powered water pumps will have been imported. Meanwhile, our private sector is building a factory for producing solar-powered water pumps and panels. The factory will be ready by the end of this financial year and it will continue to repair and expand irrigation schemes and build new ones. 

As of now, the following irrigation schemes are ready; Wadelai in Pakwach, Mubuku in Kasese, Ngenge in Kween, Doho in Butaleja, Rwengaju in Kabarole, Agoro in Kitgum, Olweny in Lira and Tochi in Oyam.

Before the global destabilisation by COVID-19 and the Ukraine crisis, Uganda had a surplus of sugar, maize, milk, chicken, eggs, bananas, cement, soap, beers, etc. The global price crisis, therefore, presents Uganda with plenty of opportunities. 

The President emphasised that Ugandans need to deal with a few quality and biohazard issues. Aflatoxins, for example, will be dealt with by proper harvest and drying methods as well as the method of embracing biotechnology. 

In Financial Year 2020/2021, Uganda exported goods worth $1.3 billion to the East African Community, $1.7 billion to COMESA and $2.03 billion to the African Continental Free Trade Area. As we speak, Algeria and Ethiopia have a market worth $1.124 billion and $30.473 million for dairy products. Cattle owners now need to tap into these opportunities by vaccinating against foot and mouth disease and the contagious bovine pleuropneumonia at an affordable rate – and this has been done by the Government. 

His Excellency the President emphasised the strategic need for value addition as a link between agriculture and industry. The Government’s strategy is that anything agricultural that is not consumed fresh should be processed industrially so that it is preserved to reach distant markets through value addition. 

For example, a kilogramme of coffee beans gives us $1 currently, but if processed, a kilogramme fetches $14. When a kilogramme of coffee is roasted in London and ground, it fetches about $30. The President noted that this haemorrhage must come to an end. 

Madam Speaker, the President assured the country that the Government will successfully implement the Parish Development Model as an initiative aimed at springing the nearly 39 per cent of the households from a subsistence economy to a money economy. 

His Excellency the President reiterated the correct strategy of the NRM of developing infrastructure – roads, railway, electricity, piped water, telephone, internet, etc. Good infrastructure reduces the cost of doing business and improves the country’s competitiveness. 

On the cost of borrowing, the President noted that the Government will continue funding the Uganda Development Bank so that it can give loans for manufacturing, agriculture, services such as tourism, medical and ICT at lower lending rates. This will, indeed, support import substitution, industrialisation and agro-industrialisation – that is value addition for local produce. 

Madam Speaker, on improving the legal regime in the country, the President informed the nation that a total of 62 Bills will be introduced to Parliament during the second session. 

Lastly, I wish to thank the President, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni Tibuhaburwa, for the impressive socio-economic transformation, which has been achieved under the NRM since 1986. It has awakened Ugandans to meaningfully participate in wealth and job creation initiatives. (Applause) More Ugandans are embracing the urgent need to integrate into the modern money economy and this trend will continue. 

Madam Speaker, the mantle of securing the future of Uganda is so great a task for one to bet on. It is not a gamble and can only be entrusted to tested and experienced leaders such as His Excellency Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the NRM. I beg to move. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Can I have the first seconder, Dr Bukenya? 

3.29
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to second the motion presented by my brother, Hon. Dr Emely Kugonza.

Madam Speaker, you will note that on the date of the State-of-the-Nation Address, a good number of our colleagues were not there and you know, food is usually best eaten hot. However, they are now going to take the cold food. I hope they enjoy it. (Laughter) 

In summary, I am going to talk about one or two issues. Madam Speaker, the President emphasised a few things. The first one was that over the last 35 years, the NRM Government has been building the Ugandan economy. That is why, to a certain extent, the economy has been resistant to the several shocks that have been there and it has not collapsed to date. We thank the President for emphasising that. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, my brother talked about the pillars of the NRM. In as far as socio-economic transformation is concerned, the emphasis for this term or year is going to be on moving the 38 per cent of the poor into the money economy. I urge all my brothers and sisters to join and support Government in implementing the Parish Development Model. 

Another point, Madam Speaker, is on the issue of Pan-Africanism where we are in a bid to first expand the East African Community, and you have seen that. That will help us access market and improve on the security. 

Madam Speaker, my second last issue will be on science and technology. The President emphasised the importance of science in the development of the economy. Whereas the emphasis in the speech was on increasing the pay for scientists, I would like to first thank the leadership of this House for having the wisdom to change the Committee on Science and Technology from a sessional to a standing committee. This will give us chance, as Parliamentarians, to interface with the President and also the different sectors and see how we can make science mainstreamed in all the aspects of the economy. 

Madam Speaker, the President talked about value addition. This issue has been very controversial here, mainly on the issue of coffee. We all agree on the “what” and the issue is on the “how” we are going to improve the value of coffee. I would like to urge you, Madam Speaker, through your leadership, to guide this Parliament to work with the President and see how we can improve the value addition idea of the President, such that Ugandans get the best deal out of this. 

We are experiencing floods in Bugisu Subregion. This is an issue arising from environmental degradation. The President talked about the environment and I think he gave instructions on what should be done. I would like to ask all Members in this House to put the minister, who is here, to task to start implementing the directives of the President, such that we save our environment and minimise costs on what we are spending on disaster. 

Finally, I would like to thank the President for the precise and concise manner in which he gave the State-of-the-Nation Address. I beg to move. 

3.33
Ms sarah netalisire (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion that has been moved by Hon. Emely Kugonza, in thanking the President as he fulfilled his constitutional mandate in Article 101(1) in giving the State-of-the-Nation Address.

When the President addressed the country, he began by quoting the Bible. He quoted Matthew 7.24-27 where he highlighted about two men in the Bible – one being wise and the other foolish. He went ahead and said that the wise man built his house on a solid foundation and even when the storm came, this foundation enabled his house to remain standing. 

I want to agree with the President that Uganda has experienced very many storms but because it has been built on a strong foundation, it has been able to survive up to today. 

The President highlighted issues of terrorism, COVID-19, landslides and many others. It is in this area that I want to appeal to all of us, as Ugandans, to join the President in ensuring that this Uganda that has been built on a strong foundation is sustained and not destroyed. 

We can all achieve this by looking at corruption. This is a challenge that we still have and is still eating Uganda. If we worked together to ensure that all the resources that are allocated to develop this country and take it further, are put to proper use, we can achieve more and continue strengthening our foundation.

On page 6, the President hinted on the issue of surplus production more especially in the area of agriculture. My brother, Dr Bukenya, has just mentioned sugar. He also mentioned eggs, maize and milk. Most of us who live in the areas where there is production have seen surplus, which ends up being wasted. If we continue promoting value addition, then we shall realise that most of our produce and products that go to waste during bumper harvest are saved. 

I want to appreciate the President when he came up with the issue of value addition and ensuring that our products are not put to waste. It is in this area that I want to implore the minister in charge of the EAC that we can tap into the market of the East African Community if we positioned ourselves properly. We are getting a lot of imports to our country from our partner states, yet some of our products have been rejected or some have been limited in the amount of export to the East African market. Therefore, with the EAC ministry, we can tap into this wide market before we even go beyond.

On page 24, the President also talked about infrastructure development. This was hinted on in connection with linking the producer to the consumer. In my area - the Elgon Region, when it is time for harvest, the farmer is given very little pay for their produce after harvest. Today, when we drive along Kampala streets, people are buying 10 Pineapples at 10,000. Consider the farmer who produced this product wherever they are. If we improved our infrastructure, then we shall save the farmer but also the consumer who sometimes pays higher costs because of transport.

It is in this area that I implore the Minister of Works and Transport, that there are some areas that may need the low cost sealing infrastructure development. For example, in the areas of Bukedea and Budaka – the Bukedi Region – when it rains in the mountains, whatever amount of gravel you put on the road will be washed away. 

Therefore, if we tarmacked these roads within the low cost sealing programme, we will save the money that we spend every year repairing the roads because we are putting gravel. The same thing is in the mountainous areas. The whole of Bugisu Subregion needs only 300 kilometres to have interconnectivity roads. This is an area where we do not have gravel and the roads are all gravelled. 

I am imploring the Minister of Works and Transport to look into this idea as we support the President to achieve infrastructure development. 

Lastly, on page 38, the President talks about environmental conservation. My brother has just hinted on it; you have hinted on the creation of the Disaster Management Commission. Yesterday, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness talked about the Disaster Management 10-Year Plan. If we can have these two in place, then we shall avert so many issues of disaster that are happening. 

However, Madam Speaker, I would also like to implore the offices responsible for conserving the environment to help His Excellency the President, in achieving this goal. When allocating these plots, they should be realistic in giving the environment assessment plans - the report that they normally give. We saw on the screens CNOOC all flooded and now the President has given an instruction to evict all those that are in wetlands. I pray that the Minister of Water and Environment and agencies responsible for conserving the environment support the President together with us to achieve this goal. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and I second the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, honourable member. The Leader of the Opposition has a right to reply to the State-of-the-Nation Address under rule 53. Then, we will open the debate; you will debate both the reply and the motion. 

OPPOSITION RESPONSE TO THE STATE-OF-THE-NATION ADDRESS 2022

3.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me begin on a light note that in future, the Clerk should adhere to the Speaker’s instructions and make the Reply a substantive matter on the Order Paper. Otherwise, those who read history will imagine that the Speaker was cajoled, compelled or arm-twisted on a matter that is statutory. So, I request the Speaker to remind the Clerk to put the matter substantively on the Order Paper because it is statutory. I thought I should draw that to the attention of the Clerk. 

Secondly, allow me to officially communicate to the House, with your indulgence, that we have officially appointed Hon. Francis Katabaazi, Shadow Minister for East African Community Affairs. Hon. Katabaazi is the Member of Parliament for Kalungu East Constituency. He can rise for the Members’ attention, him being a new Member. (Applause) He will be headlining matters related to the East African Community. 

That said, I beg to report to the House that when the address was made by the President, the Opposition officially boycotted it. Officially, it means the Leader of the Opposition rallied his troops to stay away as a matter of protest. A protest is a lawful activity. We did that exactly to express, first of all, our respect for the law; that we can stay away as a matter of protest and we explained our staying away to be a protest to the President and the Executive because of the manner they have treated matters of human rights, especially the mistreatment of our comrades who were arrested nine months ago but up to now, the State is very hesitant on moving to their full prosecution. I thought we needed to explain that to Parliament for Members to understand where we came from on these matters. 

Having said that as a preamble, pursuant to Rule 53 of our Rules of Procedure, I seize the opportunity to respond to the State-of-the-Nation Address delivered by the President on 7 June 2022.

First, I would like to congratulate you, Rt Hon. Speaker and Members upon the commendable performance exhibited in the First Session of Parliament. Like we all know, at times, we converged and on other occasions disagreed on a number of matters of principle. I celebrate the times when we built consensus and moved together in the interest of our motherland.

I also would like to congratulate Members who have had election petitions, upon securing rulings that were in their favour. Of course, I extend my sympathies to those Members who lost their seats and are awaiting by-elections. 

As the Opposition, we carry wounds with us in the manner upon which our colleague and comrade, Hon. Attan, lost his seat in Soroti. It is unfair that his counterpart in Soroti West constituency never lost his seat yet both their constituencies were affected by boundary alterations. 

It is further unfair for a Member to be penalised for the inefficiencies of the Electoral Commission. This was compounded by the brutal force of the State, earlier on talked about, in the by-election of Soroti Municipality East. Of course, a ray of hope is drawn from the fact that – I have heard from my FDC friends – they are going to contest that electoral outcome. I raise these issues in this partisan House because every one of us here is a potential victim of injustice in one way or another. 

I once again reiterate that there is need to amend the Electoral Commission Act to redefine the role of the police, the military and other armed personnel during elections. The Electoral Commission should be solely in charge of and in direct command of the co-opted police and other internal security personnel deployed in electoral processes and not the other way round; that the military will come and appropriate the role of the Electoral Commission. I thought that should be on record that we are very concerned. If there are Members that are not concerned about that development, my apocalypse is and will be that sooner than later, it will claim more victims out of this place. 

While the President complied with Article l0l of the Constitution to present the State-of-the-Nation Address, it fell short of the expectations of the citizens in as far as accounting for the performance of Government is concerned. Instead, the address – and I know Members can bear witness - was loaded with liberation war hangover, historical reflections, economic fascinations and imperialism undertones, as we heard them. It was at cross-purpose with the realities of the citizens. Of course, we all hate war but nobody should pride in war mongering as an art.

As emphasised in the response that I delivered in August last year, we are convinced that the State-of-the-Nation Address should report on progress made in realising the National Objectives and Directive principles of State Policy. This is enshrined in the National Objective and Directive Principles of State policy. This is enshrined in the National Objective and Directive Principles, 1(ii) of the Constitution. This Principle dictates the expected structure of the State-of-the-Nation Address.

Our response, therefore, will be delivered based on this constitutional structure. Madam Speaker, because it is structured, it will be brief. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by speaking on objective one, which is the implementation of national objectives, which are well enshrined and I would like to invite Members of Parliament to make it your culture to get accustomed to reading the Constitution. It is not a preserve of lawyers but every one of us can really be at par with the provisions of the Constitution, including the key tenets enshrined in the implementation of national objectives which, as Members of Parliament, we are custodians. 

Madam Speaker, the reading, understanding, application or interpretation of the Constitution or any other law, as well as Government policies, is constrained by the veil of official language. 

Although the literacy rate; ability to write, read and understand a simple sentence in any language is 72 per cent for adults and 76 per cent for persons of 10 years and above, many citizens lack the ability to access and comprehend policy, regulatory and legal frameworks that are majorly published in English. The second official language of Swahili is also not comprehensible to many citizens.

There is a cause of concern given the fact that only 40 per cent of persons that have completed basic universal primary education are able to read and comprehend primary two level English stories.

Besides, the efforts to translate the frameworks and the Constitution are progressing on a very snail pace. For instance, while the Third Schedule of the Constitution reflects 65 indigenous communities that have unique dialects, it has only been translated into 19 languages ever since its promulgation. This means that only 29 per cent of these dialects are available in translation.

Additionally, there are over 500 laws in the statute books of Uganda but only two laws; Local Council Courts Act and Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Act that have been translated into six and two languages respectively. 

These inadequate levels of translation adversely affect civic engagement, influence accountability of Government policies and ultimately, service delivery. No wonder several citizens do not tune into national addresses, do not follow parliamentary debates nor have a grasp or policies passed by the Cabinet; they require interpreters.

Madam Speaker, in line with Article 6(3) of the Constitution, an Indigenous and Official Languages Bill will be developed and introduced in Parliament targeting educational, legislative, administrative and judicial purposes. The Opposition is incubating that Bill as a remedy.

Objective Two: Democratic Principles

Madam Speaker, the Government's tale of the NRM regime is characterised by threats and coercion other than accommodative engagements, which are expected in democratic dispensation. This has been exhibited in the conduct of elections, handling of grievances of public servants and rebutting political dissent, among others. As a result, citizens are unable to fully participate in the determination of their leaders and influence matters that affect them. 

These have translated into authoritarianism and ultimately violation of human rights as envisaged in the violence marred in the general elections as well as by-elections. In Soroti - I do not have to mention - in Kayunga and Omoro, citizens being abducted, illegal suspension of non-government organisations, as well as the shrinking civic space for the opposition and political parties.

Worryingly, the citizens’ recourse in courts of law as a means of checking the excessive powers of the Government has also been held captive by the State. As a result, the judicial system is increasingly becoming opaque, less trustable and distant from the people from whom it derives its judicial power and closer to the rulers of the day.

There is open expression of bias by some higher-ranking judicial officers, increasing rate of written other than oral submissions in a bid to limit public scrutiny. Madam Speaker, as a lawyer, when a judge says, I will entertain written submissions only, we understand its implications. 

Part of justice is scrutiny of the bearers of the wings of justice and where it is curtailed and limited to written submissions, there is a problem. Therefore, we are very concerned because this negates public scrutiny. 

Of course, we all know the challenge of hefty bail terms in appeasement of the powers that be, illegitimate detentions in disguise of completing investigations, presidential discretion that facilitates appointment of regime cadres as judicial officers and all attendant challenges. 

Regarding the principle of decentralisation and devolution of powers and functions, the decentralisation policy is long overdue for review. It has been observed that currently, the Government is largely enforcing a centralisation policy, particularly in management of finances, procurements and recruitment.

This has incapacitated the functionality of local governments, which are the main anchors of decentralisation policy and the last mile in service delivery. 

This prompted the Opposition in the last session, Madam Speaker, with your permission, to move a motion that was adopted by Parliament urging the Government to reverse the directive requiring local governments to remit all local revenues to the Consolidated Fund. It is yet to be ascertained whether this resolution has been adhered to. 

Madam Speaker, in compliance with rule 22(20) of the Rules of Procedure, the Minister responsible for finance should submit an action taken report on resolutions of Parliament in regard to local governments. 

Parliament should also demand for an update on the review of the decentralisation policy in Uganda, which for us as the Opposition, is actually on the rails of the fossils of history as no longer functional but dysfunctional. Madam Speaker, there is need to have constant focus on representation of a national character in the Government and its institutions. 

It is common in public discourse to align institutions to belong to persons originating from given regions of the country. For instance, it has once been established that 59 per cent of heads of parastatals originate from western region followed by the central region and the eastern region at 18 per cent while the northern region came last with 2 per cent.

In terms of staffing levels, the western region accounted for largest portion; 35 per cent, followed by the central region at 27 per cent, eastern at 23 per cent and lastly the northern region at 15 per cent.

This, most a time, arises from identification of persons of authority originating mainly from a particular region irrespective of rank and file or officers having a national character. In other instances, the leadership levels may reflect national diversity but the lower level staffing reflects regional imbalances.

Madam Speaker, as a remedy, it is critical that the Minister of Public Service periodically tables in Parliament a report on the composition of the Government and its institutions detailing the levels of reflection of national character and social diversity of the country.

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, some taxpayers would be inclined to believe that they do not have to pay taxes to the Government because they do not see the presentation out of what the Government does. 

Objective III – National unity and stability

Madam Speaker, the popular chants of the political parties represented in this Parliament are so revealing regarding the aspects of national unity and stability. The mantra of the NRM regime “tubonga nawe” loosely translated “we associate with you” is individualistic in nature. It is targeted at praising and servicing the ego of an individual ruler. This denotes a political environment in which citizens and institutions are subject to the whims of the ruler. 

No wonder, there is massive institutional breakdown and proliferation of presidential directives that are illegally executed by timid civil and public servants.
 
Madam Speaker, the approach of individualism has been extended to the response of the Government to issues that are threatening national stability. For instance, the country is faced with escalating prices, particularly of fuel and household items. These have led to financial insecurity of almost every household. This has contributed to the increase in crimes such as theft, armed robbery, murder and illegal roadblocks across the country. Instead of advancing plausible interventions, the President has categorically stated that each citizen is on their own and should not expect any assistance from Government. Rather, the President urged citizens that pay taxes, which sustain him, to implore the liberal market forces of demand and supply. This is utter insensitivity.

No wonder, the chants of the Opposition point to the prevailing deficiencies and project aspiration of hope, liberty and unity as they strive to attain a peaceful, secure and stable political environment. For instance, “People Power, Our Power” for the National Unity Platform (NUP), “One Uganda, One people” for the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC), “Together in Progress” for the Peoples Progressive Party (PPP) and JEEMA, too, confesses “People Power, Our power”. These call-for-change chants will continue to sound until a new, empowered, united and fair Uganda is realised.

Madam Speaker, they can be negated but they sound a very serious warning, as to our sense of unity as a country. They will be only ignored at our own peril as leaders in this country. 

As a remedy, the Opposition will seek space on the Order Paper to present a statement on the current state of the economy. It will articulate plausible interventions that will support citizens in the current economic crisis and avert the imminent risk of national stability.

Efforts will also be undertaken in this session by the Opposition to champion amendments to the Political Parties and Organisations Act, with emphasis on funding and facilitating civic engagements that will be spearheaded by political parties.

Objective IV – National sovereignly, independence and territorial integrity

Madam Speaker, I commend our men and women in uniform for defending the country. However, it is noted with concern that Government has disregarded the law on the deployment of the UPDF to the Democratic Republic of Congo. The Operation Shujaa has never acquired Parliamentary approval, yet lives and public resources continue to be deployed in the offensive. Our men and women in uniform work amidst challenging working conditions and desire to be motivated. 

Although the Government has committed, in the medium term, to enhance their salary payments, it should be noted that the arts-oriented officers will be discriminated against for priority that has been set on science-oriented officers. For instance, it was observed that out of a funding gap of Shs 682.8 billion, a total of Shs 73.2 billion has been indicated as full salary enhancements of UPDF scientists in Financial Year 2022/2023. Such discriminatory approaches are bound to raise disquiet in the forces and risks of national insecurity.

While this concern needs to be urgently addressed, there is a visible shift towards security forces preserving the regime – and that is worrisome. This has diverted the forces away from the constitutional mandate of preserving the integrity of the nation. This is observed in the brutality inflicted on the citizens through abductions by ununiformed officers, disruption of lawful assemblies, violence against journalists and extrajudicial killings, among others.

Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister has never reported on the extrajudicial killings of 2019 as directed by the Speaker. Hopefully, she would have courtesy without being compelled to report – without being demanded to do so – to this House.ouse.Hou 

Unfortunately, these human rights violations continue unabated. This prompted the Opposition to momentarily walk out of the Plenary in protest, launch complaints register to capture human rights violations in different parts of the country – of course – unsuccessfully tried to censure the Minister of Security and table in Parliament a list of missing persons and those killed by security forces. In addition, a statement was delivered demanding for remedial actions from the Government and a report on persons killed during the general elections campaigns. The matter was referred to the Committee on Human Rights in February 2022 and, to date, no report has been presented to the House. 

The same committee has never presented a report on the inquiry into the allegations of human rights violations that marred the 2021 general elections.

I implore you, Madam Speaker, to use your prerogative to demand that the Committee on Human Rights presents this report on human rights violations in the country at the next sitting. Otherwise, Parliament would be insensitive to the plight of the affected persons.

Madam Speaker, within this objective, there is a directive to the effect that the country should avoid undue dependence on other countries and institutions. Unfortunately, the country does heavily economically depend on other countries, donors and lending institutions. For instance, out of the approved budget of Shs 48.13 trillion for this Financial Year 2022/2023, domestic and local revenue is projected to only be Shs 25.78 trillion (54 per cent) while the rest, amounting to Shs 22.34 trillion (46 per cent), will be mobilised from borrowing and grants. To make matters worse, the domestic revenues cannot fund the entire county’s recurrent expenditure, which is Shs 34.04 trillion.

Furthermore, there are programmes within the approved budget for Financial Year 2022/2023 that will largely be dependent on external financing. These include sustainable urbanisation and housing at 81 per cent, sustainable energy development at 66 per cent and manufacturing at 53 per cent. The situation is not any different within individual Votes of ministries responsible for health at 86 per cent, agriculture, animal industry and fisheries at 83 per cent, water and environment at 70 per cent as well as energy and mineral development at 66 per cent. Therefore, with these illustrated excessive levels of economic dependence, sustainable development cannot be guaranteed.

As a means of addressing the escalating levels of borrowing, the Opposition advanced alternatives to the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility that were adopted by the House. The alternatives were hinged on the principle that expenditure needs of Government be targeted to liquidity rather than solvency levels – of course, which the minister was reporting about hitherto, raise more revenues to increase expenditures and vice versa. This is meant to reduce dependence on borrowing. It is, therefore, critical, Madam Speaker, that Parliament offers adequate oversight into the implementation of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. I hope the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Committee on Budget will be able to patrol how this charter is implemented over the next financial years coming. Of course, we know it lasts at least four years. 

Objective V - Fundamental and other Human Rights and Freedoms

Madam Speaker, Objective V(i) requires that the State provides adequate resources for effective functioning of institutions charged with the responsibility to protect and promote human rights. The lead agency on these matters is the Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC), and it is facilitated by funds from the Consolidated Fund. Unfortunately, only 10 per cent of Ugandans are aware of its existence. This is not helped by the indifference and inaction of the commission even when it confirms occurrence of human rights violations such as torture and political incarcerations as was the case for the famous novelist Kakwenza Rukirabashaija, Hon. Ssewanyana Allan and Hon. Ssegirinya Muhammed. 

Instead, when the commission appeared before the Committee on Human Rights in February 2022, the commission’s Chairperson insensitively downplayed complaints of human rights violations by State operatives as exaggerations. How unfortunate! 

The commission is also slow in inquiring into human rights violations happening in the public domain on the assertion that it is awaiting formal filing of cases. This is not any different for those formally filed before it. For instance, in February 2022, a copy of a complaint filed in the commission on 9 February 2021 by Namugunya Zainab, a resident of Kimaanya, Kabonera in Masaka City, was laid in this House. She and her children sustained injuries due to negligence by the police. To date, her case remains un-investigated and undisposed. The commission has 1,827 cases of which only 326 were investigated and disposed.  This translates, Madam Speaker, to a deplorable performance of 18 per cent by the commission. I do not know whether there is another meaning of failure. 

Given the fact that security forces are leading human rights violators in Uganda, it would be prudent that the Committee on Human Rights is transformed into an accountability committee, led by the Opposition. This will ensure increased scrutiny into the operations of human rights institutions, and investigations into the management of human rights cases. This will be pursued through comprehensive amendments of the Rules of Procedure and the engagement with the commission and other key institutions of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, this matter has been pending for a while - whether a Committee on Human Rights should be chaired by the ruling party. Under the Commonwealth, which we should be part of, it is unheard of – I believe the next session of Parliament should seriously consider migrating this committee to the Opposition because accountability is not financial only, but we must also compel and demand for accountability for human rights.  

VI – Gender Balance and Fair Representation of Marginalised Groups

Madam Speaker, it is time for the citizens to have an honest deliberation on the level of representations in the country. While it is a constitutional obligation to ensure balanced and fair representation of marginalised groups, one cannot be oblivious of the justified sentiments about overrepresentation, particularly as regards special interest groups. Besides, rarely do the special interest groups introduce in Parliament, business that specifically targets the concerns of the people they represent. 

On the contrary, some have been proud to pronounce themselves as “listening posts” - so, they are voted to merely listen, not to speak. No wonder, the public is agitated by the administrative costs incurred for merely listening amidst a troubled economy. Madam Speaker, we believe, as the Opposition, that time is now to review this kind of arrangement which is loose and does not really advance democracy and representation. 

Some people have argued that representation of social interest groups is an affirmative intervention that should be time-bound, or cap the years of representation. Others argue that constituency Members of Parliament, by virtue of sex, age and professional trade, can represent interests of women, youth, the elderly and workers. These are fair options that need an extensive discourse. However, each time a motion for review of representation in Parliament is introduced as per Article 78(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, there is no commissioned study or report to inform decision-making. As a result, there is a risk of sentimental approach in deciding the motion. 

Remedy: Given the fact that the Constitution has been operational for 26 years since promulgation on 22 September 1995, it is long overdue for a review. Aware that we are in a multiparty dispensation, when constituting a Constitutional Review Commission, consideration should be taken to appoint at least a representative from each of the political parties represented in Parliament so that this review provides for the face of the country and the diversity in opinion there is, Madam Speaker. I hope this should be part of the first tasks of the new Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs before his hands dry.

VII – Protection of the Aged

Madam Speaker, this objective stipulates that the State shall make reasonable provision for the welfare and maintenance of the aged. While effort has been taken to promote the dignity and welfare of the aged through interventions such as the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE), more is still desired to adequately address the vulnerabilities that they are exposed to. Nevertheless, in each financial year, is it one of the programmes that is underfunded and characterised by arrears. It is saddening to watch the elderly lament for arrears from a modest monthly grant of Shs 25,000. What a shame!

Whereas Government has argued that the aged can benefit from other programmes focused on health, water and education, among others, these do not deliberately target them. Hence, many continue to live in conditions bordering on negligence. At the watch of the State, many are sliding into age-prompted but preventable disability, living in dilapidated structures, losing their property to land grabbers, and exploited by unscrupulous people due to dementia. At risk are 1.91 million households that have at least one elderly person. 

Remedy: The Opposition will present a policy paper for consideration by the House on a holistic social security and protection system targeting every citizen other than the elderly alone. Nevertheless, as a matter of urgency, measures to protect the property of the elderly, particularly land, ought to be undertaken. Land is the most valuable asset and the foundation of the livelihood of the aged. The Land Act should be amended to introduce provisions that safeguard the interest of the elderly by restricting transfer of their land as the case is for family land because we believe they are badly exposed.

VIII – Provision of Adequate Resources for Organs of Government 

Madam Speaker, while adequate funds have been provided in the approved budget for the functioning of the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary, access to the fund is hampered by releases by the Ministry of Finance. For instance, in the just concluded financial year, the functioning of Parliamentary committees was constrained through supressed releases. It is common knowledge that the Executive, particularly the President, has greater leverage on all arms of Government. The leverage is mainly drawn from budget development powers under Article 155(2) of the Constitution. 

The President also exploits appointment powers, drawn from the Constitution, to influence operations of the Judiciary and partly authority to influence who takes up leadership in Parliament. These have led to the infringement on the doctrine of separation of powers, as well as the attendant checks and balances. 

Solution

I would like to salute members of the ruling party for withstanding pressure from the President and sided with the citizens when we unanimously recommended for the termination of the Vinci Coffee Agreement. It was also gratifying that irrespective of our shades of opinion, the House rejected the proposal to acquire preferential shares in Roko Construction Company Limited before undertaking due diligence. May we continue to be united in pursuit of national interests! That is why I earlier on said that we need to review the regulations on the Public Finance Management Act, to follow up budget performance in this country. Otherwise, we shall be passing the budget for the President and the presidency without having citizens acquire services yet money is appropriated.

IX - The Right to Development 

Madam Speaker, Ugandans have an unalienable right to amass wealth through lawful and gainful means. In order to facilitate this rapid and equitable development, the State shall encourage private initiatives and self-reliance among citizens. 

For the in-ebullient and vulnerable persons and households, the State is obliged to meet their needs and narrow disparities is in the populance. 

Unfortunately, the time that the NRM has been in power, income inequalities are widening in the country. The recently published National Household Survey of 2019/2020 revealed that one in five people, live in poverty. Persons in abject poverty have increased from 8 million to 8.3 million; 3.5 million people are living below the food poverty line. 

Rural poverty is twice higher than urban poverty and the share of the population of households with unemployed heads has increased from 9 per cent, in Financial Year 2016/2017, to 19.6 per cent, in Financial Year 2019/2020.

Almost half of the population, that is say 49.2 per cent, earns less than Shs 450,000 and only 1 per cent of the adults in Uganda earn a million a month. 

Madam Speaker, thousands of citizens have degenerated from peasantry to starvation, particularly, in Karamoja. With such indicators is no brainer that Uganda is far away from being a middle-income status country. Did I hear the mover of the motion speaking about to middle income status?

X - The Role of the People in Development 

Madam Speaker, this objective obliges the State to involve people, citizens and non-citizens, in both the formulation and the implementation of Government interventions that effect to them. 

Most times people are engaged in implementation but not in the formulation of laws, development plans and programmes. This has been envisaged in programmes such as “Emyooga” and the Parish Development Model. 

Consequently, this detaches the people from Government and deprives them of their role in development of the country yet it is their right. 

In a bid to reclaim their right to participation in development, citizens have challenged Government in courts of law. One such case was the monumental challenging of the rural electricity establishment and management of the rural electrification fund of 2020. It was successfully argued that the instrument that was developed without due consultation of the public and private stakeholders was illegal. 

The instrument was invalidated by court, which also counselled the Government that it is not the repository of ultimate wisdom and ought to learn from the public. 

Madam Speaker, a Bill on public consultation will be pursued by the Opposition in a bid to give effect to the provisions of the national objective No.10 of the Constitution -

THE SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, try to summarise. We will upload this; we will also defer the debate to tomorrow for Members to read through in order to debate from an informed point of view.

MR MPUUGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker; let me try to summarise. 

Balanced and equitable development in the country

Madam Speaker, various parts of the country have stagnated in development without any clear agenda to rejuvenate to them. 

Uganda neo-development over the years has occurred in patches in a way that is highly imbalanced and inequitable as far as Uganda’s regions are concerned. This has been affirmed through the recently launched multi-dimensional poverty index of 2022. 

It highlights that the areas of Karamoja, Acholi, Lango, West Nile, Kigezi, Bunyoro and Tooro have the highest incidents and intensity of poverty. They are deprived of schools, toilet facilities, electricity, housing and financial services. 

Surprisingly, these areas have, for long, been beneficiaries of affirmative programmes such as the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme, Karamoja Affairs, Rwenzori and Bunyoro Affairs.  

Irrespective of the years of implementation, the affirmative programmes in these areas have remained deprived. There is a clear indication that the affirmative programmes are ineffective.

Remedy

At an appropriate time, the Opposition will seek space on the Order Paper to present an Opposition paper on affirmative programmes. The motion will also be moved to urge Government to present a roadmap of developing implementing a fiscal planning framework because the current one is a movement in the dark. That's why programmes come and leave the people worse off. Did I hear a Member presenting a motion urging Government to provide a remedy to poverty in Northern Uganda two weeks ago, which we all recommended and supported? That actually is a vindication of this programme. 

Madam Speaker, I am skipping some areas to bring Members to speed. On the protection of natural resources, the Constitution obligates Government to hold in trust for the people and protect land, natural lakes, rivers, wetlands, forest reserves, national parks for the common good of all citizens. This is what is termed as the public trust doctrine. 

However, it is evident that Government has abdicated this responsibility and abused the trust bestowed upon it by the Constitution. Under the watch of the NRM Government for the last 30 years, almost every critical aspect of the environment has degenerated.

For instance, the wetlands cover has reduced by a half, from 16 per cent in 1990, to 8 per cent and the forest cover has reduced by three times from 24 per cent to 9 per cent. It is disheartening that this degradation has been facilitated by the weak regulatory framework and selective enforcement by institutions such as NEMA and NFA. 

For instance, regarding wetlands, they have been prone to issuance of titles and weak or selective enforcement. This has been evidenced in the implementation of the recent government policy of banning rice growing in wetlands. While, for instance, rice farms in Otuke were slashed, in Lwera wetland they continue unabated; pure double standards. 

Remedy

The provision in Section 51 of the National Environmental Management Act should be operationalised by declaring conservation areas in every region of the country. This will buttress the legal protection of the fragile ecosystem.

Madam Speaker, let me speak about recreation and sports. Join me in celebrating our gallant sports men and women across all disciplines that have excelled in several fora. A few days ago, the country was enchanted at the master class performance of Joshua Cheptegei.  Of course, we cannot forget Victor Kiplangat and Jacob Kiplimo, Oscar Chelimo and others. 

Madam Speaker, I offer my congratulations for this achievement. They have flown the flag of our motherland with honour and earned us accolades. Now the routine of pledges and tributes ensues. There is a motion coming, I know, in the coming days to that effect. 

Madam Speaker, it is high time the bar is raised to develop a structured reward framework as a benchmark of rewarding our sportsmen and women. Given the years and numerous times the Government has committed to developing a framework and failed, this House of Representatives ought to take up the mantle. 

Secondly, many of the sports men and women have excelled largely at their own effort with minimal support of the Government. They are either self-made or accidental revelations to the sporting administrations in the country. They largely incur huge expenses on accessing sports infrastructure and expert trainers. 

While the private sector has endeavoured to develop a few facilities and trainers, their footprint is limited. Nonetheless, entrepreneurs who have ventured to fill the gap are appreciated and I implore the Government to act in haste to address the sorry state of the sports system and the public sports infrastructure across the country. 

The remedy, Madam Speaker, from the Opposition; a Bill will be pursued to amend the National Council of Sports Act to address administration, rewards and infrastructural gaps in the sports industry. 

The second last is education. Madam Speaker, while the Constitution compels the Government to promote free and compulsory basic education, it is undisputed that this aspiration is yet to be achieved. At all levels of education, the Government has been outpaced by the private sector, which includes individual, religious bodies, cultural institutions, and other non-governmental bodies that it inadequately regulates.

For instance, pre-primary schools are out rightly privately owned. At primary level, there are 12,491 Government schools and 222,575 private schools. At secondary level, there are 1,351 Government schools and 3,796 private schools. At tertiary level, there are 471 Government tertiary institutions and 1,149 private tertiary institutions. 

Unfortunately, the quality of education in most Government institutions is inferior to that of private institutions. Government institutions have literally aspired and achieved the constitutional minimum target of basic education. This has prompted parents and guardians to prefer enrolling their children in private institutions as a means of securing their education empowerment. 

Due to the competitive nature of the private sector, quality is a daily aspiration that is delivered at a cost hence the parents and guardians must grudgingly accept to pay prohibitive fees. These have contributed to the declining completion rates of students and progress to higher levels as well. 

For instance, the completion rate of primary level is 60 per cent as compared to ordinary level at 35 per cent. The situation is worse in special needs schools that target people with vision, walking and cognitive difficulties. This is an indictment of the Government's failure to ensure that provision of quality education is affordable to all citizens. 

Attempts to regulate exorbitant school fees through issuance of guidelines and circulars by the Ministry of Education and Sports have failed to curtail them. 

The remedy, Madam Speaker: At an appropriate time, the opposition will seek space on the Order Paper to present a policy position on the cost of education in Uganda. Probably the sleeping regime will rise and do something about this problem.

Madam Speaker, on medical services - In 1999, the Government developed and adopted the National Minimum Health Care Package. It has been operational for 23 years and it is the basis for rationing of public resources to health facilities across the country. The package mainly prioritises malaria, HIV and tuberculosis. 

However, of late, there are new emerging and widespread diseases such as diabetes, high blood pressure, cancer and mental illness. These are outside the scope of the minimum package hence the need for a comprehensive review of the package. 

Madam Speaker, relatedly, there is still a challenge of low access to health care with 83 per cent of Ugandans reporting unavailability of medicines or supplies. Fifty per cent assert that there is long waiting time at health facilities, 47 per cent are concerned about the limited range of services, 42 per cent complain of long distance to health facilities and 42 per cent relied on Out of Pocket payment. With absence of universal health insurance coupled with low coverage of private health insurance of the population, several Ugandans are unable to access quality medical care. 

Our approach

It is the consolidated view of the Opposition that the Uganda Minimum Health Care Package is reviewed and instead of constructing new health centres, efforts should be undertaken to ensure that the existing ones are fully functional and offer the best services. 

Madam Speaker, my Minister of Health is ready with a package of approaches and with your permission, it will be presented to be able to facilitate our satisfied neighbours across your right. 

Madam Speaker, I will speak about accountability last. I know these Members are ardent readers; they read and they will debate this statement. On accountability, many times political and public officers are held accountable for the resources entrusted to them. Rarely are they held answerable to the people they serve. 

In this regard, the barazas as organised by the Office of the Prime Minister were a good approach of holding public officers accountable by the beneficiaries of development programmes. However, RDCs fused politics into them thereby defeating their purpose. 

Regarding political leaders, they are mainly held accountable through democratic approaches; that is voting out non performing leaders. However, this happens only once in five years and presupposes free and fair elections. The latter is an aspiration that is yet to be actualised in Uganda. All our past elections are characterised by violence and state persecution of opponents.

In the alternative, as a means of ensuring elected leaders are held accountable on a daily basis, citizens have resorted to activism to expose their grievances, check abuse of public offices and fight corruption. 

Although activism is lawful under Article 39 of the Constitution, the regime has resorted to forceful and violent prosecution of aggrieved citizens. Irrespective of the approach, corruption keeps escalating each year that passes by and remains a hallmark of the NRM regime. The vice costs the country Shs 9.14 trillion annually. This is higher than the budget allocations for any of the programmes in Financial Year 2022/2023.

While effort has been undertaken to estimate the cost of financial corruption, the escalation of political corruption remains unchecked and the costs undetermined. For instance, the President uses his powers to appoint some opportunists to positions in Government. This, too, translates into a burden on the public resources through entrenching self-importance and self-enrichment, grand posturing and increasing the de-functionality of institutions. 

I do not want to mention names, Madam Speaker. You know some hangers-on that are thriving on the taxpayers, courtesy of the presidential magnanimity. 

Our remedy is that with the support of the Parliamentary Commission, accountability committees will seek to pilot and prioritise dedicated engagement of intended beneficiaries of Government programmes and projects that are reported by the Auditor-General. This will widen the scope of investigation beyond the tradition of engaging public officers and political leaders. In effect, the connection with the citizenry will be enhanced and affirming the aspiration of a people-centred Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the point we are making here is that we intend to interact with the victims of corruption. Parliament only interacts with the culprits of corruption, but the victims are never given the space to express how they have suffered at the hands of the corrupt. We seek space, with support of the Parliamentary Commission, that the Parliament will have the platform to engage the victims of corruption across the country.
 
On page 24, I have expressed our priorities in the second session, including but not limited to, the intended Constitution (Amendment) Bill and the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights (Amendment) Bill, which we have already tabled as a Private Member’s Bill.

We also have:

                1. Contract Farming Bill in the pipeline
                2. The Land and Agricultural Bank Bill
                3. Indigenous and Official Languages Bill
                4. Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill
                5. National Council of Sports (Amendment) Bill
                6. Public Consultations Bill
                7. Consumer Protection Bill
                8. Education (Amendment) Bill and
                9. Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission Bill, among others.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the time. I also thank Members for their patience. Of course, pages 25 and 26 show the work we have done, which was no mean feat for the Opposition and, especially for NUP - a young party in the political arena, leading the Opposition for the first time. 

I would like to thank Parliament and Members across the aisle for affording us the space and courtesy to agree and disagree, but with decorum, for many a time. (Applause) It should be the sine qua non for the way we engage over time and allow our duty to be reciprocal but truthful. The disagreements should be our daily menu but at the end of the day, we have an eternal duty to legislate for posterity. I beg to submit. Thank you. (Applause)

The Speaker: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition, for your statement. Honourable members, I urge you to go and read those two statements - the presidential address and the response from the LoP and we debate tomorrow. I will give one hour for it. The debate should be from an informed point of view, after you have looked at all the statements. 

motion for reconsideration of the mining and minerals Bill, 2022 As returned by His Excellency the President

The Speaker: Honourable members, as you may recall, on Wednesday, 20 July 2022, we stood over the consideration of the Mining and Minerals Bills, as returned by H.E. the President, pending harmonisation of proposed amendment to clause 8. 

For purpose of this harmonisation, I appointed a team comprising:

    1. The Chairperson of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources
    2. The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development
    3. Hon. Katuntu
    4. Hon. Aisha Nalule Kabanda
    5. Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi
    6. Hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi
    7. Hon. Patrick Nsamba
    8. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba and
    9. Hon. Bahati.

The harmonisation process was supposed to last for two days. It is now two weeks. I, therefore, seek an update on the harmonisation process. Remember, once a Bill is returned by the President for reconsideration, it must be returned in two weeks’ time. We have run out of time. We must finish that Bill today and it goes back. 

I now, therefore, call the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to come and present. Otherwise, we are ready to resume the discussion, which was at committee stage – there is a procedural matter.

Ms naluyima: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we consider this matter, still, under Article 91, we have a matter – as the Committee on Public Service and Local Government – that this House passed The Markets Bill but to this day, we have not yet received any communication. This matter was handled on 15 February 2022. 

Madam Speaker, can we assume – and will it be procedurally right for this House to take it that we already have “The Markets Act” in place being that the 30 days have already passed? Today, we see several local governments struggling to have ordinances about the markets and the by-laws. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable Attorney-General?

4.47
The attorney-general (Mr Kiwanuka Kiryowa): Madam Speaker, if you could, just give me five minutes to step out and find out what the status is. As far as we are concerned, all the Bills have been returned.

The Speaker: Actually, this morning I called your office – because the mover of the motion that time came to my office. I was told that the Bill was misplaced. They needed me to send 10 more copies.

Mr kiryowa kiwanuka: My sincere apologies for that but I can go and find out exactly what happened. 

Madam Speaker, as you may appreciate, the moment the Bill is completed here in the House, the Office of the Attorney-General does not quite interact with it. It moves from the House to the President's office and we just have to keep following up on it. 

However, if you could, allow me just five minutes to go and find out what the status is and come back and report to the House.

The Speaker: Okay. Thank you. Minister of Energy and Mineral Development? 

4.49
The minister of state for energy and mineral development (Minerals) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, as you did direct, we did the harmonisation and did agree that we move with the Bill, which was at the original stage so that we come and continue with this Bill. 

4.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, thank you. I think the initial act of the Presiding Officer allowing for standing over that clause was very important. The House should acknowledge the fact that the smaller view at times can be the better view and we should learn to listen. 

My team has reported that harmony was attained and that the schedule, as agreed upon, by the minority is a workable schedule. Therefore, there is no need for acrimony. The only little bit that probably, I think, which is the latter harmonisation was on the minister returning to Parliament whenever he or she desires to amend the regulations because keeping the citizens active and involved will depend on how the regulations are framed and whether the ministers have powers to sit in their office and amend them conveniently without the knowledge of Parliament. I have been advised that has been harmonised. Whenever there is a need for change of regulations, the minister must return to Parliament. 

The fact is that the schedule protects artisanal miners who are the majority of citizens. Largely, the country, Uganda, is an artisanal mining country for the bigger part. That comforts us and we can move with amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We can go ahead with the Committee Stage. Honourable members, when we agree as a House, I want to request my very good friends from the Opposition not to start treating this as their win. Nobody is a winner in this House. We have all won and succeeded.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE MINING AND MINERALS BILL, 2022

Clause 8

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you, Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues. Madam Chairperson, I beg for your indulgence that as I proceed with the amendments, I first of all lay on Table the minutes of the proceedings and the report of the committee. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please lay. 

MR OTAALA: On amendment of clause 8, after harmonisation, we are proposing to substitute the definition of “large-scale mining” to read as follows: 

“‘Large-scale’ mining means the intentional mining of minerals in mechanised operations involving the excavation of large surface pits, sinking of shafts, driving of adits and other underground openings with limitations to the extent of the mining operation dictated by the extent of the ore body and the capital investment thresholds prescribed in schedule 3.” 

The other amendment on clause 8 is by inserting a new definition of “capital investment” to read as follows: 

“‘Capital investment’ means the capital necessary to bring the mine into production or such other amount as may be prescribed.” 

The justification for these two amendments is that determining the thresholds based on capital investment is a more stable factor as opposed to ore production volumes for the following reasons: 

    1. The nature of mineral deposits vary within different groups and ore is produced in different volumes. For example, base metals such as copper, zinc, lead, and nickel are produced in high volumes, whereas metals such as wolfram or tungsten - as it is otherwise called - and the cassiterite or tin - as it is called - are produced in low volumes. Therefore, it is not ideal to prescribe the same threshold of production volumes for different minerals. 

    2. The estimation of thresholds based on annual ore volumes is constrained by a number of factors, such as availability of resources, the nature of mineralisation (that can actually be either a massive deposit, disseminated, low grade or in what is sometimes described as vein deposits) and the technology applied at the time, which may change from time to time and does not accurately define the required level of operations. 

    3. Regional best practices show that it is more efficient to classify the different mining licences based on the expected capital investment. We have conducted desktop benchmarking on Tanzania, Ghana and Sierra Leone. These countries define the level of mining based on the capital investment. 

The proposal of a definition of capital investment is therefore consequential as we proposed on Part B, based on the definition of large-scale mining. 

I beg to submit.

MR LOKERIS: Honourable members, agreed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR OTAALA: We are proposing that we amend clause 31 by substituting subclause (7) with the following: 

“For avoidance of doubt, competitive bidding shall not apply to areas under a mineral right, except for a mineral right held by a state-owned enterprise.”

The justification for this proposed amendment is that the Bill, as passed by Parliament, empowers the minister to announce areas open for bidding for an exploration licence, medium-scale licence or a large-scale mining licence. 

It further states that competitive bidding shall not apply to areas under a mineral right. The exemption would prevent Government from applying competitive bidding for licences under control of Government, like Kilembe Mines. 

The proposed amendment, therefore, will enable Government to use competitive bidding for licences under its control. 

Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister

MR LOKERIS: I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 31(7) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31(7), as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, all the clauses to this Bill were debated; we are only looking at clause 8; the rest are consequential. 

Clause 33

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 33, we propose to amend sub clause six, by substituting the words, “may appeal against the decision to the tribunal within 30 days of receipt of the decision” with the words “may appeal to the High Court within 30 days of receipt of the decision.” 

The justifications are that the establishment of a tribunal is contrary to the Government's on-going process of rationalising and merging of agencies. Secondly, Since the High Court has unlimited jurisdiction, it is empowered to handle such grievances.

We also propose, under clause 33, to delete sub clauses seven and eight. This is consequential because we have already moved away from the issue of a tribunal. Therefore, those other clauses should be deleted consequentially. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, minister

MR LOKERIS: Madam Chairperson, this was harmonised; I agree.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 33 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

New clause

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is no rubber-stamping here. We debated this Bill for almost eight hours. We are looking at only what was returned and the Leader of the Opposition consented; learn to respect your Leader of the Opposition. 

DR OTAALA: I appreciate your wise guidance, Madam Chairperson.  We propose the insertion of a new provision numbered under crossheading “Large-Scale Mining License” immediately before the provision on “applications for Large-Scale Mining Licenses” to read as follows: 

“Cross heading 59: threshold for Large-Scale Mining License: the threshold for Large-Scale Mining License is prescribed in schedule No. 3” 

We also propose to renumber the provisions accordingly. 

The justification is these are consequential amendments. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, minister-

MR LOKERIS: I agreed.

MR MPUUGA:  Two issues, Madam Chairperson: one is to ask the learned Attorney-General, who is my senior, to confirm that the description of artisanal miners in Schedule Four, in the logo frame, confirms that the interpretation would be that it begins from one US dollar because it says up to 100,000. Would the interpretation mean from one, for the comfort of the House and those who intended to legislate for artisanal miners initially? 

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It does not necessarily mean one; it means from a capital investment. Therefore, it could be an investment of 0.76 cents; it is so long as there is capital investment. Therefore, we must see a capital investment of whatever amount but up to 100,000. Thank you.

MR MPUUGA: That is very okay; I thought I should seek that because the layman’s interpretation was that it is meant to begin from 100,000; the record needed to properly capture the intention of the legislator. 

The second concern is about what Hon. Oguzu Lee - I seek your indulgence, Madam Chairperson - that he clarifies his concern on a subject matter of large scale. He had a matter of environment that he thinks is not properly captured. 

MR OGUZU: Thank you, honourable Leader of the Opposition (LOP) for the opportunity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is not the LOP who has given you the opportunity; he is not the chairperson. (Laughter) 

MR OGUZU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for the opportunity. Actually, I wanted to draw the attention of the House to the fact that there can be mining in environmentally sensitive areas. For example, in forests, wetlands, which global standards regard as large-scale mining yet this has not been captured in the definition of large-scale mining. The harmonised position only pays attention to the capital costs yet the costs could be linked to what kind of impact a particular mining activity will have on the environment. 

Therefore, it is very important that we address ourselves to the implication a particular mining activity will have on the environment to qualify it as a large-scale mining without necessarily limiting the definition to capital investment. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, look at the NEMA Act; it caters for all the aspects of mining in terms of petroleum and that kind of thing. Maybe the learned Attorney-General has something else to say.

MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Actually, section four of the Bill, which is not the subject of debate today, addresses that and requires you to comply with all the NEMA obligations and the environmental social impact assessment.
 
What you are talking about is that the environmental social impact assessment will tell you if the required capital investment for restoration of the environment is greater than zero or greater than 100,000 and therefore, that will be taken into consideration in your capital investment. 

If you are making a proposal for mining, one of the things that you are required to do is to provide that impact assessment. Further, that impact assessment for mining and oil and gas requires you to tell the country that you shall restore the environment, and if the requirement for the restoration is greater than 100 million, then you are doing large-scale mining. Therefore, that is how it is considered. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you so much. I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 71

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, for clause 71, we propose to amend by substituting sub clause one with the following –

“(1) The threshold for medium scale mining licence is prescribed in schedule 3” 

Justification

It is consequential. 

Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MR LOKERIS: Proceed, aye.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 71 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 71, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 83

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to substitute –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, clause 83 is also a consequential amendment.

DR OTAALA: In clause 83, we propose to substitute the text of the provision to read as follows – 
“The threshold for small scale mining licence is prescribed in schedule 3.”

The justification, as you rightly pointed out, Madam Chairperson, is that it is consequential. Madam Chairperson, I submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MR LOKERIS: You have already foretold what I would say. I concur. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 83 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 83, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 287

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 287 is equally consequential.

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, we have two amendments on clause 287.

    (a) Amend sub clause (2) by inserting the words “and Schedule 3” immediately after the words “Schedule 2”.

Justification

Is that it is consequential.

The other amendment is –

    (b) Insert a new sub clause (3) to read as follows: “The minister shall lay before Parliament any statutory instrument to amend schedule 3 and the statutory instrument shall not be effective unless approved by Parliament.” 

The justification is that for transparency and for Parliament to fulfil its legislative role as prescribed under Article 79(1) and (2) of the Constitution as this is paramount. Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MR LOKERIS: Honourable colleagues, thank you very much. I accept. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 287 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 287, as amended, agreed to.

New schedule

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing to insert a new schedule to read as follows – It is a table that prescribes the capital investment for the various categories of mining licences. 

Item, licence, capital investment in United States Dollars –

    1. “Large scale mining licence. The capital investment prescribed in United States dollars is above US$ 100 million. 

    2. Medium scale mining licence. The capital investment prescribed is US$ 300,000 to US$ 100 million. 

    3. Small-scale mining licence is US$ 100,000 to US$ 5 million.

    4. Artisanal mining licence is up to US$ 100,000.”
 
Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MR LOKERIS: Colleagues, I agree.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the proposed new Schedule 3 –

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, thank you for your indulgence. Again, to be sure that the intention of the legislators are clear to those who might want to think otherwise, would the chairperson wish to clarify why these thresholds are in United States dollars and not in currency points or in Uganda shillings?

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, as you may be aware, we are trying to address ourselves to the issue of foreign investors and when they come here, they are basically investing in US dollars. Now, if we convert this into Uganda shillings, there is going to be a variation in terms of inflation but also, the exchange rate. 

That is why we felt it was necessary to make a prescription in US dollars. After all, we can also make a comparison, if it is necessary, so that we translate this into currency points but there would be variations because of the exchange rate. Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit.

MR LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, in most cases, people talk of compatible currencies. These currencies do not change all the time and you will find that in many jurisdictions they use this and then you convert to yours even if yours fluctuates. A currency like the dollar is very steady and that is why it is being used. 

Even now if you want to convert it to ours, just multiply by the prevailing rates. (Laughter) So, let us leave the steady currency to be there for everybody to understand even when the investors come. 

Secondly, some people were talking about - Of course, honourable Leader of the Opposition was correct when he said, where are you starting from? When we say up to US$ 100,000, we begin from down and then you come up to there. Whatever you have in the middle, as long as we know you can mine, you mine – and this is to save our own local people who do not have much capital. So, we do not start from far. Thank you very much.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think, Mr Attorney-General, you must be very clear on this as you guide us – because learned friend. (Laughter) The best legislative drafting system would be using currency points. What if you get an investor who is bringing pounds? Will you change the law? And, when you go to the Income Tax Act, you are going to be computing using the Ugandan currency. There is no effect because whenever you get these dollars, still, you go back to Bank of Uganda and look at their exchange rate. 

That is why I was very interested, Madam Chairperson, that we should be cautious about using currency points – and it can be computed. Using dollars – Hon. Attorney-General, what if someone comes with euros? That is why I was very interested but I did not get a chance.

Madam Chairperson, the moment you begin from $1, there is an artisan miner who might be having his business worth Shs 20,000,000. So, you have to go back to the Magistrates’ Court because you will not take him to the High Court and that will bring in arbitration first. So, if you think of going to the High Court alone, then, what type of artisan miners are you talking about – only those coming from outside Uganda or they are Ugandans? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what is your point?

MR SSEWUNGU: He has got it, Madam Chairperson, and I think he can come out, as a learned friend, to see whether my submission is per incuriam.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about if you said $100,000 to $5 million or the equivalent of Uganda Shillings, whichever is higher. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Under legislative drafting, he knows why we use currency points – they cater for all those currencies basing on our home currency. At the end of the day, you go for an exchange rate. You are not going to get only people with dollars. Okay, you can talk about that but I see putting it into our legislation as being improper. You can guide, through the Chairperson. 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Currency points are created in our legislation to create a floating base upon which, whether our rates fluctuate in different directions, it remains with the same weight. So, if Uganda changes its currency value – the currency points from 20,000 to 30,000 – everything is adjusted accordingly to take into consideration the economic circumstances.

Madam Chairperson, I think what the honourable members are saying – and my learned friend. (Laughter) Actually, what my learned friend is saying is that we could convert this into currency points. The principle will be the same – you would get the $5 million, convert it into Uganda Shillings and turn that into currency points. The beauty about this is that if the minister wishes to amend this schedule, he can always come back to Parliament to do that. 

About the issue of jurisdiction, jurisdiction is creature of statutes and if this Parliament decides to send a person whose value is $2 million to the High Court, that jurisdiction has been created by that statute. So, there will be no problem. So, once statute creates a jurisdiction for any matter to be taken to the High Court, this Parliament has the power to send that jurisdiction there. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Counsel, can you come up with what amendment you have made? Can we have the amendment? 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing that in the schedule for large-scale mining, $100 million be converted into Uganda Shillings and translated into currency points and placed here. Then, the $300,000 – in Item No. 2 – be converted into Uganda Shillings and translated into currency points and so will the $100 million. All the figures in Schedule 3 should be converted into Uganda Shillings and represented, in the final draft, in currency points. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, chairperson? 

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, just by trying a conversion on large-scale mining – with an exchange rate of Shs 3,800 per dollar – $100 million would give us 19,000,000 currency points. So, I am just wondering how it sounds – it is sort of amorphous and I would not think that is the way we should be proceeding. However, if that is the guidance of this House, so be it. We are not certain about what exchange rate we are going to use.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It would really be – I do not know what word I can use. It would really be surprising for us to sit here, as the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, come up with a law and we use the dollar. It would just be surprising, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Sarah, we have moved away from that. 

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I am stating this because the chairperson of the committee has just been on the Floor and indicated that it would sound funny to talk about 19,000,000 currency points. If that is the case, so be it. Let us move with the currency points or have the shilling. After all, the minister can always amend that schedule. 

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, I am now conceding (Laughter) (Member: “Procedure?”)

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is settled.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Since honourable members are addicted to our national currency, we accept. (Laughter)

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: For the record, Madam Chairperson, we shall convert using the prevailing Bank of Uganda rate as at the time of this debate. Most obliged. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the proposed new Schedule 3 be inserted, with amendments from the learned Attorney-General, as he has proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New schedule, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Minister of Energy and Mineral Development? 

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I beg to move.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(On resumption, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Energy and Mineral Development?

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has reconsidered the Bill entitled, “The Mining and Minerals Bill, 2021”, with amendments. I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE MINING AND MINERALS BILL, 2022

5.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Mining and Minerals Bill, 2022” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that “The Mining and Minerals Bill, 2022 be read the third time and do pass.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE MINING AND MINERALS ACT, 2022”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and the Bill passed. 

Honourable Members, congratulations. I want to thank you for reconsidering the Bill. I also want to thank the committee, the minister, the Shadow Minister, the Leader of Opposition and the Attorney-General plus the ministers on this side and the whole House. Thank you very much.

The Bill will be sent back to the President for assent pursuant to Rule 143(8) of the Rules of Procedure. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

5.31
MS JANE AVUR PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you, the minister and the chairperson of the committee for having worked hard and passed this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, you will recall that sometime back in May-

THE SPEAKER: Remember you also have a pending Bill in your committee.

MS AVUR: Yes, Madam Speaker, we are working expeditiously to conclude. Sometime back in May, this House passed the Animal and Aquaculture (Amendment) Bill and since then, we have not had feedback whether the President has assented to it or not. 

This particular Bill was going to be a rescue for many of our fishermen out there and fishmongers-

THE SPEAKER: Is it the fisheries or animal.

MS AVUR: Fisheries, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please, I want to have the record clear.

MS AVUR: It is Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill that was amended but since then, we have not had feedback and our fisheries communities are suffering because a lot of what was entailed in that Bill was to rescue some of our fishermen, especially from the Albert Nile because right now the Fisheries Protection Unit is harassing our people. 

The sooner that Bill is assented to, the better for our people. That is why I rose up to find out - We are proceeding and passing Bills but the rate at which they are assented to-

THE SPEAKER: The learned Attorney-General, we have the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2022 returned; we have just finished this one; the fisheries one is not out; the markets is not out. Which other? –(Interjection)- Those are the only two.

5.33
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, like I had requested earlier on the Markets Bill, I could not get in touch with the person concerned but just allow me time to find out the status of these Bills and then I can report back to The House.

THE SPEAKER: I was requested to send additional copies; I did it this afternoon and so you can follow it up. Honourable Members, the Kampala Capital City (Amendment) Bill was read for the first time on Wednesday 4May 2022 and was referred to the Committee on Presidential Affairs. The committee is ready with its report. Let the minister move a motion.

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kyofatogabye Kabuye): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City (Amendment) Bill, 2021” be read a second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the Bill seconded? (Members rose_) The Bill is seconded by the Minister of Energy, Hon. Bahati, Honourable Attorney-General, the UPDF and by the whole House. Would you love to speak on the principles of your Bill? 

MR KYOFATOGABYE: Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to amend section 77 of the Kampala Capital City Act, 2020 to empower the minister responsible for the Kampala Capital City in consultation with the minister responsible for finance and the minister responsible for Public Service, to determine the remuneration payable to the Lord Mayor, Deputy Lord Mayor, Mayor, Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Council.

Councillors of the Council of the Kampala Capital City Authority, Mayors and Deputy Mayors of the lower urban councils, Speakers and Deputy Speakers of Division Urban Councils. I beg submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the intention of the committee report is to inform the debate on the motion for the second reading of the Bill. I, therefore, invite the chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs to give us a brief.

5.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have taken your guidance seriously to give a brief on the report that the committee has written. We have two major amendments and our report is already uploaded. On page 2, our major amendment is on clause 1, in relation to commencement. 

In this, the Bill is seeking for the amendment to commence on the same date as on the date when the first amendment commenced - and that was 1 February, 2020. 

Our observation to this is that we are having a dissenting view, because this Bill majorly seeks to include two offices, which were omitted but created during the amendment - that is the Office of the Speaker and the Office of the Deputy Speaker. 

So, we have recommended that the retroactive application of the would-be law be limited to only the two offices - the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker - in order to avoid double payment for the offices which are being paid today - and this includes the Lord Mayor and others. So, on that we have a dissenting view.

Clause 2; still on the same page, the Bill sought to substitute the entire provision. And on this, we also have a dissenting view because much of the part of the section 77 is still relevant except in adequate because it does not incorporate the two offices of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. 

Therefore, we propose to amend it rather than substituting the whole section 77. So, we propose to amend to include the two offices so that they are brought on board. However, in that relationship, we recommend that the two offices benefit from the retroactive application of the law. 

Madam Speaker, apart from that, we also received supplementary amendments from KCCA. We consulted with the ministries relevant and have that on page four. One of the major amendments is on page five, which proposes to amend section 6A on the functions of the Council to the authority. 

Madam Speaker, the committee identified a gap in Section 6A of the Kampala Capital City (Amendment) Act. And we observe that the functions of making budget proposals lies with the city executive committee of the council. Therefore, we recommend substituting the word “Executive Director” with the word “city executive committee of the council.” We further recommend that a provision be made to mandate the city executive committee to prepare the annual budget of the authority. 

The second proposed amendment is on the terms of offices of the speakers and the deputy speakers of the division urban councils. Here they were asking about the operations of the division urban councils and requested that we grant them the permission to operate on a full time basis. We conceded to this and we made a recommendation. 

Madam Speaker, another amendment is about convening meetings of the lower urban councils. We established that they are contradicting provisions in the Act, especially sections 45(1) and 29(c).  Section 45(1) states, “The meeting of the division urban council shall be convened and presided over by the mayor…” yet Section 29(c) provides thus: “A speaker shall preside at all meetings of the division urban council.” To us this is so contradicting and therefore, we commence that section 45 of the Act be amended in order to mandate the Speakers to be the ones to convene the council meetings instead of the mayors because we had already made that amendment. 

Madam Speaker on page four - kindly allow me to go back. Under observations, there was a typing error. The first paragraph excludes the two offices. Therefore, we propose to amend that paragraph to exclude the two offices, which we provided for in our recommendation. I beg to submit and thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, honourable member.

MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, kindly allow me lay our reports, the copies of our minutes and other documents that we used in processing this report. Thank you so much. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, hon. Jessica Ababiku, the Chairperson of the Presidential Affairs Committee; she is my former chairperson. I want to thank you so much for the report. I now open the debate on the motion that has been read and seconded. Can we start the debate? 

5.43
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The recommendations of the committee are very clear. And without mincing words or wasting a lot of time, the issue is that the speakers and the deputy speakers are entitled to emoluments for facilitation. It is clear that we should answer to their plight. Without prolonging this debate, I seek for your indulgence that the question be put to the effect that we dispose of the debate.

THE SPEAKER: I put the equation for the Kampala Capital City (Amendment) Bill, 2021 be read for the second time? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

Clause 1 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 1, we propose to substitute the following: “(1) subject to subsection two, this Act shall come into force upon publication in the Gazette and two, the officers referred to in section two shall be deemed to have come into force on the first day of February 2020.” 

The justification to ensure that the active application of the Bill applies only to the remuneration of the speaker and deputy speaker of the division council of the authority and the speaker and deputy speaker of the division urban councils. I beg to submit

MR KABUYE KYOFATOGABYE: Madam Chairperson, I concur.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause one be amended as proposed?
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause one, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee moves that section 77 of the Act of 2010 be amended as follows: 

1(a) 	By inserting, immediately after the words, “Deputy Lord Mayor” the words, “Deputy Speaker.” 

(b) 	By substituting the word “authority” with the word “council.” 

(c) 	By inserting, immediately after the word, “chairperson,” the words “Speaker, Deputy Speaker.” 

The justification is to empower the minister responsible for the capital city in consultation with the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Public Service to determine the remuneration payable to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Council of Kampala Capital City Authority and Speakers and deputy Speakers of the division urban councils. I beg to submit. 

MR KABUYE KYOFATOGABYE: Madam Chairperson and members, I agree. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

New clause

ms ababiku: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We propose an amendment on section 6A of the principal Act. 

Section 6A of the principal Act is amended in paragraph C by substituting for the words, “Executive Director” the words, “City Executive Committee.”

Justification

This is to ensure clarity and consistency in the functions of the city executive committee. I beg to submit. 

Mr kabuye kyofatogabye: Madam Chairperson, this one is not related to the amendment of the remuneration and requires a policy justification. Therefore, I disagree.

Mr mpuuga: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I had frozen my guns to allow for these amendments to be undertaken. However, the minister is arousing my curiosity to the effect that - he is conceding, first of all, to the inadequacy of the existing law meaning that it is framed with a flimsy policy framework. Today, I think it is the third time this Act is being amended, if I am not mistaken, again a concession to the fact that this law either was made in haste or with inadequate consultation.

We can only listen to the minister, if this House would give me an ultimatum to table both a new policy for the Authority and a timeframe to table a plethora of amendments to the Act. Otherwise, he is putting us in a kind of quandary as Parliament to which a Committee has done a very good job but then it makes the whole work flimsy. How do we delineate the previous amends, which is made a concession to this one which he says now needs policy redirection?

The Minister must either concede now or make a concession with unequivocal commitment that he is ready - not next year, not any time, but in this session. Otherwise, acting with flimsiness and changing the law conveniently as and when is not helpful. Madam Chairperson, I need to really be guided because the Minister is making us go 10 kilometres backwards from what we are trying to do.

The Chairperson: First of all, we need to get justification. Why are you disagreeing with the committee recommendation? 

Mr kiryowa kiwanuka: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Leader of the Opposition, you are actually agreeing with the minister. When this Bill came to this House, it came for purposes strictly of dealing with the issue of non-payment of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. All the other amendments were in the legislative agenda. In the process, these new matters came up. Indeed, we agree with you that there are a number of things that need to be changed. 

However, the policy issue that we are dealing with here is the issue of who brings the budget to the House. The budget of KCCA is brought here by the Minister of Kampala Capital City Authority and is approved by this Parliament. Who makes it? Now, it is being made by a person who may not necessarily be part of the people who are bringing it to the House. 

Those are the things - and I agree with you - that we need to think through carefully so that instead of trying to create a short term solution, we may create an impasse in the management of the city. That is why he was opposed to that particular Amendment. The amendment that he did not oppose is on 77 to ensure that the remuneration of those Speakers who have been elected are able to be paid. I beg to submit.

The Chairperson: So, what have you concluded on the new insertion?

Mr kiryowa kiwanuka: Madam Chairperson, our proposal was that we maintain the proposed amendment as it was brought by the Executive. Indeed, the minister should be required to bring a substantive and well thought through policy, an amendment to the KCCA Act to avoid these multiple amendments, which are piecemeal. I beg to submit.

The Chairperson: Does the Minister’s rejection effect all the new amendments in the Bill? There are four others -

Mr mpuuga: As the minister looks at the amendments, my pain is with my old friend and the chairperson of the committee because I am sure the minister appeared before this committee and these amendments were canvassed. I did not see anywhere that the minister disagreed and therefore, it is the position of the committee without the minister.

The minister should make our work easy. Did he appear before the committee or is he just reneging on what he agreed to in the committee so that we can know how to deal with him today and subsequently. (Laughter)

Secondly, I would like to agree with the learned Attorney-General. If there is a migration away from what the committee had proposed, then the commitment must be in time and not in general terms. There is no doubt there is an impasse at the Authority. We are not blind to the clashes and the clashes were deliberately legislated as if we are legislating for short-term gain. 

Madam Chairperson, we need very firm commitment and the minister should commit to whether he has knowledge of these amendments or they are really new to him.

The Chairperson: Honourable Minister, since the two amendments have been reconsidered, why don't we remove the insertions and you bring a comprehensive amendments to the kcca Act in three months? 

Mr kabuye kyofatogabye: Most obliged, Madam Chairperson.

The Chairperson: And this time when you are called to the committee, you must appear because I am told you dodged it. 

Mr kabuye kyofatogabye: Most obliged, Madam Chairperson.

The Chairperson: First, the House needs your apology for not attending the committee and then you can make your commitment.

Mr kabuye kyofatogabye: Madam Chairperson, I only missed one day because I was on official duties but my senior minister was in attendance. However, we shall go with your wise guidance. Let us have more amendments in three months. 

Ms ababiku:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I totally agree with your ruling but I think as Government, we need to do better. All the sectors that support us in processing Bills should be coordinated. I want to inform the House that the supplementary amendments were brought by the same team. That actually delayed us in reporting to this House. We had to go retrospectively to again consult the Ministry of Finance and the Attorney-General. Actually, it was the Ministry of Kampala and Metropolitan Affairs that delayed the committee. 

However, we thank you and this House for having given us more time. Next time, we should do better before even a Bill comes to this House. Government should work in a coordinated manner and ensure that we have thorough work. Thank you so much. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Like the chairperson said, we need to come clean. Let us be clean next time. Let us not take Parliament as a joking place. As we promised, we shall throw you out. Let us work. Let us give time for Parliament. Let us give time for these Bills. Attorney-General, you need to whip your people when it comes to Bills because we are not going to start staying here and you work on a Bill afresh. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I thank the chairperson and the committee.

I think what hinders the African continent from moving forward is the value that we attach to time. Madam Speaker, the minister should put into consideration how much sacrifice you make in sitting for five hours, processing a Bill only to find that we have new discoveries. This disorganises the entire system. Remember, every Bill that is delayed in terms of processing has an impact to the people that are affected by the same Bill. 

Mr Attorney-General, I think your people – because you are the advisor – can do better than this. Everything else can be saved or renewed, but not time. If you assembled all of the money in the world to recover just one second lost, it cannot happen. That is how valuable time is. 

We are here for business, not jokes. We make a lot of sacrifices, sitting here – especially the presiding officer. I think everybody that sits in this House deserves to be treated with honour, respect and dignity. 

Much appreciated, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. 

The Title

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the title stands part of the Bill.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kyofatogabye Kabuye): Madam Chairperson, I move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House does resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.) (Laughter)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: You know, if we did not have people like Hon. Sarah in the House, it would be boring. (Laughter) 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kyofatogabye Kabuye): Madam Speaker, the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City (Amendment) Bill, 2021” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kyofatogabye Kabuye): Madam Speaker, I move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kyofatogabye Kabuye): Madam Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that “The Kampala Capital City (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2022”

THE SPEAKER: Bill passed and title settled. (Applause) Honourable members, I congratulate you upon passing this Bill. This will help in the smooth running of KCCA. 

I would like to congratulate the Committee on Presidential Affairs. Thank you so much, my former chairperson, for the work well done. (Applause) 

I congratulate the Leader of the Opposition and the Shadow Minister for KCCA. I also congratulate the minister and, most importantly the Attorney-General, for guiding the House. Thank you so much. (Applause)

I would like also like to congratulate and thank all the Members of Parliament who have stayed in this House and had this Bill passed. (Applause)

I would also like to thank myself. (Laughter) The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.04 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 August 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 

