
Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.





Tuesday, 13 August 2019

Parliament met at 2.49 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. There are a few matters to communicate: The first one regards Expo 2020, which has been advertised by the Government of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) for the last five years. It will run from 20 October 2020 to April 2021, under the theme “Connecting Minds, Creating the Future”, with this being expressed in the sub-themes of “mobility”, “sustainability” and “opportunity”. Uganda will be exhibiting under the “opportunity” sub-theme. 

Uganda’s participation will offer a unique opportunity at the international stage to engage in cultural diplomacy and interact with the host country, other participants, potential tourists, trade partners and investors. Uganda will have an opportunity to present itself to a large international audience and become part of the global village. 
The UAE has generously constructed stalls for each country. However, the Republic of Uganda has done nothing there – we have failed to brand it. Unfortunately, we are located beside the UAE and the United Kingdom. Theirs are ready and the only empty one is that of Uganda. 

No budget provision was made for this in the budget for Financial Year 2019/2020 or Financial Year 2020/2021. Honourable members, poorer countries already have their stalls branded. 

I would like, on behalf of the people of Uganda, to demand an explanation from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. First, they have not briefed us about this issue and they should also tell us why no money has been provided for the event. This is extremely urgent and we want an answer from the minister by next Tuesday.

The second issue, is the petition I have received from the people of Kaberamaido and Kalaki districts – I think they are up there in the gallery – concerning the BKK Ferry. Those who have been in this House know that the people of the Kyoga Basin have been asking the Government to reinstate the ferry on Lake Kyoga. 

I understand that there are now attempts to shift the dock from a place called Okile in Kobululu subcounty and move it to Ochero subcounty. We do not understand why it has been done or if it has been done but this is the complaint the leaders have brought to me.

I would like the Minister of Works and Transport to explain to us whether it is true that the dock has been moved as well as the progress made. This is a ferry that concerns several districts around that area. I would like the minister to come and report to this House next Wednesday.

The third matter, honourable members, is that we have lost a senior person in the country, Mrs Lawino Luwum, the wife of the Ugandan Martyr, Archbishop Janani Luwum. We have not yet got all the details about her burial but we shall be receiving information about how to handle it.

We have also lost hon. Bwanika Bbaale, a former Member of the National Resistance Council, representing Katikamu County North and he was also in the Constituent Assembly. Bwanika was also a Commissioner for Social Rehabilitation in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as well as Chairman of the Forum for Democratic Change party in Luweero. Vigil will be held at Kalongo Miti Zone in Kasana Town. He will be laid to rest on Thursday, 15 August 2019.

We also had another incident where a bus belonging to YY Coaches overturned at Busei Village along the Iganga-Jinja Highway on Monday, 12 August 2019. It was heading to Mbale. It left two people dead and 42 others injured. 
I request that we rise up for one minute and remember those who have died – the senior citizens as well as those who died in the accident.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

2.56
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, arising from your communication about the Expo 2020 in Dubai, I know you have directed that the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should come and make a statement here but the matters concerning that expo - which is causing embarrassment to Uganda - are financial. Hon. Bahati is here. (Laughter) 

I visited that place on the 5th and because of the arrangement they have given the countries, Uganda is next to the UAE. The UAE have finished with their stall but ours is a skeleton. It is embarrassing that Uganda’s stall is in that state. The ambassador told me that they have not been provided with money. 

Can this be done to help the image of Uganda? I can see the Minister of Trade and Industry and Cooperatives shaking his head because I think he knows the embarrassment he is facing. Can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provide resources to hon. Werikhe and team such that we are able to portray the image of Uganda in positive light? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.58
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My contribution also arises out of your communication and is an addition to what hon. Okupa has stated. This expo is expected to bring together 175 countries and so far 60 countries have confirmed participation. Uganda has also confirmed participation.

It is really shameful to find that a country, which has confirmed participation has, to-date, not yet put up its shelter yet the expo is going to run for six months and all these countries will be showcasing what they have. Uganda intends to showcase what we have and we are among those few countries which have unique features.

It is important that the Government makes sure that we send money so that our pavilion is fully constructed and all the labels and what we have are put in place. If we continue like this, we are likely to lose the pavilion, which will be very bad.

I have read from the communication on what the consulate wants to do with the pavilion after the expo – actually at the end of the day, the pavilion will turn into our consulate and it will be a home for Uganda. You know Uganda exports a lot of agricultural products. It is during the expo that we would showcase what we are ready to export to the Arab countries.

Madam Speaker, I join you in requesting the Government to do due diligence so that we get Uganda on the world map. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the minister.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe Kafabusa): Madam Speaker, it is true we have space in Dubai and we have been working on this space to realise an up-to-date standard for showcasing Uganda’s products.

We are working closely with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, I would like to state that to attain that kind of standard, we need finances. We are working with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to put final touches.

Madam Speaker, we will come back here to keep our colleagues informed on how we are progressing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am not satisfied that you are working closely with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. You should have provided money in the Financial Year 2019/2020, which you did not do. I do not know how close you are. Otherwise, where is the money for the Financial Year 2019/2020?

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, allow me to come back next week to inform the House on how far we have gone and if at all there are any challenges in terms of finances, we will inform the House.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are here trying to help the line ministry to realise its objectives. Indeed, the minister has just told us a while ago, that they only have space, yet, others have already constructed their stalls. 
 
Honourable minister, we are here struggling to help you by asking Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell us whether they have facilitated you or not. Yet, you are here pretending and sweet-talking the minister that you are going back. Honourable minister, are you here for us or you are here to betray the country? 

Since the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here, he should tell us how much he has allocated to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for this particular issue. Otherwise, time is running out. Others have already constructed their stalls yet Uganda has not even done anything apart from the space that you claim to have. Therefore, could you, please, tell us whether you have facilitated the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want anyone to think that Government constructed the stalls. The UAE Government constructed stalls for all the countries. All we need to do is to brand it. It is not you who constructed the stall but Government of UAE. 

3.03	
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for raising this issue in your communication. I would like to also thank colleagues who have raised this issue.

This is not an issue about the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives or the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but it is an issue about Uganda as a country and what we can showcase at that expo.    
 
Madam Speaker, it is an issue of Government and I would like to request that we are given time to work with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to see how much is needed. If the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives does not have the money in their own budget, then we shall have to arrange for a supplementary budget as the rules dictate.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, I should not talk more because I will mention things, which I would not want to say. 	

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, tomorrow, Government shall update the House on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Let us wait for you tomorrow. 

3.05
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, I am rising on a different matter although it is related to your communication, on the BKK Ferry.

As you may be aware, during the design of the route that the Bukungu Ferry would take, it was originally determined that this ferry would go from Bukungu to Muntu, which is found in Amolatar District, which is a peninsular. Later, it was decided that it would go from Bukungu to Okile.

During the submission of Ministry of Works and Transport, the people of Muntu were made to believe that there would be a smaller ferry that would ply the route from Bukungu to Muntu. 

Madam Speaker, now that you have directed that the Ministry of Works and Transport comes here on Wednesday next week, I would like to request that the ministry comes and updates the people of Amolatar about the fate of the smaller ferry that was promised to ply Bukungu to Muntu. Otherwise, BKK Ferry no longer passes via Muntu though it might have to go up to Okile. What I would like to know is: what is our fate, Madam Speaker?

It is, therefore, my humble request that you kindly instruct the Ministry of Works and Transport to come here on Wednesday with the fate of the route from Bukungu to Muntu. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
 


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in addition to explaining the fate of BKK Ferry and Okile Dock, the Ministry of Works and Transport is directed to also come and explain what is going to happen to the route from Muntu to Bukungu. We shall get that information on Wednesday.

Honourable members, we have a lot of guests today. In the public gallery, we have officials from Pader subcounty. They are Mr Charles Kainan, the LC III and Mr Ochola Obol, Agricultural Officer. They are represented by hon. Odonga Otto and hon. Lowila Oketayot. You are welcome.

We also have in the public gallery pupils from Joyce Ssebuliba Memorial Church of Uganda School in Mukono. You are very smart. They are represented by hon. Muyanja Ssenyonga and hon. Peace Kusasira. You are welcome.

We also have a delegation from Kiboga District – I do not know where they are but when they come, let me know. We have also pupils from Nakibanga Church of Uganda Primary School from Mukono, represented by hon. Kusasira and hon. Ssenyonga Muyanja. Thank you very much.
 
We have a delegation from Pallisa District. We have the Speaker of Pallisa District, Mr Odele. We have John Okoboil, the Deputy Speaker and Mr Martin Okello who is the Clerk to the Council of Pallisa. Now, which part of Pallisa is this? Anyway, they are represented by the Members of Parliament from Pallisa. (Applause)
	
We also have another delegation from Kabalaki and Kaberamaido, represented by hon. Veronika Eragu, hon. Ongalo and hon. Maria Goretti Ajilo. They have come on the issue of the BKK Ferry. Thank you very much. I will introduce the delegation from Kiboga once I have their names with me. Let us go to item three.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

3.10
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Permit me to raise a matter of national importance on the increased felling of trees in Gomba West constituency and Gomba District as a whole.

Last week, during a three-hour meeting in the constituency, three lorry fulls of charcoal passed by - the depletion rate is high and the negative effects of this deforestation include amongst others, global warming because there is absence of trees to absorb carbon-dioxide, which leaves the gas to destroy the ozone layer and so, we have direct rays of sunlight and overheating.

There is also loss of animal habitats. So, there is a fall in eco-tourism and so, Government loses revenue. There is soil erosion. As a result, we face agents like wind and drought because of the extensive soil erosion. There is famine, poor yields and poor soils, mass wasting like rock falls, landslides due to lack of roots to hold soil particles together, poor social welfare because we lack medicinal trees and reduced rainfall formation because of evaporation of water from the leaves.

My prayer is for the Ministry of Water and Environment to urgently intervene to stop the cutting down of these precious trees and provide an alternative to charcoal for the populace.

Secondly, for the Ministry of Water and Environment to sensitise the population on the negative effects of de-forestation and thirdly, district councils and local governments to be stopped from collecting local revenue from charcoal business. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Water and Environment, when can you give us a programme of when we shall reforest this country? There is so much tree cutting. Can the minister come and explain the issue about tree cutting in Gomba but also give us a national programme of tree planting, if there is any? 

3.12
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of urgent national importance pertaining to the on-going strike by academic staff in public universities. 

As you may be aware, students reported about 10 days ago to start their first semester of this academic year. Some reported about three days ago and lecturers should have started but in all public universities, academic staff have gone on strike.

This has a serious effect, first on the cost of maintaining a student who is not learning. Some of these students are from poor families that sell off even land to go and study but now, they report and cannot study yet they have to spend money to continue surviving and living in Kampala when they are not studying.

It also has an effect on the academic trends of universities in this country. As I speak, Makerere University, which used to be the fifth best university on the African continent has dropped in ranking, from 5th to 16th position. We no longer rank anywhere in the shining universities of this continent. 

The continued trend that Government is failing to address the situation in these public universities is worrying and for that reason, I am rising to ask Government to inform the country what is being done to address the issues that are affecting public universities, particularly about failure to implement salary increment, which was pledged by Government to the teaching staff of the universities. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Education and Sports should explain to the country. 

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that the academic and non-academic staff of public universities have threatened to lay down their tools.

This afternoon, there is a very important meeting taking place in State House trying to devise ways and means of addressing this issue. I am sure very useful results will come out of this meeting and as soon as the meeting is done, the country will be informed on what is going to happen.

THE SPEAKER: When will you be ready?

DR MUYINGO: Immediately the meeting is concluded, Madam Speaker, I will be ready.

THE SPEAKER: So, if it is concluded today, you can update us tomorrow? Okay, the Minister of State for Higher Education will update us on the issue of salary increase for the public university staff.

3.15
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning Universal Secondary Education in community and private schools.

As you are aware, Government of Uganda has been partnering with private schools, including community-founded schools since the inception of the USE programme in Uganda. This was done to increase access to affordable secondary education to students who attained grades 28 and below in PLE to join O’ Level and 52 at O’ level to enrol for A’ level.

This enabled many schools, especially in the rural areas to enter into an agreement to partner with Government to implement this policy throughout the country.

However, this was a temporary measure as Government looked for funds to grant aid to existing schools. Every student would be supported with at least Shs 45,000 at start, making those schools subsidise them and started receiving grants since 2006.

It is from this idea that many beneficiaries have accessed quality education in rural areas. However, in 2016, Government changed this policy of channelling money through private schools on the premise that every sub county would have a Government-aided school and thus would absorb those who would not afford private schools.

They started a phase-out programme on reducing funds by class and today, all funds have been cut-off completely, meaning no money is sent for the USE programme in private or community schools.

It is very unfortunate that the Government has withdrawn this funding in these schools yet the ground that formed it to go into a public partnership still holds.

It is the NRM Government’s agenda to ensure that every child accesses primary and secondary education. Children are going to be denied education -

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: I pray that the Government prioritises education in order to achieve Vision 2040. Also, Government should tell us how fast this Government-aided school policy will be implemented in all sub-counties.

Further, Government should give us an alternative programme to educate these people before we face a crisis in the coming term as schools will raise the fees in order to cover up. This will bring very many problems. If not they can also reconsider the policy. Thank you, very much.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Education and Sports come and update us whether he has plans to give and alternative after withdrawing from the USE programmes in the country so that Ugandans will know how they are going to study? Please, come back to us. You are ready. Yes, minister, proceed.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, it is true that there has been a change of policy and we have been withdrawing in a phased manner and have now completed.

We are trying to put up a secondary school in every subcounty that does not have one. This financial year, we will be building 117 secondary schools. Once that phase is done, we will be able to cover all the rest.

We have divided our work into two phases. Phase I is what is being implemented this financial year and phase II will be coming in soon. That means that all our children will be able to access public schools. I submit.

3.20
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance concerning the roads that connect from Sironko and Bulambuli to Nakapiripirit and Moroto. The road has been cut off. One of the bridges was washed away and as we speak now, there is no access to my district from the Mbale side. This means that all the vehicles or even the people who are coming from the other part of Karamoja have to go through Soroti District.

In July, when the President came to Nakapiripirit District for his Operation Wealth Creation programme, another bridge was also washed away by floods. So, these two bridges have caused a very big issue. There is no communication between this other part of the country and our district and the southern part of Karamoja. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Will the Minister of Works and Transport come and explain to the country the plan she has to repair or reinstate the bridges between Sironko and Moroto; Sironko-Muyembe-Nakapiripirit? The minister should come and report to us on Thursday next week.

3.21
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise here to plead for over 2,000 children, whose education has been interrupted because a storm destroyed their school block. Despite communication to the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Office of the Prime Minister for disaster response, we have not heard any response from the Office of the Prime Minister.

I am here to ask what criteria is exactly used to respond to disasters in this country. Over 2,000 pupils continue to be scattered and they cannot study because Government cannot provide an enabling environment for them to study. Can the Office of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Education and Sports tell us why they have failed to intervene at Atrakatraka Primary School to enable the children study after the storm? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Education and Sports still here?

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I feel very sorry for our children who are affected. I have just got the information right now and I would like to ask my honourable colleague to get in touch with me so that the needful is done as soon as possible.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Mulindwa?

3.23
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise on a matter of national importance. One of the major reasons the Higher Education Student Financing Board was established in 2014 was to support highly qualified Ugandan students who may not afford higher education and to develop and support courses critical to national development in public institutions.

The Uganda National Examinations Board Act and the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, as amended, particularly section 28, clearly stipulates that results from UNEB must be released by the end of February every following year, to enable students apply to higher institutions.

The Higher Institutions Student Financing Board stops receiving applications by July 15th of every year. However, you find that by this date, many qualifying students are still waiting for admissions yet studies normally commence by July to mid-August, which period is too short for the Board to conclude the national shortlist for bright but needy students.

Some of the students end up having their admissions cancelled for failure to pay and report on time. All the institutions like Uganda Institute of Allied Health and Management Sciences, Mulago ask the students to deposit at least Shs 500,000 as commitment fee, which money is not affordable to most of the needy students.

Madam Speaker, my prayer in this matter is that you direct the Minister of Education and Sports to come up with alternative measures to address this. In addition to this, the students have to apply to multiple institutions to increase their chances of admission. 

For example, one has to apply to Makerere University, Kyambogo University, Makerere University Business School, Mbarara University of Science and Technology, Gulu, et cetera and each application goes for about Shs 50,000. On top of this, they pay Shs 50,000 at Centenary Bank for these application forms. So, in essence, we are cheating the students indirectly.

My prayer is that the Minister of Education and Sports comes up with a central admissions board, like it is done in Tanzania, where they apply to one central admissions board and then they direct the students to those various institutions, other than applying to each university separately.

On another note, when I was doing –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: If you have understood that the dates are not convenient, do you have a proposal in your mind about how to solve this issue? Minister of Education -

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Madam Speaker, I have listened and appreciated the concerns of the honourable member. We have also noted that the delay to have our children admitted to public universities is also affecting their admissions, not only in universities here but even outside. 

The ministry is trying to find a solution. I have taken note of the other two issues he raised. When I go back, I will try to share with my colleagues and get back to you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I wish you could really be brief. When you make submissions, I lose track also. Hon. Kafuuzi, two minutes.

3.27
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern regarding the lack or absence of essential drugs in our hospitals.

On Sunday morning, my elder brother, Rwakafuuzi suffered a stroke. He had been battling pressure. We rushed him to Nsambya Hospital emergency ward. They prescribed for us a drug that is used to dissolve blood clots. We went to Mulago, Nsambya, Rubaga, IHK, Nakasero and every hospital in this country; it was not there. 

It was also not even in pharmacies that we went to. They told us to go to First Pharmacy in Wandegeya. First Pharmacy Wandegeya is operated by Somalis who are Muslims and so it was closed. This drug was supposed to be administered within three and a half hours. They opened the pharmacy at 10 o’clock. A dose of 5 cc costs Shs 3.5 million.

About two or three years ago, my colleague died during childbirth at one of the most prominent hospitals in Kampala because the hospital did not have medicine to stop bleeding. I do not know what they call that particular medicine.

My major issue is how many Ugandans can afford these drugs and why are there no essential drugs in these hospitals? For us who represent rural constituencies, time and again, our constituents tell us that the one thing they are guaranteed of when they go to health centres II and health centres III is Panadol. 
The whole of last year, we were –

THE SPEAKER: What is the name of the drug, honourable member?

MR KAFUUZI: It is complicated. I would have to find out. It is to dissolve clots.

THE SPEAKER: Your neighbour is complaining about the acute absence of a drug which he cannot explain –

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for raising the issue about the drug that stops clotting in the body, which is called anticoagulant. There are various types of those drugs but I have not got the specific drug he has talked about.

What I would like to say is that among the national treatment guideline drugs we have, we do have the drugs. They are in different levels. Give me time and I do more research on the case he has put before Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kafuuzi, give details to Dr Moriku so that she can respond to you. 

3.31
MR PAUL AKAMBA (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance pertaining abuse of office by the Minister of Internal Affairs, Gen. Jeje Odongo, arising from his selfish interest when on Saturday, he ordered the arrest of a Turkish national who is running a charitable organisation that operates in most of the districts in Eastern Uganda including Busiki County.

This charitable organisation is called Humanitarian Brotherhood Limited, which renders services including scholastic materials, distribution of food stuff to the disadvantaged, construction of schools and mosques, drilling of boreholes but also slaughtering of animals. 

Just this previous Eid, this organisation had prepared over 2,000 goats and 700 cows to be slaughtered and –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Speak quickly and go to your issue. 

MR AKAMBA: So, the minister ordered that the general manager of this charitable organisation be arrested and deported to Turkey under unclear circumstances. This is a person who was issued with a Ugandan passport. He is married to a Mugisu lady from Mbale but because the minister is a shareholder of a one Niver Investment Group Limited which is in the same business with this organisation, he has ordered that this person be deported.

Madam Speaker, I would like to know the circumstances under which this national is being hunted to the extent of him failing to render the charitable services to our people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What is the name of that person?

MR AKAMBA: The name of the person is Damon Aziz and the organisation is Humanitarian Brotherhood Limited. -(Interjections)- for any organisation, you have to register it as a charitable –(Interjections) Once you register a company limited by guarantee, it renders charitable services. The minister is a shareholder in Niver Investment Limited where he has four shares. It is the sole reason he is persecuting this young man. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we ask the Minister of Internal Affairs, Gen. Jeje Odongo to come and explain the circumstances surrounding the issues concerning Mr Damon Aziz and his charitable organisation. Please, come and report to us by Thursday next week. 

3.35
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi County North, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the lack of water in my constituency specifically in the subcounties of Kitanda, Bigasa and the newly created subcounty of Bukango in Bukomansimbi County North. 

I have talked about this issue before on the Floor of Parliament and no action has been taken so far. Madam Speaker, I pray that the Ministry of Water and Environment comes and tells us about the plans they have for my constituency, specifically for those three subcounties. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, some two years ago, I went to Bukomansimbi and when I came back, I reported this same matter to the House. I asked the Minister of Water and Environment to support the people of Bukomansimbi in these subcounties. Apparently, nothing has been done. Can we have an answer from the Minister of Water and Environment next Tuesday? This is an old issue. 

Have you done something in Bigasa subcounty on water? 

3.36
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Madam Speaker, I am not the Minister of Water and Environment but on provision of water especially for agricultural production, since she did not specify which water, we have done some work and the Member of Parliament is aware. We worked with her. 

We have constructed several valley tanks and we requested her to provide the gaps where she needs the rest of the water to be constructed. We are ready to handle her case.

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying the people should go to the valley tanks to collect water for animals?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Water for human consumption. Since she did not specify which water, they will get it from the Ministry of Water and Environment. For agricultural purpose, however, we are working very well with her.

THE SPEAKER: We thank the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for providing water for production but the matter, which has been on the Floor of this House is water for human consumption. So, the minister should come and explain next Tuesday because this is an old matter.

3.38
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to raise an urgent issue concerning Gulu. As an upcoming city next year, Gulu is experiencing a lot of challenges in road construction. In one of the divisions called Bar-Dege, yesterday, the residents closed the roads. This is simply because the way the road is being done is very bad. I request the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development who is here – they are the ones implementing this project called USMID –proceed to Gulu and see the challenges of this division and why they cannot allow the roads be done in the entire division.

Secondly, the UNRA road from St Joseph’s College Layibi to Customs Corner and back to Gulu town was narrowed during the implementation and yet, the design of the road was as wide as possible. Right now, it is very difficult for two trailers, coming from different directions, to bypass each other. It is very risky and many people have lost lives. 

I request the Ministry of Works and Transport to ensure we have an audit on how or why this road was narrowed yet, compensation was done to everybody on its road side. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Which road is this?

MR KOMAKECH: That is Layibi College-Custom Corner to Gulu town.

THE SPEAKER: I saw the Minister of Works and Transport around.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all thank hon. Kamakech from the region to have brought this matter to us. However, this is the first time we are getting to know about it. We need to take note that there are many agencies of Government that are doing roads. In Gulu, the roads that are being done are under a project known as Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID), which is under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

Therefore, we do not know because there are those that are being done by different agencies of Government and supported by different development partners. Otherwise, most of the roads in Gulu are under USMID. We shall collaborate with the information and find out which particular road that is under scrutiny and which people or Government agency did it. We will follow it up to correct the problem. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, even if it is USMID, there are standards for roads.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, that is why I said that we are going to work as Government and find out which particular agency of Government was responsible for that job. Secondly, we shall establish which contractor did the job, at which standards and road design were agreed upon before we see how to correct the problem.

THE SPEAKER: Was the road commissioned?

MR KOMAKECH: The road from Layibi College to Atyak was commissioned. The one from Custom Corner going straight to Gulu District main office was part of it and it is a highway under Uganda National Roads Authority. However, there is one which is from Gulu Post Office to the barracks and the other side of the airfield, which is under USMID. So, there are two components that have problems.

THE SPEAKER: Did you cause the President to commission the defective road? 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have taken note. Let us follow up and find the real area that has a defect and we shall come back here to explain. Also we are going to correct in case there is a problem.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, report back on Thursday next week.

3.43
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to an issue that has already been discussed in this House. It is the issue of Malaria upsurge. 

When I was in Kitgum District, we noticed the escalation of Malaria prevalence, which is high. For us to appreciate the level of this emergency, I would like to give the statistics, which are from the data bank of Kitgum Hospital.

Between April to July, we have had in the outpatient department, 2,393 patients treated with malaria. Out of these, 1401 were admitted. This gives us a total figure of 3,794 victims between April and July. On top of that, we have had malaria-death cases of 21 people. In terms of the blood transfusion, we have had 137 cases.

When you look at these statistics, they are very worrying. While we have been able to discuss this in Parliament as Members have been raising it, we have not seen - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Ministry of Health and honourable members, this is the third complaint from Northern Uganda concerning Malaria. The first was from Nwoya and another came in from Amuru and Pader. Now, another is from Kitgum. I do not know. Is there an epidemic of Malaria in the north?

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, it is true that there is an outbreak of Malaria especially in the northern part of this country; West Nile, Karamoja and some parts of eastern Uganda. However, the ministry is coming up with a comprehensive package to tell the country whether this Malaria outbreak is an epidemic or as he has put it.

Therefore, allow us time and we come up with a statement on this issue of Malaria because there are many factors that have contributed to that. These factors range from prevention to treatment. 

I request kindly that we come back and make a comprehensive statement to inform Ugandans and the Members of Parliament on this specific issue and the way forward as we plan what we are doing right now. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is important because this will continue coming up and each time we shall have to ask to - so, make a statement about the malaria epidemic across the country; the high and low incidences so that we know and advise the Members on what you are going to do.

DR MORIKU: Yes, Madam Speaker. This morning, we discussed it at the ministry. The technical people are working on the outbreak in terms of the prevalence in the different regions. We are looking at what the root cause could be so that we come up with a comprehensive statement including the immediate way forward, in terms of what is being done in the field right now.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you wait for the statement so that we can discuss it because different areas have different -

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, people, including children are dying. Just yesterday, we lost 18 people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, hon. Lilly Adong reported the many children that had died in Nwoya. The member for Amuru also reported similar issues. Why don’t we have a statement and we discuss so that we cover the whole country? If each Member comes, then the minister has to bring the statement quickly. Are you ready next week so that we study the whole country and then, give proposals? Are you ready next week?

DR MORIKU: Since it is an emergency, let me bring the statement tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The minister will bring the statement tomorrow. Thank you.

3.48
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding kidnaps and detention of people in unknown places by the security organs in this country.

In Mukono Municipality, two people, one called Stephen Oyimba and Ronald Mugarura both businessmen dealing in spare parts in Mukono Municipality were kidnapped from their places of work. Since then, their whereabouts are not known.

It is believed that these two were taken by the security organs of this country. The relatives have checked at all police stations and other offices concerned with security but they have not been able to see their relatives.

We are not opposed to the arrests of citizens who are suspected to have committed any offence but the people doing this outside the confines of the law by kidnapping and detaining people in safe houses.

My prayer is that the Minister of Internal Affairs tells us where these two men are, the offence they committed and also make sure that they are taken to courts of law. Their relatives and lawyers should also be granted access to them.

Secondly, I beg for your indulgence –

The Speaker: Present only one issue. Honourable minister, the people who are said to be incarcerated have been named.
 

3.50
The Minister of state for Internal Affairs (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The security forces do not abduct but they arrest people. Maybe, the method of arrest might be bad. 

Secondly, the Member has partly answered this question. She says that they are not in any of our gazetted places. We, therefore, request that you take that report to a police station. We shall take the matter up and look for where these people are.  Thank you.

3.51
Mr Elijah okupa (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The last two weeks have not been easy for the people of Serere District, especially in Kasilo County. 

There are wild animals that are suspected to have escaped from Kidepo National Park and have been killing animals at night, even in my home. You wake up in the morning only to find four or five animals dead. So far, they are over 80 animals; goats, sheep and pigs.

We appealed to Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) and they sent only two people who drive around during the day while the animals attack at night.

We would like to appeal to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to beef up the number of UWA staff in this area. In just two weeks, over 80 animals are dead. 

The Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs should also help us. The animals are suspected to be either leopards or hyenas. 

We have tried to ask for help already. Hon. Adoa has written to the minister but we are also trying to mobilise the local hunters and offering a prize to those who may help in identifying the wild animals because the UWA staff have failed.

I would like to also appeal to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to increase the staff in charge of wildlife to help rescue us by possibly capturing or killing the wild animals that have devastated the animals of the people of Serere District.

THE Speaker: The Minister for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should address the issue of the animals, which are straying in Serere and destroying the livestock of the population and report back to us next Thursday.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (MS Florence Nakiwala): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill titled, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the first time.

The Speaker: Is it seconded? -(Members rose_)  It is seconded. Can you lay the certificates?

MS NAKIWALA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Bill titled, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019.” 

I also beg to lay on Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019 dated 01 August 2019.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DEVISE LONG-TERM MEANS OF STOPPING THE RAMPANT MURDERS AND ROBBERIES SUFFERED BY BODA BODA RIDERS

3.55
Mr David Abala (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to move this motion. 

The motion is moved under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS the motorcycle (boda boda) business offers one of the most commonly used means of transport to Ugandans and foreigners alike has undoubtedly contributed to the economic and social wellbeing of operators mainly through creation of jobs and hence offering a significant source of livelihood to many youths and thousands of families across the country;

CONCERNED that there has been a noticeable but distressing rise in incidents of murders of boda boda riders coupled with theft of the boda bodas across the country with a more recent incident having been captured by a CCTV camera at Kakeeka Zone in Rubaga Division, Kampala District, which happened recently on 29th June, 2019 –“ -  Madam Speaker, this motion was prepared last month. This means that there are many incidents that have taken place since. The most recent one took place in Bukedea last week.
 
“FURTHER CONCERNED that the deceased leave behind families that have to struggle to survive and some victims of such incidents are left disabled and unable to earn a living because offering transport services is the only job they are accustomed to;
CONVINCED that the murderers and robbers either sell the boda bodas as a whole or in spare parts to persons that deal in the business of buying and selling motorcycle spare parts and yet, this business is not regulated;

ACKNOWLEDGING that the police have on several occasions communicated to Ugandans that they are investigating the matter in order to restore security; However, the murders and robberies continue to increase to at least five boda boda riders being attacked by robbers posing as potential clients on a daily basis; 

CONSIDERING that a forensic investigation by the police and respective security agencies into the rampant murders and robberies suffered by boda boda riders across the country and the regulation of business in motorcycle buying and selling inclusive of motorcycle spare parts will not only serve to bring the perpetrators to book but also curb further crime and also restore citizenry confidence and trust in the Government; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that: 
    1. Government regulates the business of buying and selling motorcycles, boda bodas and the related spare parts and develops a monitoring system, where all those involved in the business of buying and selling boda bodas and spare parts must declare the source of their business stock on a regular basis. 
    2. Government strengthens the capacity of police and other responsible security agencies to enable them to effectively curb the high crime rate in the country. 
    3. Government imposes heavier penalties for crimes related to boda boda safety and murders suffered by the boda boda riders.” 
I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_)It is seconded by several members. What is the justification? 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to say that this motion is straight forward. Let us do some simple mathematics; if five boda boda men are killed in Kampala City, multiply that by 365 days and the number comes to 1,825 people killed in the city. If these people are married, it means that we shall have 1,825 widows. (Laughter) If each of these people are married and had two children, then, we shall have 3,650 orphans. This tells us that serious action must be taken on the people who have the “appetite” to destroy and kill our relatives; brothers, sisters, cousins and the citizens of Uganda, who are boda boda riders. 

Madam Speaker, remember that all of us here are beneficiaries of boda boda riders. I sometimes ride them because at one time, I was a boda boda rider. I must declare my interests. I used to ride boda bodas. 

Madam Speaker, it is important for us to protect these boda boda people and their security must be guaranteed, just like yours, as a Speaker is guaranteed. We should not relax. Their security must be taken seriously so that they are free to do their business wherever they go. 

Life is short and sweet but it is also a right. We must protect the rights of those boda boda men when they are going about their business because the beneficiary of their business is actually Government; they pay insurance and taxes. They are able to pay fees for their children and the final beneficiary is actually Government. 

That is why I am moving a motion that this House – let me just read one verse from the Bible. Even God does not want us to commit murder. Matthew 7:12 reads, “So whatever you wish others to do to you, do also for them -” This message was basically from Jesus who came from heaven. He is now telling us, as a Parliament, that whatever we want to be done to us, we must also do to other Ugandans, especially the boda boda people. They need to be protected and they need security. The same way we are touched and we begin to complain, even those people are complaining. 
By the way, this afternoon, I met one boda boda man here along Kampala Road around Uganda House called Ssenyonjo, who was hit last year and he lost his motorcycle; he had a scar. That is why I move this motion with confidence that we must not relax but we must urge Government to make sure that the security of boda boda men is guaranteed. I beg to move. Thank you very much. (Applause)

4.05
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to second the motion to find ways of curbing down the rampant murders and protect the boda boda men.

It is true that I come from an area where the population of boda boda riders is very high. Madam Speaker, I would like to report to you that just one week ago, seven boda boda riders from Makindye West were killed while riding their boda bodas. That is where I get the guts to second the motion. They include Musa Okello from Kibuye, David Ssembuusi from Katwe Kinyoro, Omar Muliisa from Kosovo Salaama and Ntale from Kelezia Zone in Makindye. They are seven of them and their motor bikes were taken. 

As we find ways of protecting these people, the police should also take this matter seriously. When you visit Katwe Police Station, you will notice that there are over 500 boda bodas parked in the parking yard without known owners. When you ask the Katwe Regional Police Commander, he will just tell you that they were confiscated by police under uncertain circumstances. 

Therefore, most people, who were involved in boda boda riding and know what boda bodas were doing for them, they have to find a way of getting a new motorcycle because the one he was riding was taken by police and it was never returned. These are some of the activities that police does and in the end, cause incidents of robbery and theft of motorcycles. 

In the motion today, there is a statement that those who deal in spare parts related to boda bodas in Uganda are the ones behind the rampant murders. However, this is not true because we have people in our areas that deal in genuine spare parts and they have been doing this business for over 30 years. Nevertheless, such activities of murder have just happened in the last two to three years. That is when they have been so rampant.

I think the police should also put it into consideration that not all businessmen who sell motorcycle spare parts participate in such murders.

Madam Speaker, the reason I would like to further second this motion is that the loss of lives in our areas is too much. We think the police can get better ways of handling this issue and the Government should get more serious on this issue. Sometime back, I heard the President telling the public that whoever sees a boda boda riding behind them, they should sort themselves. Ever since the President made that statement, there have been more cases of murder of boda boda riders. Therefore, we should be cautious of what we say – (Interruption)   

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to the senior Member who is seconding the motion, is it in order for hon. Ssewanyana, who has seen – after the President guided as the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces, a freedom fighter and Chairman of the NRM party, which I belong to - boda boda   riders being arrested using footage from the CCTV cameras. I know that he was among those that objected to the idea of CCTV cameras yet they are now capturing thieves. Therefore, is he in order to insinuate that the President ordered people to kill the boda boda riders? 

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. 

MR SSEWANYANA: I call upon the whole House to support this motion because of the reasons that I have given. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.11
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion moved by hon. Abala. The boda boda business needs to be supported because it is one of the avenues and activities that occupy most of our youth; it earns them income. 

Madam Speaker, in the districts that border Uganda - let me speak for Busia where I come from - you will realise that the boda boda business is not taken serious and many boda boda riders are not protected. The motorcycles that the boda boda riders use, commonly known as Bajaj, are very expensive in Uganda, especially in Kampala. In Kampala, a Bajaj costs about Shs 4.5 million yet in Kenya, it costs between Shs 3.3 million and 3.4 million. 

Therefore, most of the youth engaged in this activity try to buy boda-bodas from Kenya because they are cheap. However, the Government has not done any good for these people. Most of their motorcycles have been confiscated by the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). Those who register them in Kenya and use Kenyan number plates - we say that we are in the East African Community where people should freely use goods both from Uganda and Kenya. However, when you go to Busia Police Station, you will find very many motorcycles with Kenyan number plates confiscated from the boda boda riders.

Madam Speaker, while I stand to second this motion, Government needs to be considerate to the boda boda businessmen. If we cannot have the prices of those motorcycles lowered here, why don’t we allow our people to freely buy them from Kenya where the prices are low and allow them to use them freely, just like Kenyan registered cars move freely on the Ugandan roads?

I would like to request this House to support this motion that the Government protects boda boda riders and allows those who can cross to Kenya and buy Kenyan registered motorcycles with Kenyan number plates to trade freely because they are not criminals; these are registered motorcycles and we are in the East African Community and such number plates can be traced.

There is so much death resulting from insecurity of boda boda riders all over the country. It is not only in Kampala like the mover of the motion alluded; it is everywhere in the country. Towards the end of last month, we lost two prominent leaders in Busia as result of lack of security for boda boda riders. These were not boda boda riders but clients who were using boda-bodas. There is need for this House to implore the Government to provide protection and security for boda boda riders.

Lastly, His Excellency, the President, provided one of the strategies of protecting both Ugandans who use boda-bodas and cars because it has always been sounded that criminals use boda-bodas to kill innocent Ugandans. The President said there is need to come up with digitalised number plates whereby if a number plate is tampered with, there will be a notification to URA or something of that kind. However, to date, this has not been effected. This is one of the things that would create confidence in the boda boda business and encourage our youth to do that business. 

It is against this background that I urge the House to support this motion.          

4.17
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and also to commend you for allowing this debate to take place. I remember you are the one who said that it must be debated here. 

Some of us have lost very many people in boda boda thefts. As members of Parliament, we have been called that so and so has been killed in this area and it is upcountry where people are devastated. This is a bipartisan matter and I hope in our debate, we shall not allow politicising it. Our people that are being killed are not first asked which political side they belong to; thieves are thieves –(Interruption)- Madam Speaker, kindly protect me from hon. Wadri.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, order! Allow hon. Tayebwa to speak.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, the problem with boda-bodas is that if you do not provide them security, they will attempt to provide security for themselves. You know the repercussions of that. You have seen cases of mob justice. We have ended up losing innocent lives in some of these cases because as long as they suspect someone - because they know that we do not have mechanisms put in place to protect them - they will try to instill fear in everyone that in case you touch a boda boda rider, you are killed. They do that by killing people. We need to move quickly and put in place these mechanisms. 

The mover of the motion has raised an important issue of registering dealers in boda boda spare parts. In the video that went viral, the suspect who was caught confessed and said that he was paid only Shs 100,000 for the boda boda he sold. Imagine such a risk for just Shs 100,000. What hurt me the most is that the man said he is called “Mukiga”; Bakiga do not behave that way. (Laughter) I was really hurt. 

I think each boda boda should carry only one passenger especially at night as part of the regulations. 

We also have drunk motorcyclists. We should also have guidelines for people who ride boda-bodas at night. We should encourage them to join the likes of SafeBoda, Taxify, Uber Boda and others because those entities register passengers. 

Finally, although I support the boda-bodas, they too have a bad side. Recently, most of them have installed very bright LED lights. When they flash at you at night, you can lose control of your vehicle. It is just a small motorcycle but when you see the floodlight before you, it gets scary. (Laughter)

Government needs to come in and find a way of addressing this issue. Recently, I nearly knocked someone after being flashed. They have normal lights but as they get closer to a motorist, they flash their floodlight and you are startled. I think this needs to be addressed.  

Having said that, this is a very serious industry. Honourable members, we should support this motion. It supports many of our youths and they are dying. I hope each one of us here will encourage Government to work on this motion.

4.22
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise to support the motion with a lot of pain in my heart; this is very painful. The mover of the motion talked about a case that was seen after we installed the CCTV cameras. I would like to assure you that a lot is happening where there is no CCTV coverage.

I would like to give you a few cases in Luweero. Just last month, we lost a young man in my home village in Bukalasa. This man had been hit and the motorcycle was taken. As he tried to get help, the villagers lynched him because they suspected him of being a thief. There is a lot of pain out there. He was from Lusenke, Katikamu and he was buried in Butambala. 

Yesterday, at 2.00 p.m. we buried another boy in Nongo Village, Musale Parish of Katikamu Sub-county. He was 21 years old, called Julius Nakabale. He was hit the other Friday. He was riding a boda boda from the Tugende Programme. This is a company that provides boda bodas on loan schemes. I have reason to suspect –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MS NAKATE: We should also investigate the dealers because these people keep tracking the boda bodas they have sold to the young men. They follow up the boda bodas. It is important to note that when the engine is off, the GPS cannot work. They have standby vehicles waiting. Once the engine is switched off, the motorcycle is loaded onto a waiting vehicle and taken to a garage and dismantled. How are we going to track this down? I think we need a robust way of tracking boda bodas in this country so that we can restore sanity.

I call for regulation of the dealers in spare parts. I also call for an effective tracking – (Member timed out.)

4.25
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion for highlighting the plight of boda boda riders in this country. I have personally been riding a motorcycle for over 15 years. Therefore, I am part of the boda boda riders in this country.

I would like to highlight some issues affecting the boda boda riders in this country especially in my district of Kamwenge. 

    1. We need to ask the Government to reduce on the tax charged on the boda boda sellers. Someone said that we need to allow number plates from Kenya and other neighbouring countries; I do not support that because we need taxes to build our country. We, however, need to reduce the taxes charged on motorcycles so that the little that we collect from these boda bodas can develop our country - but not to allow foreign number plates because they are charging low taxes across our border.

    2. We have the problem of boda boda riders being killed day and night so we need to regulate. His Excellency, the President promised to have scanners to register the boda boda riders and then we would have security because whenever that boda boda is touched, the finger prints can be detected. It is better we do that. It is very unfortunate that the boda bodas are increasing in the whole country but they are not registered. No one knows the number of boda bodas per district, for instance. 

As I conclude, I would like to ask the police; we have problems where when the boda boda riders nab red-handed someone suspected of killing the boda boda riders and he is handed over to the police, the suspects are released on bond and they go back to the community. They cause a problem for the boda boda riders, forcing them to take the law into their own hands and they kill the suspects. This is because when these suspects are taken to the police, they are not apprehended. 

I, therefore, support the motion that we need to regulate and we have to provide security for our boda bodas because this business has helped so many Ugandans to get jobs. They are doing a good job, where vehicles cannot reach – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Keefa, I would like to ask the Minister for East African Affairs, the Minister of Works and Transport and the Minister of Internal Affairs to be ready to answer many of these policy issues. A number of things are being raised and we need answers.

4.28
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I say this with a lot of confidence on behalf of the people of Kiboga. I am sure the Minister of Internal Affairs will agree with me that we have had two serious riots in Kiboga as a result of the complaints against the police.

We have had 13 boda boda riders killed in Kiboga and their motorcycles taken away over the last two years. We have also had several others fatally injured and their motorcycles robbed. 

In all incidents – and the cause of the riots that we have had in Kiboga where the road from Kampala to Hoima has been cut off a few times – the complaint has been that at the time when the boda boda riders are being killed or attacked, when they call the police for help, police always find an excuse not to turn up. Sometimes the police have complained that they do not have fuel and at times they have complained that they do not have tyres for their motorcycles.

However, whenever the boda boda riders arrest the suspected killers, the police have been quick to respond. As a result, the boda boda riders have said it is now time for them to act and defend themselves – taking the law into their hands. 

I think the starting point, honourable minister, is – (Member timed out.)

4.30
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Madam Speaker, I am here to register my support for this Bill and the motion. I would like to tell this country and colleagues that as representatives of upcountry areas, we know the importance of boda boda riders. If they were not there, pregnant women would not reach hospitals, the sick would not go to hospitals and the local people would not transport anything to the markets. 

Therefore, if anything frustrates the boda boda business, it would definitely have frustrated the people’s livelihoods. You will recall that I went on record last year when we were dealing with amendments into the tax laws and discouraged anything that would frustrate people from accessing boda bodas. 

We are aware that this is a business for the poor. Actually, any young person starting a business finds it easy to get a motorcycle and the majority of them get the motorcycles on loan. Madam Speaker, the Government needs to look into this matter and make it affordable for one to get a boda boda - and we can still get more money if we have more people in the business. 

However, I request that we look at developing this industry and what we need to look at should include training. It should not be that anybody who has learnt how to ride from anywhere should go and join the business. There should be key training, using the grouping. We should help these people to be grouped into SACCOs and every one should belong to a certain arrangement so that we can easily train them, license them and regulate their code of conduct –(Member timed out.)

4.32
MR JOHN TWESIGYE (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice in supporting the motion. I would like to bring to the attention of Members that for most of us who come from rural constituencies – as my colleague has stated – boda boda transport is the most common means we use. In my constituency of Bunyaruguru County, where there are very many hills and valleys, we have to use boda bodas to reach our people. Therefore, I appeal to Government to strengthen the capacity of the police to help us ensure that the security of these people is guaranteed. 

What I have discovered while on routine visits in the constituency is that the police rarely carry out community sensitisation to update these people about the guidelines required to ensure that their security is guaranteed. As a result of the lack of sensitisation, the boda bodas have, in most cases, organised themselves and engaged in mob justice whenever they have suspected somebody of stealing their motorcycles. We are discouraging this but in most cases, people have been killed innocently.

Therefore, I would like to re-echo what the President said about the need to digitise these number plates to ensure that if someone is arrested or if someone touches it, he or she is able to be detected so that these rampant issues are controlled.

Lastly – as the honourable colleague has said – currently, we have SafeBoda and Taxify. If these could be explored more –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had planned only 30 minutes but it seems this matter is important. Ministers who have business will forgive me because this is also important.

4.34
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support this motion and also thank hon. Abala for bringing up this matter. I specifically salute him for declaring his interest as a boda boda rider. I hope that come 2021, we shall not see many boda boda riders storming the august House, following in the footsteps of hon. Abala. (Laughter)

The challenge with the boda boda industry is that it has been infiltrated by the criminals and it is the same challenge the police had. It became very difficult to differentiate between a good policeman and a bad one. You could sometimes end up reporting yourself to a criminal at the police station.

Madam Speaker, if you look at these boda boda riders who operate at night, most of them are not genuine. They disguise as boda boda riders to trail their so-called colleagues. The issue here is that Government needs to regulate this industry. I do not understand why up to now Government is very lax when it comes to regulating that industry. There was an attempt to register all the boda boda riders. The exercise kicked off but for unknown reasons, they abandoned the exercise. Up to now nobody knows – (Member timed out.)

4.36
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion brought by hon. Abala. He has brought it at a time when Uganda is faced with death of many boda boda riders. Busia being on the border, which is porous – and it is where the word “boda boda” started and I also worked as a boda boda rider – it is almost becoming a disaster. In Busia we do name the boda boda riders who die because every two to four days we lose one.

The police should deploy more personnel on the porous borders of this country because most criminals run to no-man’s land and as a result, we have lost many of our people. I would like to give the example that in the last 14 days, people came and grabbed a gun from a policewoman in Busia. Three days ago, a vehicle was taken at gun point in Busia from a health officer called Samuel. 

We, therefore, call upon Government to put up security cameras on borders. According to the directive of the Commander-in-Chief, the cameras are really only in Kampala City but at the borders, they are not there and when any dangerous weapons enter through the border, it is difficult to trace them within the country. 

I would like to, therefore, request Uganda to do what Kenya does. All boda boda riders in Kenya are registered in SACCOs and they are controlled. In fact, it is very easy to know boda boda owners - (Member timed out.)
	
THE SPEAKER: I think that is an important point. Conclude on that point of registration in Kenya.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, all boda boda riders in Kenya are organised under SACCOs in stages. These stages are governed by chairpersons who report to a central SACCO in each county and so, they are monitored. In Busia District and in my municipality, for example, we have almost 4,700 boda bodas but right now, their numbers are mixed because we only write behind their vests.

Madam Speaker, Kenya has two different types of number plates. A boda boda will have a SACCO number plate and a number plate for the motorcycle. Whenever they pass, people get to know that this is so and so, who comes from such a place. In Uganda, one cannot tell whether a given boda boda is from Mukono or Kayunga and so, one cannot tell where the rider might be going or coming from. Uganda should benchmark this because it will help us a lot.

In addition, our police should stop desk investigations. Madam Speaker, I was shocked when I read a story in the New Vision of last week, where one of the culprits who had been arrested was a police officer. He was pretending to have entered into a gang of boda boda killers to investigate and bring information, which was false. 

Therefore, I pray that the ministry sets up a special force to handle this matter because it has become rampant in the country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
 
4.40
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. Madam Speaker, you and I are suffering the effects of the deaths of boda boda riders. In Kamuli Municipality, so far, 12 deaths have been registered at the police and almost every month, in Kamuli, there is a boda boda cyclist who passes on.

In addition to what my colleagues have contributed, I do not think Government knows the number of boda bodas in the country.  Actually, they do not know those numbers yet as a country, we need to know that. 

Secondly, boda boda riders who work at night have problems. We cannot tell a genuine rider from the one that is not.

The third concern is about the old spare parts for motorcycles that are being sold. They are also causing problems. In Kamuli, a person was found with all spare parts of the motorcycles for the riders who had been killed. The boda boda killers came from Bugerere and benchmarked in Kamuli.

Finally, on the issue of the logbooks, the Uganda Revenue Authority previously provided good logbooks but when you look at the logbooks that are –(Member timed out.)

4.43
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I would like to also thank the mover, hon. Abala for bringing up this important motion. I would like to also thank colleagues who have contributed to this motion, which I also support.

Madam Speaker, as we move to protect boda boda riders, I think we need to also protect the users. Otherwise, many of these boda boda riders are not qualified. Someone just goes and tries the uncle’s motorcycle and the next day, he is riding passengers.

Many of them are underage and for that matter, unqualified to ride yet no one cares about this. Quite a number of them are indisciplined and that is why you get mob justice whenever there is an incident concerning boda boda riders.

Madam Speaker, I do not recall well but there was a regulation   that mandated boda boda riders to ride with protective gears and provide protective gears to their passengers but this is never done. 

I would like to, therefore, call upon those responsible for enforcing protection of boda bodas to make sure that the riders and their passengers have protective gears. Otherwise, many of these boda bodas are never tested and many of them are in dangerous mechanical conditions yet a passenger may not know whether the motorcycle is in good condition or not because there is no way – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, as we regulate boda bodas, we need to take note of a new type of boda boda called Tuk-Tuk, which has come up. I think these should also be considered in this motion. I have seen many of them in old Masaka Road.

In addition, the cameras should be rolled out to all parts of the country. Government should find money to roll out these cameras.

Lastly, boda bodas should be regulated; they should be uniformed. I saw in Burkina Faso where the motor cyclists are mainly women but they are properly uniformed. One can tell which group they belong to and so, it is very easy to enforce discipline amongst them. 

Otherwise, the boda boda industry contributes a lot to the economy. Thank you very, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Majegere, hon. Ssentongo and hon. Alum. I am giving time to everyone because the subject is important and we have never discussed it. Let us work on it and get some policy changes.

4.46
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank hon. Abala for bringing this motion.

As we talk, they are burying a young man called Idhuma. He was yesterday killed in hon. Bagiire’s constituency but he comes from my constituency. They even took his motorcycle. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to help the Minister of Internal Affairs. Minister of Internal Affairs, please - hon. Macho and hon. Okoth have alluded to the fact that we should have a national body with structures from the village, parish, and subcounty up to the top, such that in case one gets a boda boda, for example, from Mityana and they want to sell it in Mayuge, there should be someone who can be contacted to know the right owner of that motorcycle.

Secondly, these young men are dying and leaving young families behind. Madam Speaker, we have a big number of boda bodas. Suppose each boda boda cyclist contributed Shs 1,000 per day – I would like to, therefore, suggest that we set up a contributory fund from within the boda boda riders, where each of them contributes Shs 1,000 to take care of their welfare and social security so that in case one of them dies, the family has something to survive on but now these young men are dying and they leave nothing behind - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a second to conclude.

MR WAIRA: If Government is not ready to regulate the boda boda transport, as Members, we can be able to help the ministry by bringing a Private Member’s Bill. Thank you.

4.48
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the rest by supporting the motion. This motion has come at an opportune time; I think it should have come yesterday. As we look at the issue of boda bodas, we should look at the regulation comprehensively.

It is not about the safety of boda boda riders; it is more than this. The problem is so huge that we do not need to look at it superficially; we need to go in depth and see how we can regulate the boda boda industry, how we can protect the riders, passengers and vehicles on the road.

They ride badly, I know we are borrowing a leaf from Kenya’s book - when you go to Nairobi, you will see the discipline of motorcycle riders outside the city but since we need them in the city, we need to regulate them.

When traffic lights turn red, all the boda bodas go through as vehicles stand; as you try to move, the rider just passes in front. Let us look at this comprehensively; not only the killings. There are very many people in the hospital - riders and their passengers - with broken limbs and are suffering for ages and are going to lose their lives and families. I pray that we look at it - (Member timed out.)

4.50
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start my submission by asking the minister in charge of this industry when he is coming with a law to regulate the boda boda industry.

We have very many people involved in this industry and this is where they get their livelihood. I think that it is not the first time we are calling for regulation in this industry as if we do not have a Government in place. 

I would like to give a scenario in my district two years ago. Very many people were being killed, including the passengers and in this very instance, a very responsible young man who was taking care of three children and he also had a wife. He was hired but brutally killed. 

The women led a riot and they attacked the police station. To me, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has a lot to do to streamline this industry. Sometimes when these cases are reported to police, the way they handle them leaves a lot to be desired and I would love to hear what the Ministry of Internal Affairs has to say about the cases which are mishandled as far as this problem is concerned.

Sometimes these boda bodas are stolen and are sold in the neighbouring countries and yet we have the police and all the security agents around. I would like to know how this can happen - (Member timed out.)

4.53
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to support the motion. However, the image of a country is portrayed by what the capital looks like. 

If any foreigner came to Uganda and to Kampala in particular, he will wonder whether he has reached the capital because of the uncontrolled nature in which our boda boda riders use the streets; they are a menace.

In countries like Nigeria, in Abuja you will never see a boda boda; you will only see a cyclist on his personal motorcycle riding. Go next door to Nairobi, you will not find them in the centre of the city. 

What are we doing as a country as far as regulating the operations of boda bodas is concerned? While they are here, the other road users are also at risk.

Many times as hon. Ssentongo said, go to the yard at Ministry of Internal Affairs, you are waved to pass because the green light has gone but somebody crosses just right in front of you. 

In such a case the traffic man will blame the motorist, they look at the vehicle rather than who is on the wrong. Unless there is regulation in this country, the boda boda riders will continue to be a menace. 

Secondly, we all need to differentiate between boda bodas and authorised cyclists. My honourable sister from Kamwenge said that she was a boda boda rider; I do not know but there is a difference and I wish the mover of this motion could clarify on that because a boda boda is a person who rides a motorcycle at a commercial level. However, for an ordinary motorcycle rider - like I have given you the example of Abuja, you are there alone; you are not licensed to carry any passenger at commercial level.

Let alone the very good idea that hon. Chango brought of regionalising registration so that you can be able to know what comes across.

I represent Arua Municipality; it is a border town not far away from Congo and many of the motorcycle riders buy the Senke motorcycles from across Arua and it is from there that they bring them in. Even next door to South Sudan, motorcycles keep coming in and out.

Unless we have that regulation of regional registration so that we are able to know which motorcycle originates from which region and organisation, then the police will not be in position to assist because motorcycles are not like vehicles.

A vehicle can be seen from afar and you can identify the number plate but many of the motorcycles in Kampala here do not even have registration numbers. When they commit traffic offences or when they fatally kill someone, nobody can be able to come and say, “It was motorcycle A, B, C, D” and it becomes a problem. Lastly, the boda boda riders also need to respect other road users - (Member timed out.)

4.57
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Abala for the motion. I have gone to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs several times and pushed them to fund district police commanders.

The DPC of Kamuli and Kalungu are paid only, I think, Shs 500,000 a month for operations and even if they are to catch the killers, they will not get them. I told the Minister of Internal Affairs that they cannot manage police without procuring for them bigger motorcycles to monitor.

When Afande Kaweesi was killed - if Kulambiro at least had five big motorcycles; the ones we normally refer to as the Katwanga, the 700 CC and above - they would have got the killers. However, look at a situation where you have police that is not funded. 

Recently in my constituency of Kalungu, I had to give the DPC money to build a house for a sniffer dog. In rural areas, if you have a sniffer dog and there is a killer, this dog can be rushed to that place where a motorcyclist has been killed or the bike stolen; the sniffer dog can easily detect this. However, in Kalungu, you have to go to Masaka. When you reach Masaka, you will find that the dog is in Lyantonde yet it is the only dog in the region. So, this should not happen.

I was in Bujumbura and they have laws that govern motorcycles. At exactly 6 p.m., they are not allowed to operate in business centres and in the city. Even in my constituency right now, I have directed boda boda riders not to ride their motorcycles at night and if anyone is killed, they should not invite me for burial. I have told them and they must listen to me as their leader. These are the laws that we must follow.

Madam Speaker, most of these Members are not like us who wear rosaries. One time, I was coming from an area in Kampala enjoying my evening and a boda boda rider stopped me. I lowered my windows and he told me, “Your tire pressure is reducing” but the intention was to kill me. 

I told him to follow me up to a Shell Petrol Station where I would fill my tire. I discovered that the intention of this fellow was to kill me because we are not regulating these people on when they are supposed to ride and when they are not supposed to. We must test this to find out how to manage them. 

As I conclude, the Committee on Defence and the Ministry of Internal Affairs must allocate money to districts for police commanders and operations. There are police posts in rural areas like Villa Maria where the Officer in Charge (OC) cannot even afford money for fuel in a motorcycle to go and find out what is happening in a particular area. How do you expect these people to arrest killers of boda boda riders? How do you expect that?

When Ssewungu and others are going to conduct a rally, you have the money to regulate that but you do not have money to fund an OC and DPC to carry out operations to arrest killers. That is not fair and we must fight that. That will stop the killing of boda boda riders. I pray that Parliament and the Ministry of Internal Affairs come up with a law to manage boda boda riders.

As I conclude, in Kalungu, a motorcycle was stolen from one of my councillors two years ago and the thief was arrested riding the same motorcycle along the road but the police released the thief. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

5.01
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to overwhelmingly thank hon. Abala for bringing this motion. Boda bodas in Uganda have become an economic activity; it is an industry and a source of livelihood. The gaps that are there are a response to failure by Government on public transport policy. That is why they are there. I think it is imperative that the regulations that are going to be put in place should make the boda bodas the most organised in this region.

One, I think there is need to go for biometric registration of anybody who would like to do commercial, motorised transport system using boda bodas. That would help ease access by the police to get them those who are stealing these motorcycles anywhere in the country. If this is done, I think it would sort out all this mess.

Secondly, the Minister of Internal Affairs is here. Our children on the road are at very high risk every morning and evening. In primary school, we were told and we used to read at the back side of the exercise book that when you are crossing the road, look left, look right, look left again and then cross the road. That was at primary level. Today, you cannot cross any road using those guidelines. (Laughter) Even if the traffic light shows green or red, there is something passing.

I would like to request, through this House, which now that we plan to regulate the boda boda sector, let us ensure that the issue of “keep left and keep right” should be part of this process.

Why is it that we ride on the left all the time and yet you should overtake any vehicle on the road on the right side, there is – (Member timed out.)

5.03
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am of the opinion that we are discussing two different issues under one item. The rampant murders in Uganda should be discussed on their own. 

It is true that boda boda riders are being killed but it is also true that these murderers target Ugandans from all walks of life. It cannot be that we have mere or ordinary criminals kicking people in the same way using the same style, at the same time using the same gadgets. The Minister of Internal Affairs should one time come here and tell us why we have all these murders in the country, not only against boda boda people.

There is also the issue - 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we are responding to a petition brought by the boda boda people to my office. That is what we are responding to.

MS NAMBOOZE: Secondly, Madam Speaker, we should discuss the boda bodas as an industry. Today, the English Dictionary has the word, “Boda boda” as a bike which is used for transport in East Africa. That is how important that industry has become.

In Mukono alone, we registered the boda bodas riders and they are 5000 of them. You can imagine where all those youth would be working if we did not have this industry. It is long overdue that we put this matter to rest by coming up with clear regulations about boda bodas. Today, we are talking about those who were murdered. Still – (Member timed out.)

5.05
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to associate myself with some issues of hon. Nambooze and hasten to add that what we are dealing with is crime. I have addressed my mind to the three leading causes of crime:

    1. Poverty;
    2. Economic deprivation and 
    3. Unemployment.

When you contextualise those three aspects, you realise that all those who participate in crime, including those who have infiltrated the boda boda industry, might be the three leading causes to those people.

On the debate going on, we need to also draw a distinction. There are those who – it is true the boda boda riders are murdered but the boda bodas are also used as a means of causing crime when some wrong elements use them.

I will give an example. I was driving back home around Nakawa. I saw a boda boda man parked at the side. One young man jumped off the bike, saw a lady who was driving with her window down, picked her phone and went back on the boda boda.

Madam Speaker, something happened to me just last Sunday. I woke up in the morning and they had plucked off both my number plates and left a number saying, “Please, if you want the number plates, call this number between 7 a.m. and mid-day”. (Laughter) 

I went and reported to police. Police told me that I will not manage these ones and I should just call and give them the money. I called and told the young man, “Please, why have you also taken my number plate? I am your Member of Parliament here”. The man told me, “You see, this was an operation. Since we know you as our Member of Parliament, send us Shs 100,000 and we will give back the number plate.” That is half the price.

When I sent the money, they went and hid one number plate somewhere, which I picked. I asked them why they had given me only one and they said, “You send the balance for the second one.” Then I sent the money and that is how I got the number plates back. 
Anyhow, the young man was telling me that he had used a boda boda to do an operation in all the areas. We met over 20 people at the police station with the same telephone contact.

Madam Speaker, we need to regulate the boda bodas – whereas we are fighting crime – so that we can distinguish the boda boda riders from those motorists who use those motorcycles for something else. Thank you.

5.08
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (Jeema, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in thanking the movers of this motion. It is true that boda boda riders are being murdered. My concern though is that when these suspects are arrested, the way the police deal with them has created a very big problem. 

This Parliament has enacted two laws; the first is the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act and the second is the Human Rights Enforcement Act. In those two enactments, the issue of protection of rights is very critical.

What has been happening is that once the police arrest these suspects, their rights are violated. When these people are produced before the courts of law, preliminary objections are raised. Some are tortured; others are detained beyond the mandatory 48 hours. They eventually end up being released, which has caused a very big problem.

In the Human Rights Enforcement Act, it is very clear that a trial will be nullified if it is proved that there was violation of human rights. Under the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, evidence obtained through torture is inadmissible in the courts of law. This Parliament has enacted those two laws. Unfortunately, the police continue to disrespect the rights of these suspects and as a result, courts have no option but to release them.

Therefore, we can talk about the suspects and we will get the murderers but if the police do not respect their rights –(Member timed out.)

5.11
MS OLIVER KAYOKYENGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. The boda boda cyclists are being battered. For the last two months, I have been taking care of my voter who was bartered and his motorcycle taken away by unknown people. For two months, he has been on oxygen at Mulago National Referral Hospital. 

I think if we are going to help the boda boda riders, we must come up with regulations. People will agree with me that most of the criminals hide in the boda boda industry; you cannot tell who is a right boda boda rider and who is not.

Madam Speaker, these are the people who take you home but later, come back and rob you. I think regulation of boda boda riders is very important as the other Members said. I think registering them under one umbrella like Taxify and Safe Boda is a very good idea. If we can look into that matter, it would help the boda boda riders in this country. Thank you.

5.12
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank hon. David Abala for the motion. 

Madam Speaker, if you note, 68 per cent of the population of Uganda are the young people and they have found riding boda bodas an alternative to the high unemployment in this country. Therefore, I think providing them with security is something good. Some of these people are well learned but cannot get jobs in the industries or the public sector in Uganda.

Secondly, we all know the benefits of boda bodas to all of us. Boda bodas provide, in the rural constituencies, transport to hospitals, schools and meetings. As such, it is important that we provide the security that is required for the boda boda riders. However, it is also important for us to note that most of the boda boda riders are not trained. Therefore, police should provide comprehensive training to all boda boda riders throughout Uganda. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, if we would have the CCTV cameras installed, as one of the Members said, it would be good. Thank you.

5.14
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka North County, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would also like to thank hon. David Abala for coming up with such a wonderful motion for this House to consider.

I cannot deny that I am a very serious client of the boda boda riders. The boda boda industry is very good at the moment but it would be better if we came up with serious ways of regulating their operations. 

I did a simple research about boda bodas and a few murders of boda boda riders that had taken place in my constituency. I noted one serious weakness among the cyclists themselves; they are desperate. If you stood in the bush at midnight and gave a boda boda rider a call to pick you, he will come. That kind of arrangement - if we do not help them to see how they can run away from desperation, where they carry whoever wants to be carried at any time, the incidences of killings will continue. So, - (Member timed.)

5.16
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I salute all of you and I thank the mover of this motion. 

I stand to second the motion but the premise under which this motion was moved was that the boda boda riders and their property are in danger; they need to be protected. However, when you go to the prayers, there is no point directly related to the issue of protecting these people. The issue of regulation may not easily be connected to the issue of protecting somebody who really is in danger.

Therefore, we must, first of all, focus our attention on rescuing the boda boda riders and their property from danger before we look at them being sources of danger to other people. Otherwise, if we do not do this, we shall lose the objective of this motion. 

Madam Speaker, for us to protect the boda boda riders, we must first understand the nature of the danger they face. How are they killed - for those who have died? You need to understand the killing itself and then you devise means of protecting them.

One of the things that make the boda boda riders vulnerable and easy to kill is that the passenger - or source of danger - sits behind them. The rider is busy controlling the motorcycle while the passenger has a knife that can easily kill this person. On analysis of this, the best means to protect the boda boda rider - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to propose.

MR FUNGAROO: One is that we train them on issues of self-defence and preservation. For my case in Obongi; a boda boda rider was picked from Adjumani and taken deep in the forest where he was killed and the motorcycle burnt beyond recognition.

Therefore, what we should tell them is that if someone picks you at night or takes you for a long distance, ask this person to pay for three motorcycles instead of one. Even if the two go without carrying any person, they will be escorting the one who is carrying. By so doing, these two will be protecting the one carrying the passenger. This has helped our riders in dangerous times and dangerous -(Member timed out.)
 
5.19
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I stand to support the motion and thank the mover for coming up with it. We are all Ugandans and we know that the boda boda business could be Uganda’s largest employer after agriculture but they are not guided and protected. Due to that, unfortunately, we have lost many of them.

Witnesses from SafeBoda say that they are happy now in the industry because they have been trained in road safety, first aid, bike maintenance and customer care which is helping them. Secondly, they are identifiable and traceable through the system. Therefore, whatever happens to them means that they are sure they will be traced and guided on what to do and they have even been taught how to save money, meaning that they have increased their business and their families are now benefitting.

Therefore, we need to help them, as a country, to be regulated, organised and given guidelines countrywide other than leaving the service providers to come and help them without helpful laws that guide. Otherwise, they are very important people in Uganda and they have helped many. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.21
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I thank you and support the motion. If any of us went to a police station around Kampala today, you will be shocked at the large number of boda bodas at those police stations.

One day, with the Committee on Defence and Veteran Affairs, we went to the Central Police Station here and made a quick count and there were over 300 boda bodas in the police yard. If you are to put economic value to that, you will see that it is billions of shillings stuck at police stations.

We would like to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs a very quick question; how do you hold up all those motorcycles at police stations? You can visit any police station in this country and you will be shocked at the number of boda bodas stuck at the police station.

The second issue I would like to inform the honourable colleagues is that when considering the question of boda boda crime, you must be careful. It is one of the industries where security agencies in this country have deliberately highly deployed. I am being serious; security forces in this country like the Internal Security Organization and the spy network. 

If there is any industry where they are highly deployed, then it is the boda boda industry over the years. How come where you have highly deployed is where we are witnessing the highest number of murders? I can give you data that will surprise you.

Recently in Kampala and the surrounding areas, security agencies -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute for the shadow minister.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I am very keen about this because in the last couple of years, an attempt was deliberately made to turn boda boda into a security apparatus. High calibre deployment was done and security bought a number of boda bodas in thousands and gave them out in Kampala and its surroundings. 

Therefore, if you had bean weevils - the Boda Boda 2010 - Mr Kitatta their commander is in Luzira, how about his infrastructure? What happened to them? When you are witnessing these murders, we must be very careful and put the security of this country on the spot. They are not doing a smart job.

Lastly, hon. Basalirwa spoke about the capacity of our law enforcement, especially the judiciary and the police to let out criminals. 

Madam Speaker, today when you have money - in my constituency alone, they normally call you and request for money. Do not even go and talk about these issues because there has been somebody who has committed murder and they want to bribe a state prosecutor, criminal investigation officer or the magistrate.

Now, if criminals with money are finding their way out of our judicial system and are not able to nip, eliminate and punish them, you cannot eliminate murder. Highly organised criminals in this country have a network; a lot of money and capacity that even our judicial system can no longer function - (Member timed out.)

5.26
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the movers of the motion. I have two points to make; the first is security in broader terms. The other day we had mobile money operators killed, women being kidnapped and today, we are discussing the murder of boda boda riders.

All these things have come after the President addressed many meetings advising on how this crime can be combated. I would like to ask Government to brief us whether the measures, as outlined by the President and the other relevant security agencies, are not working. Perhaps if they are not, we may have to do what was done when we faced the menace of Kony. 

You had people in Teso raising a militia, the Acholi raised a militia and so did the people in Lango. If the measures as outlined by the Head of State are not working, it means we will have to find solutions that will be in every community and group raising its own militia.

Madam Speaker, the second point that I would like to raise is to thank the colleagues who have raised a broader issue of regulating boda bodas. Of course the trouble is that there are people who are helplessly crying but others have issues against them.

Madam Speaker, my request - not to confuse the two issues - is that you allow us have another debate on regulation of boda bodas as an industry – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: A half a minute for the Chief Opposition Whip.

Mr Ssemujju: I suspect that nearly a million Ugandans are in this industry so it needs to be regulated.

However, the moment you try to chase for both of them; their own safety and the regulation, you are going to look awkward as a Parliament. It is important that we deal with their security today and the broader regulation of the boda boda industry at another time. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.28
Mr denis Oguzu (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I would like join others to thank hon. Abala for thinking about the boda boda men and women.

What moves me is the fact that despite a number of people working as boda boda riders in this country, it had to take this individual to think of how best they can be helped when we had a Government in place. You have awakened this country and now there is need to rethink the boda boda industry. 

According to the Global Entrepreneurship Index, there are about 400,000 boda boda in Uganda. This has a lot of political implications, which men in Government have feared to manage. I would like to call on the – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Your two minutes are used up. Please, conclude.

Mr Oguzu: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport needs to learn from the private sector and build on existing systems that are there to streamline the industry.

We have already developed private sector systems that can register boda boda riders across the country and we would be willing to share such experiences.  Thank you.

5.31
Mr Solomon Silwany (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My contribution will be brief. I am trying to come up with suggestions and solutions.

The cause of havoc is lack of financial support to the boda boda riders. These riders work day and night. You find him sleeping on top of his motorcycle late at night because he is working hard, since there is a financial institution that has given him a loan. They have to work twice as much to cover that loan.

These young men buy boda boda motorcycles at Shs 8 million in instilments yet it would cost them about Shs 4.2 million. This has killed them. To avoid sleep, most of them end up using drugs. When you board it, the smell of the drugs welcomes you as he rides. You then realise that the person is under the influence of drugs.

Therefore, if we do not regulate the use of drugs on boda boda riders and empower them financially, it will lead us nowhere. Let us start with – (Interjections) - do you want me to allow you give information? No; let us start by empowering the boda boda cyclists financially. 

On the issue of loans, there is a case of Kenya. We can get some people to go and benchmark what hon. Macho talked about –(Interjections)– we can go and benchmark what is happening in Kenya and also give them a good facility to pick cheap loans from other than them buying one boda boda motorcycle at a double price. When they buy the motorcycles at Shs 8 million, the financial institutions cheat them. 

There is also the issue of the owners of the boda boda motorcycles. These are very rich people who exploit the young men. Therefore, if we provide the financial facility where they can get cheap loans from, the issue will reduce and the debts will come down.  Thank you.

5.33
Mr alex burundo (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of murder of the boda boda riders has gone as deep as Bulambuli, which is almost 300 miles away from Kampala. Any attempts to tighten security in Kampala makes the thieves resort to going deep into the villages.

Last month, three boda boda cyclists were murdered next to the district headquarters, which is next to Bulambuli Police Station. This is very unfortunate.

We recently elected LCs and Government has Parish Internal Security Officers, the Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISOs), the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) and District Internal Security Officers (DISOs); all these are concerned with the security of the people but nothing is taking place.

I feel that if you want to solve the problem of murders of boda boda riders, Government should take this as a rebel activity. If one woke up one morning and said, “I am hiding in Mt. Elgon and I would like to take over this Government,” they would look for you wherever you are hiding. Why is Government just looking on as our people die? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion that many of the people here are owners of boda bodas in Kampala. Otherwise, I suggest that we flush out boda bodas that operate from here. There is a lot of indiscipline, taking place.

The honourable member is shaking his head – (Member timed out.)

5.36
Mr James Waluswaka (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you because you give such issues as this, which affect Ugandans, time. 

I will not be in agreement with any person who says that boda bodas should go out of Kampala unless Government puts in place public transport. Otherwise, without that, you cannot chase away the alternative.

Secondly, the boda bodas that are stolen from the rural constituencies are brought to Kampala for spare parts sale. Most of the people selling spare parts are the ones who tell thieves to steal and take the motorcycles to them.

The other day I watched on Bukedde Television - somebody kills another for Shs 200,000. Therefore, we should regulate the people who sell spare parts because if one cannot get market, where would they sell the boda bodas? I would like to request the House to impose strict regulations on the people who sell boda bodas.

Finally, Ministry of Health, somebody might get stabbed or beaten but they go to the health facility and find no drugs and ambulances. 

As I speak now, the health system is dilapidated, including Busolwe. We have even talked about rehabilitation of Busolwe General Hospital - the other time they took a boda boda rider there but there was no light in the hospital. 

Madam Speaker, now that the ministers are here, we would like assurance because when people are – (Member timed out.) 

5.38
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me join colleagues to put my weight behind this motion because I support it. Indeed, it tasks Government on the growing spate of murders and robberies in this country. 

Madam Speaker, despite the fact that boda boda industry has been infiltrated by criminals and a regulatory framework is not yet in place, we could borrow a leaf from our neighbours; for instance Kenya abolished them in Nairobi city and they had a point. 

Nevertheless, even in cities, like Kisumu, where boda-bodas are still active, they have serious regulatory frameworks in place. For instance, they have a coordination mechanism. Boda-boda riders were told to desist from riding long night travels. For example, if a rider has to take a passenger from Kampala to Nansana, the rider is required to coordinate with colleagues at nearby stages. They are supposed to drop or stop somewhere and then surrender a passenger to a colleague, who they ensure is familiar with the destination of the passenger. That one would help to reduce on the spate of murders that we are witnessing. 

Most importantly, Madam Speaker, the police recently boasted of having obtained sufficient evidence after pinning down – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude. 

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, according to the Police Spokesperson, Mr Fred Enanga, they have obtained sufficient evidence – I would like to first of all commend their operation to crack down the robbers of boda-bodas and businessmen who deal in stolen motorcycles and spare parts.

However, the challenge is that the police have abdicated their responsibility. They have asked anyone with information to avail it to them. They also have free toll lines but they can never pick them. Therefore, this leaves a lot to be desired, Madam Speaker, so to speak.   

5.43
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion. I would like to say that a few years back, the Uganda Police Force celebrated 100 years. Their theme was, “Community Policing.” During that time, we integrated that theme into the operation of the boda-bodas in my area, after having very many murders. It worked very well but that approach has since been stopped. Since it stopped, I see the murders rising again. 

Therefore, I would like to say that the integrated approach that was in that theme - where we even had some good crime preventers brought on board and the neighbourhood watch system was very effective and it is helping our area. Up to now, in my constituency, the murders have reduced drastically. Therefore, I think we should go back to that process to help this situation. 

Secondly, the boda-boda industry is now circulated with all criminals because we think it is an easy job to do. The youth have nothing to do. They are very lazy, they do not want to work and have no money. Most of them are riding boda-bodas, which are not theirs so what they do is to steal to buy their own. Therefore, it is a whole mess and I think when the boda-boda robberies are finished, they will move on to other murders. We have already seen this in the mobile money business. 

The other day, the President was in Bundibugyo saying he was going to take people there to guard vanilla. Will he guard vanilla, matooke, milk and mobile money businesses? Therefore, we need a comprehensive approach in terms of empowering our youth, giving them skills and helping them make money. 

Otherwise, the whole problem is that people want quick money, which is not there. The boda-boda industry is circulated and it is now a soft target. Many other soft targets are going to come if we just look at the service. Therefore, we need a comprehensive approach to eliminating simple robberies by guiding our people into what they can do appropriately, especially the youth. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.45
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Abala for bringing this motion concerning boda-bodas. This problem has been in Uganda for so long and that is why he is looking for a long lasting solution.

In this case, it means that we need to know why boda-boda riders have been dying in Uganda. We have to make sure there is some research done in that respect. 
That is important because the number of youth in Uganda compared to the level of unemployment, created by the situation in Uganda, also created by their thinking; the level of unemployment is increasing every year. Therefore, we need to look at how to employ our youth to make sure they are very busy because an idle mind is the workshop of the devil. 

We also need to look at our level of corruption. All these youth killing and stealing boda-bodas from riders are looking for a way of getting rich very quickly because they see their brothers and relatives getting rich in a few years. For example, someone might be working for a salary of Shs 500,000 but every month, he invests about Shs 5,000,000. Therefore, we need to check our levels of corruption seriously and when I talk –(Member timed out.) 

5.47
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion. In the past, the issue of boda-bodas and taxis businesses were a duty of local governments. They used to allocate stages, take registration, after being recommended by local council one. What happened is that everything was politicised. 

These boda-boda riders used to have stages with well-known chairpersons who they could identify themselves but now, there are no stages and there is no control. We, in the local governments, by then used to know where there was no stage.  

Madam Speaker, can you imagine that even in front of Parliament there is a stage for boda-bodas simply because there is no control? Some boda-boda riders do not have stages. They just ride from one side to another and cross roads anyhow. Though, local governments and KCCA used to have proper control of them but because of a few individuals who are benefiting from this kavuyo - when there is chaos, a few individuals benefit from it. That is why they came in and completely failed the registration that was going to take place in Kampala and other local governments. Politicising this industry should be clearly out if we are to benefit.

Secondly, the boda-boda riders themselves should also pay interest and take this as a job. Otherwise, many are coming and hiding in this business. When you look at the person who was arrested in Mukono, he would buy these stolen boda bodas and he is now a billionaire. He owns three wonderful houses in almost every village. Do you know what is going to happen to him? Very soon, he is going to be released. The people who were arrested said this was the man who had been buying the stolen motorcycles from them. He would pay them Shs 1 million for a brand new motorcycle and Shs 500,000 for an old one. However, what is going to happen? Let the minister get in touch with the police and follow up these matters seriously. If such culprits are kept in jail for a long period, the other buyers will fear to buy the stolen motorcycles.

5.49
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. About a month ago, I spoke on this issue here in this House. I raised it as a matter of national importance. We have had a number of deaths in Gomba and they were violent deaths of the boda boda riders. My concern was about the manner in which they were killed and also the boda bodas being taken away from them. The type of the motorcycles that is taken away from them is Bajaj, which they purchase at Shs 4.5 million. The group that is targeted are the youth who normally ride these boda bodas.

My concern is mainly about tracking these boda bodas. One of the motorcycles that had been stolen in our place, had the spare parts found in Katwe, which was quite amazing. I would like them to be tracked but I would also like the police to sensitise the boda boda riders massively and the country on what to do. When you kill those people so as to take their motorcycles, these are murder cases. 

In addition, people have been talking about police compromising these cases. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.51
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of this motion for bringing this motion at a time when the boda bodas everywhere are at a risk. We cannot talk about where and who has died because it has happened everywhere. This motion seeks to urge Government to provide for security of the boda bodas. However, the critical question is what kind of security can be provided? Experience has proved that boda bodas are killed by both strangers and their compatriots that they work with. 

Therefore, this kind of mixed grill makes it very hard at this critical time to prescribe the best security solution. The answer lies in a comprehensive regulatory framework that can determine how boda bodas are bought and how they are transferred in order to avoid this problem. 

There is also a problem of deliberate insecurity designed to undo the confidence that the people have been having in the security forces protecting the Ugandans. We need to do much more than we are looking at when dealing with the boda boda problem. At the moment, boda boda is an important industry since it provides occupation for most of the youth. Furthermore, it has even been streamlined by Government among – (Member timed out.)

5.53
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion, urging Government to devise long-term means of stopping the rampant murders and robberies suffered by boda bodas riders. Boda bodas, unless advised otherwise, have come to Uganda to stay. In the past, we used not to have these boda bodas. However, the way we look at it now, they have come to stay. They started in Busia like hon. Macho told us and they have spread all over the country. In that very spirit, you find that our youth and many other people have sold land and cows to buy boda bodas. This is a very serious matter.

Therefore, we would like to urge Government to protect these tuk tuk boda bodas instead of these “naked” motorcycles – like other countries have done; Kenya and Tanzania. We further urge Government to put in place security tracking gadgets and mechanisms to know where these boda bodas are at any time if we are to look after their safety. 

Similarly, we would like the Government to come up with a law that would regulate and register all boda bodas in the boda boda industry so that they can be helped. We would like to urge the Government to register boda bodas into Savings and Credit Cooperative Organisations (SACCOs). For example, in Kenya and Tanzania, they have registered these people into SACCOs in order to promote their safety and insurance cover for their lives, which could attract even cheaper – (Member timed out.)

5.55
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank hon. Abala and the team, for bringing this motion. I support the idea that the boda bodas should be organised. As we speak now, the way they are operating, for example, the boda boda who was killed and captured on CCTV, it took time. I was reading on social media and people were saying, “If you know any boda boda who has disappeared, come and identity.” This means that these people operate without any organisation. Therefore, there is need for them to be organised and have stages. 

I also buy hon. Nambeshe’s idea that when you are taking somebody, do not go beyond certain places. You should deliver from one stage to another. For example, in Arua, there are two ways of killing them. One of them is that they are waylaid. Somebody comes and pretends to be a passenger. You take him and on the way, he drops you to the group and you are killed. The other one is when you reach the destination claimed, they kill you there or sometimes they put you under gunpoint and take the boda boda.
I buy the idea that they should be organised. It will help to follow, monitor and regulate them.

Madam Speaker, there is also need for the boda bodas to be trained. Many people have lost their lives in the hands of these boda bodas. For example, somebody buys a motorcycle today, he has just learnt how to ride it in two days and he is already operating a boda boda. This has also led to many cases of accidents. In many cases, I used to think that motorcycles are also motor vehicles, which the police – (Member timed out.)

5.57
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you, for allowing me to be on record to support this motion on the boda boda industry - that is a non-conventional means of transport that has greatly helped this country to bridge the gap in transport. I like the boda boda industry because of the opportunity it has created for many people to access a livelihood and because of its manoeuvrability and the ability to move on bad roads like in my constituency, Kioga. 

To that effect, this is one industry that I have passionately supported in my constituency.

The issue of insecurity of boda bodas is no longer a preserve of urban settlement but even in rural areas. It is interesting to note that recently, when one such a boda boda was attacked in my constituency, I participated greatly. Much as he was left for dead, we rushed him to Mulago Hospital for treatment. The motorcycle that was stolen from Kioga was traced up to Ndeeba, here in Kampala. It was a motorcycle that was taken on loan and the bank officials were able to help us trace it. We actually recovered – (Member timed out.)

5.59
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank You, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you very much for giving adequate time for us to discuss the issue of boda bodas. I would like to thank my brother Abala for bringing the motion.

I would like to start from the angle that most people have not yet touched. Looking at the numbers – I was seeing most reports and Kampala alone has between 80,000 and 100,000 boda bodas. This is such a huge number. When you look at this across the country, then we are talking about a huge number of people within this industry.

This means that the boda boda industry is here to stay, it is not going anywhere. We must, however, regulate it. Reports also show that we are now losing close to 2,000 people every year due to accidents related to boda boda on our roads. Government itself is spending between Shs 1.5 to Shs 2 billion in treating injuries caused by boda bodas. 

People have already said that most of the riders have not had adequate training to be on the roads and to carry passengers. 
This only speaks to the urgent need for us to now come up with the regulations that should enable us to curb this problem but also –(Member timed out.)

6.01
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion for the work well done. We have seen or heard of crimes being committed against boda boda cyclists as well as their passengers. 

Two weeks ago, in my district, I had a case where a young girl was defiled and from her story, the person who defiled her used a motorcycle. They hoodwinked her, defiled her and then took off. 

We have also had cases where cyclists are knocked by speeding vehicles. When they fall down, the people in the vehicle pick the motorcycle, put it in the vehicle and take off. This means that they have started using cars to steal motorcycles.

I would suggest that Government makes a clear roadmap for the boda boda cyclists. Right now, all stages in Kampala are not gazetted. If only KCCA would speed up the process of gazetting the boda boda stages and also registration of all boda bodas. 

They need also to be put in sectors; maybe in divisions or in districts and where possible, they are given colours to wear so that they can be distinguished when they move to another place. 

There is an issue of training – (Member timed out.)

6.03
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Abala for moving this motion. Indeed the boda boda industry is very lucrative and it is assisting many of our young people and many families. Many families sell land to buy boda bodas and they expect this young man to bring money daily. Therefore, the rider works from morning till deep in the night. For that matter, we need to protect the boda boda riders.

They must be sensitised not to move at night. I know some of us roam through the night and that is why the boda bodas are there. They should also avoid very dangerous dark places.

This wave of insurgency, the killing of boda boda riders, has just come. What has happened? Who are doing this? There was one time in the past where people were being killed left and right. Government installed Operation Wembly where the police was moving everywhere and that thing was arrested. I think the police should come up and patrol again. I know they cannot be everywhere, but at least if they are visible along the roads, those killers will be arrested. Government should come up and do something to protect the boda boda riders. 

When we had highway robbers, they would put policemen in the buses and it became safe. Therefore, we have –(Member timed out.)

6.05
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the mover of the motion. To start with, I would like to appeal to the mover and to the House that we include another prayer in the motion, that Government deliberately supports boda boda industry to organise into viable cooperatives with a view of graduating to better transport means in the long term.

I am making this proposal because if we have it in view that in future we may need to get boda bodas out of the city, by organising them in cooperatives, we shall make them a viable industry. For instance, I have got more than 1,000 boda bodas in Kaliro. I was talking to them last weekend. I was telling them that if 1,000 of them are saving Shs 1,000 per day, it means they are saving a million shillings per day. In one month, they would save Shs 30 million and in one year, they would save almost Shs 400 million. 

If supported, they could graduate to even operating buses and lorries and other better transport means.  I think Government needs to consider this deliberately and support them to organise properly. 

On the issue of security, there is need to train these people on due diligence; to do some background check on the person they are going to transport, especially at night. If somebody wants to be taken to a distant place, it is important for this rider to find out more about this person: where is he from? What is his phone number? Even try to test the number –(Member timed out.)

6.07
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. A lot has already been said as far as this motion is concerned but I insisted on making a contribution because of the very nasty incidences we have been having in Pader District. I felt I should also put it on record as we discuss this motion.

Just a week ago, on Monday, 5 August 2019, four people died as a result of boda boda accidents. One of those – a young man – came riding all the way from Pader District up to Kiryandongo. He was knocked by a vehicle and died instantly.

Two weeks ago, there was a man who was being carried by his son. They knocked a nine-year-old girl. The boy, who was riding, died instantly and the father was critically injured. He was brought to Mulago Hospital and operated on. Unfortunately, he also died. The girl is in a critical condition up to now.

The number of deaths we have registered in Pader District over this short period as a result of boda-boda accidents is very high. So, much as we are talking about the security and murders, we must do something about the safety of these boda-boda riders, the accidents they cause – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 43 Members have contributed to this motion. I had originally planned for 30 minutes only but because of the importance of the subject, I had to surrender. Now, we have taken two hours. However, this matter raises policy gaps and we shall need answers from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of East Africa Community Affairs and the Ministry for Kampala Capital City.

Honourable members, just a snapshot of what I was thinking about includes the issue of training and registration of motorcycles, not just boda-bodas. Can one distinguish an ordinary rider from a boda-boda rider? How are they regulated? What is our policy in the region? If, for example, I import a boda-boda from Kenya and it is impounded; is it about taxation? Are we losing revenue or should we be making some money there? What about the safety of the persons – the passengers and the riders? It is a very serious issue.

The other issue is about the sale of stolen items. All these are crimes. I do not know whether there is any minister who is ready now. Should we give you time? Otherwise, we need answers. Is the Minister of East African Community Affairs ready?

6.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the mover of the motion and the Members who have participated in this debate.

On the issues that came from the operations of the boda-bodas across the border points – the boundaries between Uganda and the partner states – is something I believe we could give the House as information because we already have regulations and I believe I am in position to handle it now.

Madam Speaker, we run the East African Community integration under different pillars. One of them is called the Common Market Protocol, which allows free movement of people, goods and services. This protocol has been facilitated by the Customs Union Protocol. 

Under the free movement of goods and services, which fall under the Common Market Protocol, it has now facilitated Uganda Revenue Authority, which has already established gazetted points at the border, to allow people to move. While we have allowed people to move without using passports, we regulate people from within the regions to use the identity cards, especially people from Rwanda and Kenya as well as Ugandans going to Rwanda and Kenya.

In that perspective, the regulations want a person to go through a gazetted area and the interstate pass is given for one to stay within the country that they have entered for six months and they can do all the businesses without any interference.

Where we have issues pertaining moving with a unit, i.e., vehicle or motorcycle, the regulations allow one to clear their motorcycle for free and enter into that country for the first 14 days. After the expiry of the 14 days, one can make an extension of between 30 and 90 days using the same document and they pay $20 for that unit to be operated from a foreign country. This also applies to motor vehicles, which carry less than nine passengers. 

Madam Speaker, these are some of the areas where we have tried to make interventions to allow our people to move across borders and do business without any interference.

The second issue is that we have allowed the Resident District Commissioners to hold monthly meetings to mitigate insecurity issues that arise concerning the people who have moved across. In places like Busia, Malaba, Mbale and some parts of Tororo, we allow residents from within the border points to have free entry to the partner states and move 10 kilometers within either Kenya or Uganda without any interference.

In situations where a person is going more than 10 kilometers inside another country, it is required that such a person be cleared to move across the border. This is a mitigation measure between partner states and it also applies to people who do boda-boda business and others who move across.

The only challenge we have faced is that there is a high level of indiscipline among the people operating boda-boda business. There is also poor observation of the traffic rules and regulations as well as the laws and they end up in the hands of the police when they have committed crimes. At the time they report back to the authorities, they do not give the true picture of what would have caused the arrest. 

However, we normally move in and sort out the issues. We usually cross them over to Kenya and Kenya also comes and picks their residents who have been arrested this side. Where we find that the case is stiff, the case is handled according to the laws of Uganda. That is the information I would like to give to this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, have you had sensitisation meetings with the Ugandans or Kenyans, especially the riders and the people walking on foot who might stray one-and-a-half kilometers beyond the 10 kilometers?

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for that question. We have held sensitisation meetings across border points and in districts, which we believe have people who are engaged in cross border trade activities. What we have done is to set up committees, which facilitate the people who are crossing the border as well as educating those who may not be sensitised.

Madam Speaker, if you go to Busia, we have already stationed the staff of the East African community for purposes of sensitising the masses. We also have a team of the women traders who have an office at the One-Stop Border Point which supports women in cross-border business and all the people are informed. However, a few isolated cases arise and we resolve them as they come.  

Otherwise, we keep on getting challenges. For example, we may sensitise the police but immediately after doing the sensitisation, those policemen are sometimes transferred and we get new personnel who are not yet fully sensitised on issues of integration and that requires the ministry to do new sensitisation. 

Madam Speaker, the process of sensitisation is ongoing and we shall not stop until we are sure that the country has appreciated the relevance of the integration agenda.

6.17
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with the Speaker that this subject has caused a lot of reactions from the Members and it concerns several ministries. None of us here can ably answer all these pertinent questions from the Members.

Hon. Karooro was standing in for the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of the Government Business. When she was going out, she asked me to – (Laughter) – stand for her.

THE SPEAKER: Order please. Allow the Prime Minister to – 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, the chair for the Prime Minister has not been empty.

The issues that have come out concern many ministries, which include the regulation, registration, organisation, emphasis to organised groups and cooperatives of these boda boda riders; monitoring gadgets, control of numbers, protection and security of riders and passengers; discipline, training, sectorisation and identification, among others including Kampala Capital City Authority issues – and what my brother here has said regarding the boda boda practices.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that I report collectively to the Leader of Government Business and you give time to the ministers concerned to come and give proper responses to Members anytime next week.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, thank you but treat this matter seriously. You have heard the debate, sentiments and the fears of the population. Please come at the end of next week.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Much obliged. Government takes this issue very seriously. By the end of next week, we shall be here, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Unfortunately, police have more work to do.

6.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): My Leader of Government Business has spoken and so, I do not have anything other than to thank the movers of the motion. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is just being polite to thank you. That is what he was doing.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister is from Kalungu   -

THE SPEAKER: So?

MR SSEWUNGU: I felt that since he had made submission for next week, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs would keep aloof until next week so that we enjoy our office now. 

THE SPEAKER: He was only thanking Members. Honourable minister, let us have that comprehensive response next Thursday. Honourable members, let us go back to the Order Paper. The Minister of Works and Transport has told me he has some people he is meeting at Kampala Serena Hotel and so, I am excusing him for now. Can we have item No.5(ii)?

Honourable members, do you want us to take a vote now because there was some proposal for amendment of the motion, which I have not yet seen? The vote will be taken at the end of next week. Those who are proposing some amendments should circulate them so that we can see whether hon. Abala will accept them.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER ON THE ISSUES RAISED ON THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO US $45 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (ISDB) TO FINANCE THE TECHNICAL AND VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING (TVET) SUPPORT PROJECT

6.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I give responses on the issues raised during debate on the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal to borrow up to US $45 million from the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB) to finance the Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) Support Project, I would like to start by reminding you, Madam Speaker, that in December 2017,  the Islamic Development Bank cancelled the Shs $45 million financing for TVET support project due to delays by Government to fulfil the requirements for loan effectiveness 

In response to an appeal from Government, IsDB mounted a high level mission to Uganda in March 2018, which led to re-appraisal of the project in July 2018. The loan negotiations were conducted in October and November 2018. The revised draft loan agreements were then presented to the IsDB president and Uganda Parliament in December 2018 for approval. 

The motion to consider the loan was moved in Parliament on 13 May 2019, by hon. Charles Bakkabulindi, the Minister of State for Education and Sports. Consequently, the Committee on the National Economy presented its review report, recommending approval. 

However, various Members raised pertinent issues and requests for clarification. Parliament, therefore, decided not to take a vote on that day to allow the committee and the ministry to go through the issues and return with formal responses. This is the reason we are here to report.

Madam Speaker, in my submission, I would love to have taken you through the issues, which were raised by 17 Members but we have tried to group them into seven key categories as follows:

    1. Selected focus areas of training;
    2.  Tutor training programmes, student enrolments and gender balance;
    3. Project activity line budgets vis-a-vis debt situation;
    4. Accountability for previous loans;
    5. Distribution of beneficiary institutes and public private partnerships;
    6. Project procurement arrangements;
    7. Synergy between parliamentary committees.

Selected Focus Areas of Training

Under this, Members were concerned about the selection of training areas. The selection of the training areas was informed by the Vision 2040, National Development Plan II and the Skilling Uganda Plan, which all point to six key drivers of the national economy. 

Each selected institute was then assigned a pertinent focus area of training in line with the potential of its geographical location, as summarised in the figure that I have attached.  Madam Speaker, this is not business as usual. Instead, we are responding to the demands of the world of work for higher standards of trained output, through use of upgraded training curricula and modern equipment, with emphasis on international accreditation.

For the construction sub-sector, for example, we are looking at the use of advanced construction techniques and equipment not just the spades, wheelbarrows people were talking about on that day. This will help to produce better quality technicians that will construct excellent, safe structures and roads, to avoid rampant collapsing of building and shoddy work.

We further note that while electronics and telecommunication have specifically been selected as the focus area for training for Kitovu Technical Institute in Masaka, relevant ICT entrepreneurship and innovation will be a cross-cutting aspect of all the other focus areas of training.

Several other development partners are already focusing on oil and gas sub sector for example the World Bank and others. In Kitovu, the selected focus area is electronics and telecommunication because that area is going to become a city and it is on Kampala-Mbarara Highway. Lutunku, which is in Sembabule; the selected area of focus is commercial agriculture that is in a cattle area so there will be a lot of emphasis on added value -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I recall the day the chairperson on National Economy read a report on the loan request. The Speaker then requested that the minister and the chairperson of the committee go and harmonise because there were budget issues.

Now that the chairperson and the vice-chairperson are not here, is it procedurally right for us to proceed without us knowing whether this was done because in the end we are supposed to adopt a harmonised report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us defer the debate, we need the chairperson and vice chairperson on National Economy because we will have to take a vote at the end. Sorry honourable minister, I wanted us to move on, but the chairpersons are not here. 

We defer it to tomorrow and Clerk please ensure that the chairperson and the vice chairperson of the Committee on National Economy are both here, thank you.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE CLOSURE OF KAGADI HOSPITAL DUE TO WATER SHORTAGE

6.29	
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 31st July this year, hon. Eric raised a concern on the closure of Kagadi General Hospital which is in Kagadi District, due to the breakdown of water supply and medical equipment.

The Ministry of Health wishes to make the flowing response in regard to the issue raised. Kagadi Hospital is a general hospital under the local government that has been mandated as per the functions and service for which district councils are responsible. That has been stipulated clearly on the article which is in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and in the Local Government Act.
	
However, when we learnt about the alleged closure, the Ministry of Health made a follow-up on this matter with the district leadership and the hospital management to ensure that this issue is addressed.

The Ministry of Health has since then established that there was never a closure of the hospital; but there was a temporal scale down of services in areas where water was much needed due to the breakdown of the main water pipe.

During the week of July 29th to August 5th, the hospital registered 639 visits at the out-patient department. There were 49 deliveries, 264 antenatal care visits and laboratory tests were carried up to 444 and 483 patients were admitted in four major admission wards. That explains that the hospital was not closed.

The ministry understands that following the water pump break down, the district officials and the hospital stakeholders sat for a quick meeting to get a way forward and to come up with the solution to the water shortage.

In the interim, the stakeholders’ meeting resolved to have the mortar to the water pump replaced. It was also resolved that the district water tank be used to supply water to the hospital units like the maternity ward, theatre in order to avoid any disruption of healthcare services.

As I conclude, I would like to inform this House that the district has agreed to purchase a new mortar for the water pump. That has been estimated at Shs 10 million and this was expected to be delivered and installed by last week.

This week there were new developments which the Member of Parliament told me; that the pump was purchased fixed but could not work because it needs the entire set which is going to cost Shs 21 million, which the local government was not in position to cater for from the Primary Healthcare Fund. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: What do you intend to do about it you are the minister in charge?

DR MORIKU: Resources were allocated to the district local government and initially they had agreed to find the Shs 10 million to purchase the pump.

However, realising that the resources were not enough to put up the whole set, which means they will have to either solicit for funds within the local Government setting or alternatively it has to be addressed through supplementary funding.

As you know resources are allocated, appropriated and approved in this Parliament and the local government takes charge of managing the resources. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We need a solution, those people want their pump working so someone must find the money - is the Shs 21 million in addition to the Shs 10 million or it is a different set of Shs 21 million? Hon. Kyomuhendo you have the information.

MS KYOMUHENDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Shs 21 million is for entire system, they first bought the mortar but they found that it could not work alone. The whole system is spoilt so they need to replace it.

THE SPEAKER: That means if it is not repaired then there is no water in the hospital. 

MS KYOMUHENDO: Madam Speaker, right now there is no water we are just improvising by fetching using a water bowser but it is a very big issue. 

THE SPEAKER: Can’t the Government do something? These are Ugandans, how will they survive? Prime minister can’t you give a solution? 

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, I think that the Shs 21 million is not too much that Government could look round within the Local Government system or other resources if they can be reallocated. I was supposed to speak to the district chairman this afternoon – please allow us handle this matter with the district local government.

THE SPEAKER: And you report back to this House?

DR MORIKU: Precisely.

THE SPEAKER: Today is Tuesday. Report back to us on Tuesday next week.

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With your permission, allow me say that there was an issue on Mbale Regional Referral Hospital about the stock out of vaccines, which I think has been handled. 

The stock out was because the order was not made in time. However, as we speak, yesterday, National Medical Stores got the order for the vaccines and testing kits and so, they are going to process them. Otherwise, drugs were taken to Mbale Hospital minus the vaccines because they had not been ordered for. So, they are going to process their order and deliver to the hospital. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. ROBINA RWAKOOJO ON THE IMPORTATION OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE-STRICKEN HEADS OF CATTLE FROM TANZANIA BY A ONE, MR. MULINDWA AND THE IMPORTATION OF COUNTERFEIT ACARICIDE-DEXTATIX FROM ZIMBABWE BY THE SAME PERSON

6.37
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Madam Speaker, I got information from the office of the Clerk to Parliament to give a response to Parliament with regard to the alleged importation of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD)-stricken cattle from Tanzania and the counterfeit Dextatix from Zimbabwe. I got it today morning when I was attending a meeting at the Prime Minister’s Office.

Therefore, the response that I have here does not adequately answer the question. It talks about FMD and educates the Members of Parliament on FMD. Otherwise, the issue of importation of FMD-stricken cattle from Tanzania and counterfeit Dextatix from Zimbabwe must be investigated and then the results of the investigation will be reported to Parliament. 

For now, it would be wastage of time for Parliament. I would like to withdraw this statement, if you accept, Madam Speaker, so that I come back with full information on the question.

THE SPEAKER: So, Clerk, the matter will be reflected again on the Order Paper for next week.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, next Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Will you have the right answer? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, the right answer because now this is – (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Have you looked at the answer? The minister says it is not what he wanted to tell you.

MS RWAKOOJO: I have not looked at the answer but I would like to give further information. The gentleman, Mr Mulindwa – I am reliably informed – has been arrested, as well as the District Veterinary Officer (DVO) who gave him a letter to import the said cows from Tanzania. That happened in Ssembabule this afternoon, which I think is a step in the right direction –

THE SPEAKER: Mulindwa was arrested in Zimbabwe?

MS RWAKOOJO: Yes, this afternoon in Ssembabule not Zimbabwe.

THE SPEAKER: In Ssembabule. (Laughter) Okay, let the minister then come back to give us all that information. Let the minister come and give us a comprehensive answer.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, I have already heard about the arrests but I have also heard about other things surrounding this arrest. So, I thought I should investigate it properly because it looks like there is something more than what we are talking about here. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. ROBINA RWAKOOJO ON UNSCRUPULOUS HEAD TEACHERS AND DIRECTORS OF SCHOOLS WHO DEFRAUD STUDENTS, PARENTS AND GUARDIANS OF REGISTRATION FEES AND USING IT FOR PRIVATE GAINS

6.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a statement on unscrupulous head teachers and directors of schools who defraud students, parents and guardians of registration fees and use it for private gains, which was raised by hon. Robina Rwakoojo, MP for Gomba County West. First of all, we would like to appreciate the concern raised by hon. Rwakoojo about these funny people who defraud our parents and learners of registration fees.

As a policy, registration fees collection is handled and remitted to UNEB by the management of respective schools that are privately owned, while UNEB receives fees directly from the Government for candidates in Government universal education institutions. This ensures that we can track pupils according to the schools where they register and also hold school head teachers and directors responsible for the monies collected.

However, we are aware that some schools have, in the past, defrauded parents of the fees paid. Most of the implicated schools have been privately owned and neither licensed nor registered by the Ministry of Education and Sports. It has, therefore, not been possible to track registration of learners in such schools until it is too late. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports has put in place preventive measures, based on extensive sensitisation of parents and the public in general. These have included:

    1. Notices put in the newspapers by UNEB, including the local language papers like Bukedde, Orumuri, Etop and Rupiny; 
    2. Radio announcements that ran on FM radio stations around the country in English and the local languages; and
    3. Provision for the public to access registration information through SMS and via the internet for those with smartphones. 

The notices in the newspapers include brief instructions on how to use SMS and the internet address. The ministry has also issued circulars to sensitise parents on the procedure and requirements for registration.

The ministry is committed to ensuring that the registration process is smooth and that parents are not defrauded along the way. We call upon our leaders to join the ministry in sensitising the public on the need to ensure schools to which they send their children are registered and to follow up on their registration in good time. 

The ministry further urges the general public to bring any cases to the ministry’s attention for disciplinary action. Madam Speaker, I have attached copies of notices and circulars on this matter for ease of reference. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Rwakoojo, are you satisfied?

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Speaker, I am partly happy with the response but I thought it could be better. My concern is that some parents do not know that some of the schools are not registered with the ministry. How are they supposed to know?

I had earlier told the honourable minister that, for example, lawyers, engineers, architects and some of the other professions come out yearly to show who is registered and who is not or who has enrolled. They could do the same to show us which schools we should trust to pay registration fees for our students and the ones which should not. There is nothing wrong with doing that.

In addition, I would like to propose that maybe UNEB could have scattered centres within the country so that one can know that, for example, in Mpigi, it is in place X and let those who have registration fees go and pay it there, rather than paying these unscrupulous people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have any plans to gazette the schools that are officially registered?

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, we do not have plans to do centres, as suggested, but at least one thing that is very clear is that we have sensitised the public. The public know because that time when we were closing unlicensed and unregistered schools, we moved all over the country. We told people what to do and prepared the LCs and leadership at local level and the the districts –

THE SPEAKER: No! Honourable minister, what the honourable member wanted is to do with the Uganda Law Society. They published a list of firms which have been cleared to work for that year and so have the engineers. That is why the honourable member asked, “Can’t you do it and publish the schools that you know have met the conditions?”

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, that is possible. Let me go back and we think about it. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We are on a question by hon. Rwakoojo and it is not for debate. 

Let us have response on No. 5(vi), which is on the threat of industrial action by the local councils. Are you coming in on that, Rev. Fr Lokodo? 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED ON IMPENDING THREATS OF INDUSTRIAL ACTION ON TUESDAY 13 AUGUST 2019 BY LOCAL COUNCILS ON ACCOUNT THAT CENTRAL GOVERNMENT RETAINS ENORMOUS AMOUNTS OF LOCALLY GENERATED REVENUE YET REMITS INSUFFICIENT AMOUNTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS TO RUN COUNCIL OPERATIONS

6.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo): Madam Speaker, I am standing in for my colleague, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to read the statement. Nobody should think a reshuffle has been done. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, after the enactment of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and in accordance with Section 30 of the Act, effective Financial Year 2016/2017, local governments were requested to deposit their local revenue collections to the Consolidated Fund. 

The law provides that during the budget preparation process, local governments submit their local revenue projections along with their estimates to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for consolidation and submission to Parliament for appropriation by 1st of April of the preceding year.

After appropriation by Parliament for the Financial Year 2018/2019, the fund was released based on actual collections and remittances into the Consolidated Fund. This was in some cases on a weekly basis, which brought a sentiment from the political and technical leaders in the local governments due to delays in accessing the funds.

Madam Speaker, in circumstances where there was more collection than it was appropriated, the accounting officer would request for supplementary funding, which would be presented to Parliament for consideration and approval. 

Accordingly, Shs 2,736,000,000 was appropriated as supplementary financing for local revenues under supplementary schedules 1 and 2. 

Madam Speaker, in case of less collection than appropriated, only the actual collections would be available for release to the local governments. 

Effective this financial year 2019/2020, to avoid complaints from the accounting officers, a decision was taken to advance funds to local governments at the beginning of the first quarter, which is equivalent to 25 per cent of their local revenue projections. Where the accounting officers have been very active, the funds have always been accessed in time. 

In circumstances where more collections will be realised than appropriated in the Financial Year 2019/2020, the accounting officers will, in writing, submit their request and I, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall prepare and present a supplementary budget of the equivalent. Actual collection being less than the funds advanced in the previous quarter, there will be no release of local revenue component in the subsequent quarter for the respective local government.

Madam Speaker, I am laying the resolution of Parliament approving the Parliamentary Schedules 1 and 2 of local revenues, the quarter for expenditure limits for Financial Year 2018/2019, which funds were released and the quarter one expenditure limit for Financial Year 2019/2020, that demonstrate that 25 per cent of annual local revenue projection has been released in advance of the actual collection.

Therefore, all revenue collections remitted to the Consolidated Fund by local governments and requested for by the accounting officers were duly released to them. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, let me also take this opportunity to make a comment on pensions and gratuity processing. 

Payment and accountability 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has continued to receive appeals from pensioners who have not been paid their pensions and gratuity for a long time even when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has released the funds.

This is, therefore, to warn accounting officers who are not timely in processing pensions and gratuities and not accounting for arrears released to them on the pretext that pensioners disappear and yet they are still on their local government’s payroll. However, they will always be reprimanded. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the question came from Ssabagabo Municipality. They said they collect money in billions, send it to the Consolidated Fund but what is given to them to use is very little. It is not even a quarter of what they collect. It was a question of disparity; what you put in and what is given back. 

6.53
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, that is my colleague who raised that issue and you know we are people of local governments.

Madam Speaker, the issue was; a lot of money is supposed to be transferred to the local governments and it does not actually go there. The amount of local revenue which is collected is not equivalent to what is released. So, what really happens here? The local governments are crying. 

By the way, Uganda Revenue Authority has taken over collecting from down there. What the local governments used to collect is now collected by URA. When it comes to submission, your hands become short. What is the problem? That is where the question is. 

What are you doing about this? The local governments are suffocating terribly. 

Madam Speaker, I need to inform the minister that currently, the situation between Central Government and local governments is totally imbalanced. A lot of money is left at the centre but there is no money that is taken down to the local governments. 

Therefore, they are failing to do anything tangible. Let me give –

THE SPEAKER: No. You have now taken over the debate. Honourable minister, that is really the answer we wanted. That municipality said they send in Shs 35 billion but when you send them money, you send Shs 100 million. They put in so much and they get so little.

REV. FR LOKODO: Your concern is taken note of, Madam Speaker. Being only a delegate, I would like to seek your indulgence that I will refer this to the responsible minister for a better answer. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs to respond to item No.5(vii). For item No.5 (ix), the Minister of Security is not here. Item No.5(viii) was answered. The minister left but after she came back, she gave an answer. So, this should be moved. Hon. Sarah Opendi came and answered that very afternoon. I also do not see the Minister, Office of President (Presidency). 

So, honourable members, I think we have – The Minister of Education and Sports has answered. Honourable members, I think we have done quite enough for today. 
House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

So, tomorrow, we shall mainly focus on the Bills so that we can finish what is outstanding. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.55 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 August 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
