Monday, 15 August 2005

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you from the weekend and I thank those who have been able to come here this afternoon. It is a fact that we have taken some time without having a break and we are to adjust our programme to continue the way we have continued because of the importance of completing the Constitution amendment that would lead us to make other laws that would enable us to have a proper transition envisaged after the referendum. But we have been stuck with this business for quite some time. 

It was my intention that we should have completed this last week. Unfortunately, because of the events of the week, we did not do much. I think we should now make a firm resolve to complete the two Bills this week say Thursday so that we can tackle other business. I will be very glad if this happens and you will see how glad I will be by action. I know you must be feeling fatigue because of the business we have handled. If we complete this business say this week, I may consider giving you a break of about one week so that we can come back and handle the Budget. The next business will be the Budget but again we shall have to discuss the way of handling this Budget. We have to make some revolution in the handling of the Budget, especially as we are moving to a Multi-party system.

In the Multi-party system of Parliament, they do not discuss all the votes. They pick out certain votes important for debate but this is a subject for discussion with you. I am just giving you information that in other jurisdictions that is what happens. They do not call our, “agriculture, this and the other”. They select those they want to scrutinize and then the others let go. I think we have to find a way because as we have seen in papers there is a lot of demand that certain Bills must be in place. I have seen in the papers where our developing partners are suggesting that by September - but this I must say is not possible. It will not be possible by September to have done what has been envisaged not because of problems but because of the kind of job we are handling. We have the Budget, which is a constitutional programme. We have suspended it but we cannot suspend it longer than we have done. We shall have to complete the Budget. Meanwhile, those concerned will have prepared the Bills that have to go with the Constitution so that when we complete the Budget then we go to those Bills and we see how fast we can handle this matter. But I thank you for the commitment you have exhibited in the past. I hope more commitment will be shown this week so that at the end of Thursday we can go in the gardens. Why not, if we finish this business as I wish you to?  

As for today’s Order Paper, last week we had expected a statement from the Minister of Local Government but I understand he had engagements in Entebbe and I understand the statement is available now. While we are waiting for our friends also to come to join us to deal with the Constitution Bills, let us adjust it so that the minister can make his promised statement for that matter. Thank you very much.

2.45
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Following your communication, and I am not undermining what you have said bout the heavy responsibility we have - but there was a definite date given for the Domestic Relations Bill, which was today 15 August.  I do appreciate that it is not likely to be brought back to Parliament within this week. I request that since it was given a definite date to come back, maybe you attempt to give us also a definite timing that we shall have the Domestic Relations Bill back to the House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, I quite remember I am the one who suggested the 15 August day and I do not know how far the minister has gone. We shall follow it up to ensure that before we tackle the other businesses I have talked about the statement is made so that we know the position of Domestic Relations Bill. Even I now attend a number of functions and weddings. Sometimes they call me to say a word and I fear to go because I always tell them they are going to make a demand on me, “Where is the Domestic Relations Bill?” Yesterday I was at a Hajji’s place and there was this kind of ceremony. I had to explain that this matter is being handled. “We are trying to look at areas that had caused the problem.” But I assured them that at the end of the day we shall make it without harming families because I think our intention is not to make a Bill that is going to disintegrate families. Ours is to bring the families together and because families are the bricks for the country, I am conscious of that. I will talk to the minister to see how far he has gone so that this matter is reported to us.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week the Government promised this August House that they would come with the statement on the matter of press freedom. I was just wondering whether they have been working at it and if the statement is now available because it is extremely urgent with the unfolding events. I would like to know if the Government is ready to tell this August House the policy. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I am the one who said that the Government would make a statement but then the matter is being complicated because I understand there is a court process, which is going on about it. This statement tackles the court process and this may cause a problem. But I hope the minister will tell us what he intends to do. 

2.49
MR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I just want to raise as a matter of concern, which is the current escalating fuel prices. I know it is not within our means as a country to control the escalating prices. As you know the fuel prices internationally are going up and I want to express my concern here. I want the Leader of Government Business to at least bring to us as Parliament of Uganda a comprehensive national strategic plan on energy, which includes fuel because I am aware that fuel is a finite element, which as exploitation goes on internationally, as fuel is being drawn, it is going to be finished one day and even if it is not finished because of increasing demand, the price will keep going up. As it is in Uganda today we depend on transportation and in most cases even for domestic use and other commercial uses, we depend heavily on fuel.  

I would envisage that government could plan to expand and develop our hydropower, which is in abundance, and even convert some transport systems to use electricity. We should have some comprehensive long-term plan to reduce dependency on oil, which we do not even have. We have tried in Semliki and results are not coming out, which means there are only some small amounts within the creaks within the rocks but which cannot be commercially exported and we are going to depend on importation of fuel.

I am requesting kindly that government comes up with a write up for Parliament so that we debate and come up with a direction on how we shall tackle these energy prices. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can the ministers respond? This was supposed to be a Communication from the Chair but these matters have been raised. Don’t you think we should get responses on these and then we proceed as the Order Paper dictates?  

2.52
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Mr Speaker, I am raising a very important matter. There is a lot of distress in the Police Force. The majority of the police men and women have not received their salaries for last month and I would like to know from the Leader of Government Business why this is the case and what is being done to make sure their salaries are paid.
 
2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr James Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, the Government last week promised to make a statement concerning the closure of KFM radio station and the current state of press freedom in Uganda, but in light of what you have just told honourable members, I find it very difficult to proceed with that statement.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, it is an established practice in the August House that indeed we do not discuss any matter before the law courts. To the best of my knowledge this matter has yet to reach the law courts. Is it in order for my honourable colleague to deny information to the August House under the pretext that the matter is before the law courts? If so, can he mention the case number, who is hearing it and when was he charged Mr Mwenda to qualify this as subjudice?

THE SPEAKER: Why do you say it is a court case, can you substantiate? I want to rule on the matter.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Well, Mr Speaker, the honourable member is not informed. As a matter of fact, only this afternoon Andrew Mwenda was charged and it may appear that the honourable member is not informed about it. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have substantiated. There is no debate on this issue.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of salaries for the Police, I do not have information right now because I knew that salaries for all civil servants and all forces are paid promptly. I will inquire into this and give the House information. 

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, we should have given a progress report on the DRB today but as you rightly pointed out, our ministry has been engaged in these Constitution amendments. What I know is that negotiations with the interested parties are going on and as soon as they are completed we will take the outcome of those negotiations to Cabinet, which we have not done, to enable Cabinet have a final position, which we will bring to this House.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This House is an honourable House and should not be taken for a ride. What is before court is Andrew Mwenda the man, the case of closing KFM radio is not yet before court. Why does the minister concerned not give us an explanation and instead chooses to confuse us? We understand the law and you should not confuse us.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.57
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement to the House on the disappearance and presumed death of Mr Robert Kizito, a boda boda cyclist. 

On Wednesday, 3 August 2005, the matter was raised on the Floor of this House concerning the acts of a group of boda boda cyclists from Kampala Central. It was mentioned that they went and exhumed a dead body at Bukasa Cemetery in search of the body of their colleague, who is feared to have drowned after a heavy downpour in the city on Thursday, 28 July 2005. I have received conflicting statements from the leaders of the boda boda cyclists, and the leadership of Kampala City Council regarding the circumstances of this tragedy. The leadership of the boda boda cyclists has told me that their colleague died on 28 July 2005 during the rain as he was trying to seek shelter. This was after falling into an open manhole at the entrance of Kikuubo market, and he was carried away by the flooding water. A joint team of the Police, Fire Brigade and the cyclists themselves made a fruitless search for the body of the cyclist along the Nakivubo Channel, actually up to the swamp near Luzira. This search has proved fruitless till today.  

In a turn of events, however, the cyclists allege that KCC management found and secretly buried the body of their colleague on Friday, 29 July 2005 at Bukasa Cemetery, disguising the body as that of a female. The cyclists, therefore, say the reason for their going to hon. Sitenda Sebalu’s constituency at Bukasa was to exhume the remains of their colleague and bury him at his home. These are claims the KCC leaders are denying. 

The Kampala City Council on the other hand says that when they got reports that the boda boda cyclist was feared dead as a result of the floods at the Kikuubo area, they informed the Police who quickly launched investigations into the matter and the search for the body, if any. To-date, no body has been recovered. KCC goes further to say that the body could not have been carried far, as the Nakivubo Channel has metallic barriers that trap residue particles and stop them from flowing along with the water. Therefore, these metallic barriers would have trapped the body if the floods had carried it. 

The mayor has assured me of the following. Firstly, that since all investigations have not produced any results, KCC has decided to hire a private investigator to look into the allegations that have been made. 

Secondly, the cemetery at Bukasa belongs to KCC and for a long time has been used as a burial ground for bodies that have not been claimed. He further assured me that this burial ground is properly maintained to the standard that is required of cemeteries.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this matter has been handled by the relevant offices, particularly the Police. I have followed up the matter with the District Police Commander, Jinja Road Police Station who was present at Bukasa cemetery when the exhumations took place. He has informed me that the allegations made by the boda boda cyclists that the cemetery attendant accepted knowledge of the body in question are not true. 

Furthermore, according to the DPC, what the cemetery attendant actually said was that the process of exhuming the bodies was tedious and, therefore, demanded some money as a labour cost to help them do it. The group immediately raised this money that was for purposes of opening up all fresh graves to establish whether Mr Kizito’s body was in one of those graves. After this exercise, no positive identification was made. However, because the group had turned rowdy and started accusing the attendant of conspiracy with KCC, the DPC arrested him for his own security from an imminent lynching. He was, however, released the following day.  

This information has been corroborated by the Regional Political Commander Kampala, Mr Benson Nyeko, who has said that the search has so far yielded nothing and hopes for locating the body have faded. According to the Police, therefore, the exhuming of bodies at Bukasa cemetery took place but no positive identification was made contrary to what was said by boda boda leaders that the process stopped midway following orders issued by KCC. 

We are now awaiting a report from the private investigators commissioned by the KCC after which I will make another statement to the House. Before I conclude, this morning I met with the top leadership of KCC in my office and among other things we discussed this issue and I was assured that immediately the investigations are completed, I will be informed and I will subsequently inform the House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

3.03
MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for this statement and take this opportunity to extend my condolences to the family of Mr Kizito, the boda boda cyclist, purposely because his body has not been identified or seen. Therefore, we presume that he is dead.  

On the day this issue was raised by hon. Sitenda on the Floor of the House, among other issues raised was the fact that Kampala City Council has been very negligent on matters regarding management of the city. That is why a manhole had been left unattended and open for many months and consequently the rains of 28th July resulted in a person falling through and drowning in it. 

Hon. Sauda Mugerwa Namaggwa actually went ahead to demand that hon. Members of Parliament from Kampala make a statement and report to this House on how the management of Kampala City Council is handled. I want to say that I was waiting for a more detailed statement from the hon. Minister of Local Government and he has ably covered the issue of Mr Kizito. I also want to mention that when the incident took place, I was not in Kampala. However, I want to report to this House that hon. Babu visited Kikuubo on Saturday morning with city council officials and was able to talk to the boda boda cyclists, the DPC and specifically Mr Turyagumanawe. I was also able to talk to him on the day we were mourning the late Dr Garang. He actually told me that the body had been found and taken to the city mortuary contrary to what the honourable minister is reporting. I want to say -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I did not get the name of the person who claimed that the body had been taken to the mortuary.

MRS ZZIWA: I want to report, Mr Minister, that when I went to sign the condolence book at the Sudanese embassy, I met Mr Julius Odwe and Mr Turyagumanawe. As we were chatting I asked them about the boda boda cyclist and they told me that a body had been found and taken to city mortuary. I wanted to place that on the Floor of the House for purposes of verification that I had an opportunity to talk to and got this information from these two very senior police officers. 

That notwithstanding, I want to briefly handle the issues that were raised by hon. Namaggwa because I think they need some kind of response. I want to mention that during the second session of this august House, hon. Nsaba Buturo brought a motion to this Floor demanding that Parliament pass a resolution on how city council is managing its affairs and on the status of the city. 

Your ruling was that a motion of the resolution of Parliament would not discuss exhaustively the issues pertaining to city council and find solutions for them. Therefore, you advised that the responsible committee, which is the Committee on Local Government and Public Service, take up the matter, study it and bring back a report to this House. By then hon. Beatrice Byenkya was the chairperson and she led a ten-member team to visit Kampala City Council, the White Hall and the divisions. 

May I add that the findings were not very pleasant? I want to mention that it is true that under the Local Government Act, city council is autonomous. It is given that power to manage its affairs. However, many people, including residents of the city and members of this August House, are not happy. I remember at one time that Col Bogere also raised issues concerning city council on this Floor. 

I want to take this opportunity to mention that we the Members of Parliament from Kampala have a caucus and after observing these tremendous challenges, have made an effort to make an appointment with the Mayor of Kampala to discuss these issues. This is because ordinarily we cannot discuss these issues at length in the council yet they are quite many. The honourable minister also knows that we have had opportunity to discuss some of these issues, some of which border on crises like strikes by market vendors and boda boda cyclists arising out of increased dues and other strikes arising out of improper infrastructure in gazetted areas like taxi parks, among others. 

Unfortunately, the honourable mayor was not very willing to talk to us and my colleagues are here and can bear testimony to that. Actually later on we received a letter from the mayor who was complaining that we were not giving him due support. I took that opportunity to write back and said, “Would you kindly reconvene and avail us time as the Kampala MPs District Caucus to discuss these issues because they are very serious?” I do not want to divulge details but the letter I received in response was very serious and frustrating and I shared this with the hon. Minister of Local Government.  

With that in mind, Mr Speaker, we have made continuous efforts to raise all these challenging issues to you and the Minister of Local Government. I can quote the case of the Naguru-Nakawa Housing Estate that led between 1,800 and 3,000 tenants to walk the streets of Kampala and come to this august House to bring a petition to you. Finally it was His Excellency the President who intervened.  

I want to quote another case that involved the people who operate in an area called the container village near the weighbridge. These people have been operating in that area since 1989 and by virtue of this, they applied to city council to be allocated that area. This was before the Land Act and even after the District Land Board was established, they applied but they were denied. Later they even sent you an application. Soon after the boda boda incident there was another incident in container village simply because the mayor did not seem to appreciate the condition -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is becoming a very long statement yet what we have is a statement on Kizito. If you still have a lot to say about city council that can be another item. Could you briefly conclude? 

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, I was being elaborate because hon. Namaggwa did not seem to appreciate the challenges we face. I also want to salute this August House and the constitutional commission for coming up with a recommendation for city council to have a separate law and be governed autonomously. This is different from the current arrangement and we hope that this will alleviate some of the challenges we are having. I wanted to bring this on the Floor of the House because there has been an adamant and arrogant attitude towards leaders who are simply trying to point out problems within the city. 

Furthermore, there is lack of appreciation of problems faced by residents. For instance when the   boda boda cyclists got this problem it would have been very easy if the authorities had addressed the problem there and then. However, they had to wait until the boda boda cyclists demonstrated before acting. I think this is very unfortunate because as leaders we asked the city authorities to put a slab on the manhole but it was not done.

As I wind up I want to say that these manholes are all over town and all of us are vulnerable. I remember one time when one of the Justices almost fell in a manhole as he was walking around Uganda House. This is a big problem so when we talk about these issues it should not be in isolation. Maybe we need to demand that the report of the Local Government and Public Service Committee to be brought back before this House so that we can debate it fully. This is because many issues concerning misappropriation of funds in projects have been reported and I think we need to find a solution for this. Otherwise, we are equally frustrated.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should leave this to the supervising committee to handle. 

3.15
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. I have looked at the minister’s statement and a couple of things require clarification. First of all we have Robert Kizito, a boda boda cyclist falling in a manhole because it had no cover. The question I would like to ask the minister is when Robert Kizito fell into the manhole, who was there to witness it and where are the witnesses?  

Secondly it has been said that to date the search has proved fruitless. Who is responsible for this search? The reason I am raising this is because I hear that Kampala City Council is hiring a private investigator to handle this case. Is it because the public security authorities responsible for this have failed? And if they have failed is there any justification to keep them?  

Thirdly, there is the question of who is responsible for putting covers on manholes. We need to know so that we can hold those people accountable. The most disturbing issue of all is that of bodies being exhumed. If a body was exhumed then whose was it? There must be someone who exhumed this body and tests must be done to prove whose body it was that was exhumed. This would help rule out foul play of hiding someone who disappeared when everybody was not looking. We are raising this to avoid extending political interpretations on something that was accidental.  

I sense that hon. Zziwa’s comments are as a result of failure of the system to establish simple facts and truth. If a man disappeared into a manhole they must have seen him. If you are searching a manhole it must lead somewhere and a body must be found there. There is nothing like a body disappearing in a manhole and you cannot find it. If you exhumed the fellow surely you must know who was exhumed and whose body it was. The statement would be better if these facts were revealed. Then insinuations like those by hon. Margaret Zziwa would hold no water. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Why do you want to discuss this matter when it is an incomplete exercise? Has somebody found Mr Kizito somewhere? The report is that he fell into a manhole. Has there been any new development to disprove the fact that he actually fell into a hole? What are we discussing? I think the Committee on Local Government should handle this matter. 

MAJ. KINOBE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I agree with you entirely that the relevant committee should handle this matter. However, when you look at the statement, I think we need to broaden what we are talking about. The statement is about the disappearance of one Kizito in an accident that happened at the entrance of a busy lane in the City. There is a broader matter that has not been addressed here. 

Mr Kizito dropped into a manhole at the entrance of a lane in this very busy trading centre that has been the subject of wrangles for over two years. I do not know what the minister wrote to Kampala City Council about but I thought that the explanation would have been broader to include what hon. Kamuntu has just said rather than simply concentrating on Kizito.  

One area of concern is what caused Mr Kizito to fall into the hole. Another area of concern is that having been on a committee that is slightly related to the one responsible for this accident, there are pieces of information that I have picked up that raise other issues. Therefore, the aspect of negligence or incompetence that have been advanced by hon. Zziwa need to be looked at. Kikuubo lane is one that was supposed to have been constructed about two years ago. The local community mobilized Shs 70 million and Kampala City Council was supposed to top up with another Shs 50 million for the work to be completed. The community approached hon. Awuzu Andruale who volunteered to give them the necessary machines. But along the way city council defaulted on fulfilling the requirements.  

Shortly after that, and I have documents here to that effect, a company was contracted to do the work at the cost of Shs 200 million. This was after KCC failed to raise the Shs 50 million to top up on the initiative of the community to have this work done. This company called Multiplex, is the same one responsible for handling road parking and has a contract to collect revenue. However, there is a letter that says –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think we are going astray. Now we are beginning to talk of contracts. Let the Committee on Local Government handle this matter.

MAJ. KINOBE: Mr Speaker, I wanted to request –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That is the end of the matter. The committee will deal with whatever remains. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, hon. Zziwa has given us a lead that she talked to senior police officers and they indicated that the body of Kizito had been found. I am surprised that she waited for this statement to be read instead of helping us get the body so that the family – because that is what she said. I would want, if the body is in the mortuary –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Did you contact the police yourself?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I did.

THE SPEAKER: She has given you the information so you can verify it.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: As a Member of Parliament for Kampala –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You are in charge of the city council. Let this matter be handled by the committee. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION 
(AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2005

3.23
Clause 97

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman as I said before, clause 97 seeks to introduce communities that were not recognized in the 1995 Constitution. It introduces five communities. However, the committee examined the request of the petition from the hon. Twarebireho Tungwako to recognise the people called the Banyaruguru. We duly submitted this to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and sufficient verification was done. We received communication from the Minister of Internal Affairs saying that the Banyaruguru should duly be recognized. We, therefore, propose an amendment to insert the Banyaruguru after Aliba, in clause 97. We beg to propose.

MR AEL LODOU: Mr Chairman, I want to move an amendment to the Third Schedule immediately after –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I thought we had disposed of the issue of the Banyaruguru. Did we not? I think we included them.  

MR AEL LODOU: Mr Chairman, I want to move an amendment to the Third Schedule to include, after Napole, the community of Ngikutio. The Ngikutio are a Nilotic ethnic group who have lived in Dodoth County as an indigenous community since 1st February 1926. I wrote to the Minister of Internal Affairs about this and copied the letter to the Speaker. The minister has given a reply to this effect.

MS KYATUHEIRE: Mr Chairman, I would also like to make an amendment to include the Banyabutumbi of Kinkizi as part of the indigenous communities of Uganda as of 1926. The people that now reside in Kinkizi and parts of Rukungiri were previously brought from Kabale and Kisoro districts. However, the indigenous people of Kinkizi were the Banyabutumbi. I already wrote to the Minister of Internal Affairs and he has approved this. Therefore, I would like the Members of Parliament to support me. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: If I may ask my friend here, in the original Constitution that we are amending I see an indigenous community called the Karimojong. Who are these Karimojong?

MR LODOU: Mr Chairman, the Karimojong are found in places like Matheniko, Bokora and Pian. In Dodoth there are very many other tribes such as the Meni, the Hiti, Tehuso, Napole, Nikwito and Dodoth.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, I received a letter that was addressed to your office and copied to the Chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. The letter came from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs Mr S. P. Kagoda and makes reference to a letter dated 11th August 2005 in respect of a request made by hon. Ark Lodou on the tribe or community he has just mentioned. The last paragraph of the letter says, “I, therefore, propose that they be recognized as an indigenous community that was in existence in Uganda by 1st February 1926,” and he has attached other letters.

A second letter also addressed to you is dated 9th August 2005 and is in respect of the Banyabutumbi and the Aringas who wish to be included in the Third Schedule of the Constitution. This letter is also from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and is signed by the Permanent Secretary.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, I think we are going too far as regards the identification of groups. In particular I want to comment on the Banyabutumbi. If one is talking of a tribe or an ethnic group, there must be characteristics that one can use to identify it. One of those characteristics is the language and that is the most important one. I would like the proposers to tell us the language of the Banyabutumbi?  

A second characteristic is the customs and traditions. There must be something to identify you as a group that is different from another. For example the way to differentiate clans are their different totems. I am an omwitira and you can identify the totems, animals or birds that are supposed to belong to my clan. However, when you talk of the Banyabutumbi I have some queries. What is their totem, what is their ancestral origin and what is the name of their ancestor?  

In my knowledge, Butumbi is an area in the rift valley. The word emitumbi means dead bodies and that is where the word Bunyabutumbi originated. There was a war that was fought in that area and as a result there were many dead bodies. From then on whenever there was something wrong people would say, “Mzee Butumbi” which meant, “Go to Butumbi where there are dead bodies”. Therefore, for anybody to claim that this historical fact is an identity that you want sanctified in the Constitution, is absolutely absurd.

MS KYATUHEIRE: Thank you very much hon. Kabwegyere for giving that information. Mr Chairman, I would like to say that the language of the Banyabutumbi is Runyabutumbi and as I have already said, people were shifted from various parts of Kigezi to this particular region in the 1940s. As we shifted to this place there were already people that existed there called the Banyabutumbi. They had a different culture from the people that were relocated there; they had different types of food and different practices. 

Therefore, the issue the minister has raised that Banyabutumbi is an area where they buried dead bodies is not correct. I would like to inform him that there was a malaria epidemic when these people were transferred from different parts of Kigezi. As a result, many people feared to go to this place. However, because it was referred to as such does not mean that these immigrants were the indigenous people. I would like Members of Parliament to appreciate that I was born in this place and that my immediate neighbours were the Abanyabutumbi. I was educated in Bunyabutumbi and therefore the information I am giving as area Member of Parliament is the right one. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well the name may sound queer but they claim to be the Banyabutumbi. Why don’t we vote on this? We also have these amendments from Karamoja, Kanungu and Aringa.  

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. Every time an attempt is made to identify communities anthropologically contradictions are raised between states that are modernizing and those that are retrogressing. I have never known why you have no entity. I might as well say that the Basingo should be identified here and made a tribe since they have totems, a language and all these things. So, even by asking the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Internal Affairs may not – we should have a Department of Anthropology. That is the only one, which could give authentic information about identification of these tribes. 

The Ministry of Internal Affairs is for security, order and law. The information being given is like somebody identifying an ethnic group and he wants it to be included in the Constitution and tomorrow it will be challenged. Why don’t we get rid of these tribal identifications and be identified as Ugandans? We would have solved a whole thing by a stroke of a pen? What are we keeping here? Even for purposes of ownership, claiming land, this constantly raises problems of wrong people being identified differently. Being Ugandan we should be sufficient and we should rule out this. I move –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: If you move, your moving will be to delete schedule so and so. You delete, Banyankole, Baganda –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Absolutely.

THE CHAIRMAN: If you stand by your principle, it means that the schedule is unnecessary. Just call people Ugandans.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I wish to move that the First Schedule in the Constitution be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there are three proposals to add on the list. A certain local community mentioned by my friend here from Karamoja and another one from Kanungu, and another one from West Nile. Let us vote. Do you want to add another one?

MR PETER LOKERIS: Mr Chairman, there is a community living on Mt Kadamu, the one we used to call Debeshen. It speaks a very beautiful language, which I also do not know. Recently I went to them –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But you should have taken it to the committee. Let us follow the procedure. 

MR PETER LOKERIS: Mr Chairman, it would have been appropriate but we have passed this very important clause. I contacted the chairman and he said if I did not know the procedure, I would propose it here. It is a very important community –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, as you see we have to check with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. This we cannot do. I think somebody was asking why the Minister of Internal Affairs to handle this, but it is the one with records of citizenship. This is where you go for a passport. That is why it is in charge of doing this.  

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I think there is a bit of error by most people when they look at the Third Schedule. I want this House to realize that what it handles –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: It is the Third Schedule not the First Schedule.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Yes, that is the Third Schedule.  What is dealt with in the Third Schedule are not tribes or ethnic groups. Many people, including what hon. Kamuntu was coming up with, are talking of the Constitution recognizing tribes. The Constitution of Uganda does not recognize tribes. We are talking of Uganda’s indigenous communities as at 1 February 1926. I think the Minister of Local Government, who is a very renowned physiologist, should guide the House on this matter. When we talk of just communities they are the looser than when we call them tribes and ethnic groups. Therefore, you can go into 100 and 200 communities.  

If we in Uganda are to look at why this is important, it is important because if you go back to the issue of citizenship it is addressed – you look at Article 10(a). It says: “The following persons shall be citizens of Uganda.” You are recognized as a Ugandan by virtue of being in that community, call it by descent and afterwards by birth, by being indigenous as at 1 February 1926. They are talking of indigenous communities, not indigenous tribes or indigenous ethnic groups.  So, it is important for you people to know in this House that tribes in Uganda are not recognized under the Constitution but they are presumed. So you go into your clans and so on –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you help us? Is indigenous community defined in the Constitution?

MR OMARA ATUBO: No, but a tribe is a much bigger thing. When you are talking of the Langi, you are talking of hon. Kiyonga’s tribe, which goes up to Congo. It goes up to the shores of America, crossing the Atlantic Ocean. But we are talking about indigenous tribes in Uganda and, therefore, we may go into very small indigenous tribes. That is why these Karimojong – Karimojong looks an ethnic group but the moment you go into the details of Karimojong you come into many indigenous communities. That is why you have about 20 indigenous communities coming from Karamoja. So Karamoja is recognized as a community in its own right but then you come with all that list of 2,000 people. They may be 2,000 but they are a community.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the point is made.

MR OMARA ATUBO: So, my sister here from Kinkizi may actually have a point because we are not talking about the Bakiga. We are not talking about the Banyankole. We are talking about indigenous communities -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you have made the point. You have seen the importance of this Third Schedule because it is linked with Article 10.  What we have to ask ourselves is: what harm will it do if you recognise what he calls an indigenous community? What do you lose? This should be the principle to govern us. Can we vote now? Let us start with this community; let us vote on the Ikwicho.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, honourable members, the position is as follows: five abstentions, none against, and those for are 83. As you realize this is below the required quorum. I do not know whether there are some members who are outside. Can you ring the bell so that we see how to proceed? Should we start with the other one then we come back to this one later -(Interjections)- okay, it was pending business. So now let us vote again on the Ikwicho. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: How do I deal with you hon. Aggrey Awori? How do I treat you? Is it abstention? What is your vote?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I could not even figure out how to write or to pronounce the name. I am trying to figure it out from my colleagues. How do I vote on this matte? If I abstain, I have voted. If I say no, I have voted. If I say yes, I have vote and yet I have no idea about the matter. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You abstain. I take it you have abstained. Honourable members, the position is: four abstentions, none against, and those for are 107. So you have adopted it.

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: We go on to the Banyabutumbi, so let us vote on it.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on that indigenous community from Kanungu is: six abstentions, those against are three, and those for are 107. The ayes have it. (Applause)

(Question agreed to.)

MR AWORI: Procedure, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we finish this clause and then we can come to that later?

MR AWORI: I was just wondering if you are against the idea of including the schedule in the Constitution, why should I vote for or against a tribe being included in the Constitution?

THE CHAIRMAN: The thing is, we have to categorise you for purposes of our records to know those who are for, who are against and who are on the no side. So, the Kanungu indigenous community has been adopted? Now we go to Aringa.

MRS ZZIWA: In the interest of time and to allow us handle this expeditiously, why don’t we list all the indigenous communities and then we vote once?

THE CHAIRMAN: Since we have started with this procedure, let us continue with it. Let us vote on the Aringa.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, the position on Aringa is: two abstentions, none against, and those for are 111. So, it is adopted.  

(Question agreed to.)

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to propose that the Indian community be inserted in the Constitution because the constitutional making process is supposed to be objective. If we go by the time, 1 February 1926, the Indian community was here. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, it is well intentioned, I agree, but then you should have taken it to the committee for verification. Because if you say, Indian, you could as well say, British or English, but this does not deny them applying for citizenship. It should, however, have been verified as indicated by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. So, we can leave that.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Last time when you adjourned the House I had moved a motion that we delete Barundi and this motion had been seconded. I want to put the record correct that that motion, which I moved was not to delete Banyarwanda because I have been getting attacks from all corners, but I still move that we delete Barundi from the schedule because this is a nationality of another country.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I remember you did but then we have problems. However, let us vote on it.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, on the motion by hon. Banyenzaki to delete Barundi, the position is: 15 abstentions, those for are 10, and those against are 18. The noes have it.

(Question negatived.)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, when you look at this schedule, the Barundi were suggested by – this is a Government Bill. So I am seeking clarification from the Leader of Government Business whether it is procedurally right for a minister to abstain when this paper came from their position? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, you have asked that question, but why don’t you leave the Cabinet to deal with it? We need to take the roll call on adopting the amended Third Schedule.

(Question put.)

AYES:
1.	AACHILLA JOHN ROBERTS 
2.	AEL ARK LODOU 
3.	AGARD DIDI 
4.	AHABWE PEREZ 
5.	AKAKI AYUMU JOVINO 
6.	AKELLO DINAH GRACE 
7.	ALONGA OTHMAN HARUNA 
8.	AMAMA MBABAZI
9.	AMONGIN APORU CHRISTINE 
10.	ANDRUALE AWUZU 
11.	ARUMADRI JOHN DRAZU 
12.	AWONGO AHMED 
13.	AWORI SIRYOYI AGGREY 
14.	BABA DIRI MARGARET
15.	BABU EDWARD 
16.	BAGUMA ISOKE MATIA 
17.	BAKKABULINDI CHARLES 
18.	BASALIZA MWESIGYE STEVEN 
19.	BAZANA KABWEGYERE TARSIS 
20.	BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE 
21.	BESISIRA IGNATIUS 
22.	BINTU ABWOOLI LUKUMU JALIA 
23.	BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE GERALDINE 
24.	BUTIME TOM 
25.	BYAMUKAMA DORA 
26.	BYANYIMA NATHAN 
27.	CHEBROT STEVEN
28.	CHELANGAT GERTRUDE 
29.	ERIYO JESSICA 
30.	GOLE NICHOLAS DAVIS 
31.	HYUHA SAMALI DOROTHY 
32.	KABAKUMBA LABWONI MASIKO 
33.	KAFABUSA WERIKHE MICHAEL 
34.	KAGABA HARRIET 
35.	KAGIMU KIWANUKA MAURICE 
36.	KAGONYERA MONDO 
37.	KAJEKE WILFRED 
38.	KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA VICTORIA 
39.	KAMANA WESONGA EDWARD 
40.	KAMANDA BATALINGAYA 
41.	KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKOMU 
42.	KASULE LUMUMBA JUSTINE 
43.	KATIRIMA PHENHAS 
44.	KATONGOLE BADRU 
45.	KAWOYA BANGIRANA ANIFA 
46.	KAYONGO TOM 
47.	KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO LAWRENCE 
48.	KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA ISRAEL 
49.	KINOBE JIMMY WILLIAM  
50.	KIRASO BIRUNGI BEATRICE 
51.	KITYO HENRY MUTEBI 
52.	KIWAGAMA WILLIAM WILBERFORCE 
53.	KIYONGA CHRISPUS WALTER 
54.	KOLUO CHARLES PETER 
55.	KUBEKETERYA JAMES 
56.	KYATUHEIRE JACQUELINE 
57.	LOCHIAM MILIGAN ROSE 
58.	LOKERIS PETER AIMAT 
59.	LWANGA MUTEKANGA TIMOTHY 
60.	MADADA KYEBAKOZE SULAIMAN 
61.	MASIKO KOMUHANGI WINFRED 
62.	MATEMBE MIRIA                                                                                          
63.	MATOVU BYATIKE 
64.	MATOVU DAVID 
65.	MBABAZI KABUSHENGA HAMLET 
66.	MEHANGYE IDAH 
67.	MIGEREKO DAUDI 
68.	MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA 
69.	MUHWEZI KATUGUGU JIM 
70.	MUKASA ANTHONY HARRIS 
71.	MUKIIBI BENIGNA 
72.	MUKULA GEORGE MICHAEL 
73.	MUKULA RICHARD 
74.	MUKWAYA BALUNZI JANAT 
75.	MULENGANI BERNARD 
76.	MUNYIRA WABWIRE ROSE 
77.	MUTULUUZA PETER 
78.	MWESIGE ADOLF 
79.	MWESIGYE RUHINDI HOPE  
80.	NABETA NASANI 
81.	NAMAYANJA ROSE 
82.	NAMUSOKE SARAH 
83.	NAMUYANGU JENNIFER 
84.	NASASIRA JOHN 
85.	NAYIGA FLORENCE 
86.	NSABA BUTURO JAMES 
87.	NSHIMYE SEBUTULO 
88.	NSUBUGA NSAMBU 
89.	NSUBUGA WILLIAM 
90.	NTACYOTUGIRA PHILIP 
91.	NYANZI VINCENT 
92.	OBBO HENRY 
93.	OCHIENG PATRICK 
94.	ODONGO JEJE 
95.	OGOLA AKISOFERI MICHAEL 
96.	OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY 
97.	OKOT OGONG FELIX 
98.	OKUMU-RINGA PATRICK 
99.	OKURUT KAROORO MARY
100.	OLUM ZACHARY 
101.	OMACH MANDIR FRED 
102.	OMWONY OJWOK 
103.	ONEK HILARY 
104.	OPANGE LOUIS 
105.	ORECH MARTIN 
106.	ORYEM HENRY OKELLO 
107.	PATAKI AMASI 
108.	RAINER KAFIRE JULIET 
109.	RUHINDI FRED
110.	RUKUNDO SERAPIO 
111.	RUTAMWEBWA MARY MUGYENYI 
112.	RUZINDANA AUGUSTINE 
113.	RWAKIMARI BEATRICE 
114.	SABIITI JACK 
115.	SAIDI OKUTI NASUR 
116.	SEBALU MIKE 
117.	SEKITOLEKO JULIET 
118.	SSEMPANGI KEFA 
119.	SSENTONGO TEOPISTA 
120.	THEMBO NYOMBI 
121.	TUBWITA GRACE 
122.	TUMWESIGYE ELIODA 
123.	TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO 
124.	WABUDEYA BEATRICE 
125.	WAMBUZI GAGAWALA 
126.	WONEKA OLIVER 
127.	YERI OFWONO 
128.	YIGA ANTHONY 
129.	ZZIWA MARGARET

NOES:
1. BANYENZAKI HENRY
2. ISANGA NAKADAMA LUKIA  

ABSTENTIONS:
1. WANDERA MARTIN 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, on the question of adopting the Third Schedule as amended, we received one abstention, two against, and those for are 129. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The schedule is amended. We congratulate those who were not featuring in the schedule as it was before.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I rise to again bring to the House an amendment to clause 8(a), which I had proposed and was stood over. I beg that you permit me to present it.

I beg to move an amendment by insertion of a new clause after clause 5, to be a new clause 8(a) to read as follows: “That Uganda shall be governed based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy; and that Parliament shall make the relevant laws for purposes of giving full effect to clause (1) of this Article.” I am seconded by hon. Bamwanga Stephen.

By way of justification, in order to strengthen the culture and spirit of nationalism it is important to have the minimum interests or the minimum elements, which constitute Uganda’s national interests to be the guiding principles of Uganda’s policy. And these interests must be stated in the justifiable part of the Constitution in order to give them a permanent feature, which must be implemented by all government agencies. 

It is important to have national interests and the common good defined by Parliament to enable the key players and stakeholders in the national affairs appreciate the minimum interests, which must be observed to protect Uganda as a state, and to have defined national interests as the bedrock of state policy, which are followed by both government and civic players. It is, therefore, important to provide in the Constitution that the national interests shall guide the nation in order to give effect to the national objectives and directive principles of the state. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it okay, honourable minister?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, hon. Zziwa’s amendment was stood over; it is not a recommittal and the Government has no objection to its consideration.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then what do we do? Let us vote on this amendment by show of hands.  

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the proposed amendment to insert clause 8(a) as part of the Bill is as follows: three abstentions, none against, and those for are 94. The ayes have it, so the amendment is adopted. 

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: As you realise now I am in danger of going below the quorum because it is 96, this is barely 97; I do not know whether you are tired! Is there another part we stood over?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, this is in regard to the National Objectives of State Policy, Chapter XXVII, on the environment, and it has already been debated by the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. I propose to amend Chapter XXVII of the National Objective of State Policy by inserting parts (c), (d) and (e), to read as follows: “The state, including local governments, shall promote the application and effective use of weather and climate information in the planning process at all levels. 

(b) The state and the local governments shall promote and foster climate stability through tree planting and national utilisation of energy resources. 

(c) The state and the local governments shall ensure clean and safe industrial production.

The justification is as follows: the 1995 Constitution was enacted before Uganda had ratified the Kyoto Protocol.

Secondly, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has already issued a report and has recommended that the amendment be adopted. Even if the Kyoto Protocol is reversed in the year 2012, the concerns of the protocol will remain relevant to Uganda.

Three, I have consulted all the relevant stakeholders in the sector of the environment over the amendment and they have all given the amendment full sanctity.

Four, the proposed provision should be part of the state policy guidelines because they are unique and appear nowhere else in the existing provisions of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, Mr Minister and the chairperson, you have heard the proposed amendment. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr chairman, I oppose the amendment because first of all it was not served to us; we did not study it. I read the report of the committee and that amendment does not appear among the recommendations but subject to the advise of the chairman who is here, it changes nothing because all the concerns of the mover are really catered for in paragraph 27. It can also be handled in the law that regulates the environment in this country. So, I invite members to reject that amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, we vote on the amendment –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, the chairman of the committee has not said anything about it.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, I only have to read that portion of the report of the committee on this issue, hon. John Lukyamuzi and hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba articulated the introduction of the principles contained in the Kyoto Protocol on climatic change in the national objectives and directive principles of state policy. The committee found that even if the protocol is subject to review in 2012, the principles articulated by the protocol are everlasting and, therefore, their importance cannot be undermined even if the state’s parties later abandon the protocol. The committee agreed with the principle of the proposed amendment but recommends that since the amendments fall outside the scope of the Bill they cannot be handled with this Bill. That is what the committee said. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, now those in support of the motion to amend as proposed by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, the circumstances in which we are going to vote do not please me at all. Something is wrong; therefore, I withdraw the amendment. (Laughter)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, I had an amendment, which you had told me to submit at this stage and I would like to move this amendment. 

THE CHAIRMAN: We are dealing with the title -(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: It is in respect of clause 23 –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You wanted recommittal?

MR MWESIGE: Hon. Dora Byamukama’s amendment is moved as we are completing clause 23 and she was advised to move it as a stood over clause. That is what I recall. It is not a new thing.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is it then?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, this amendment is in respect to clause 8(2) and it addresses the issue of a person that a person is not qualified for election as a Member of Parliament if that person - we have already passed (f) and (g) and I would like to propose (h) to say that if that person has within seven years immediately preceding the by-election been disqualified for election as a Member of Parliament by the Electoral Commission for any electoral malpractices under paragraph (f) of clause (1) of Article 61 of this Constitution. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Does the Electoral Commission disqualify anybody?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, when you look at Article 61(f) of the Constitution it states that the Electoral Commission shall have the following functions, and (f) is “to hear and determine election complaints arising before and during polling”. Therefore, when the Electoral Commission hears and determines, if it determines that a person should be qualified then this determination should have the same weight as a court decision because it is a constitutional mandate. 

When you look at Article 64(1) it says that; “Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Electoral Commission in respect of any complaints referred to in paragraph (f) of Article 61 of the Constitution, may appeal to the High Court.” And that appeal would be final. So, this is –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean if one is disqualified because he is found to be under age and they disqualify him, therefore next time he is of age, they say, “Well, you were disqualified and you cannot stand”?  

MS KIRASO: Mr Chairman, I am also trying to get this amendment because it looks like it is going to work retrospectively. Further to the example you have given, if somebody is not qualified as in the academic qualifications at that time and he is disqualified on those grounds and that person continues and reads and gets the required qualifications, does that mean that as long as that election is within seven years that person will not be allowed to contest? I am finding a problem with the retrospective nature of this amendment.

MR SABIITI: I would like to get some clarification from hon. Dora Byamukama. In your amendment does it mean that if a person has been taken to court for malpractice or whatever and loses the case that this will also be included? We should not try to scrutinise an individual and stop him from taking part in an election because I can already see some people targeting others. We should be very careful -(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, this Parliament has already passed clauses (f) and (g) and if you read carefully they say that, “A person is not qualified to stand as a Member of Parliament if that person has within seven years immediately preceding the election been convicted by a competent court of a crime involving dishonest or moral turpitude.” Clause (g) states that, “If that person has within the seven years immediately preceding the election been convicted by a competent court of an offence under any law relating to elections conducted by the Electoral Commission…”  

The principle that hon. Sabiiti is referring to has already been passed and justice is not blind. All we are saying is that if the Electoral Commission is given a constitutional mandate to hear and determine cases, their determination should have the same gravity as that of the court of law. If someone feels that they have been unjustly dealt with they should appeal. This Parliament has just passed special courts for corruption. Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Sabiiti to insinuate that we are making a law with eyes, when he has been part of us?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think he either misunderstood the reason behind your amendment or was interpreting it in his own way. The problem is his assessment of your proposal.  

MR SABIITI: There is something I wanted to clarify.

THE CHAIRMAN: Since he has not understood the reason behind your amendment, his submission is not out of order. However don’t you think that what was passed under clause (g) is enough to cover you? If you think that the Electoral Commission has powers to do all this why don’t you leave it to them to impose this ban on the person being disqualified? This way we will mandate the Electoral Commission to impose any sanctions that they will deem fit without necessarily amending the Constitution.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, I agree with you that it should be included in the electoral laws and I would like to leave it at that. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us now deal with the title.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, when you called it out the first time I was thinking of either the long title or the short one. However, since there have been a number of changes on what has been passed, we need to reflect this in the long title of the Bill. I do not know whether I should introduce this at this stage because the long title of the Bill is almost a page long. 

We propose that from the fourth line of the long title we delete the phrase, “To prescribe the procedure for the removal of members of Commissions, Boards, the Director of Public Prosecution and the Auditor General,” and insert in its place, “To provide for the independence of the Auditor-General and to prescribe the procedure for his or her removal.” This is to take care of amendments that have not been effected for example the proposed procedure for the removal of commissioners, which we have not adopted that in the Bill.

The second lot is from line 13 where we propose that the following be deleted to make provisions relating to the qualifications and appointment of judges, jurisdiction of courts, composition and appointment of the Judicial Service Commission, regulation of the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Prison Services, to amend the functions and powers of the Inspector General of Government and to provide for the creation and functions of Special Courts to handle offences relating to terrorism. We propose that we delete “terrorism” but leave everything else. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. However in the first instance you suggested that we provide for Swahili yet it was already provided for.

MR OULANYAH: No. I am amending as I go along and I did not read that, Sir. I only said that we delete to prescribe the procedure for removal. I did not talk about Swahili.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. 

MR OULANYAH: That was in the original text.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think that it is clear. He is deleting things that were in the minds of those who drafted the Bill. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position on the amendment to delete the long title is as follows: one against, no abstentions, and those for are 104. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now I put the question that the title of the Bill as amended stand part of the Bill, and the voting will be by roll call.

(Question put.)

AYES:
1.	 AACHILLA JOHN ROBERTS  
2.	 AGARD DIDI 
3.	 AHABWE PEREZ 
4.	 AKAKI AYUMU JOVINO 
5.	 AKELLO DINAH GRACE 
6.	 AKWERO ODWONG JANE 
7.	 ALONGA OTHMAN HARUNA 
8.	 AMAMA MBABAZI 
9.	 AMONGIN APORU CHRISTINE 
10.	ANDRUALE AWUZU 
11.	ANIFA KAWOYA 
12.	ARK LODOU 
13.	ARUMADRI JOHN DRAZU 
14.	AWONGO AHMED 
15.	AWORI SIRYOYI AGGREY 
16.	BABA DIRI MARGARET 
17.	BABU EDWARD FRANCIS 
18.	BAGUMA ISOKE MATIA 
19.	BAKKABULINDI CHARLES 
20.	BANYENZAKI HENRY 
21.	BASALIZA MWESIGYE STEVEN 
22.	BASHAIJA KAZOORA JOHN 
23.	BAZAALE BYARUHANGA PHILLIP 
24.	BAZANA KABWEGYERE TARSIS 
25.	BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE 
26.	BESISIRA IGNATIUS 
27.	BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE GERALDINE 
28.	BUTIME TOM 
29.	BYAMUKAMA DORA 
30.	BYANYIMA NATHAN 
31.	CHEBROT CHEMOIKO STEVEN 
32.	CHELANGAT KULANY GERTRUDE 
33.	ERIYO JESSICA 
34.	HYUHA SAMALI DOROTHY 
35.	ISANGA NAKADAMA LUKIA 
36.	KABAKUMBA LABWONI MASIKO 
37.	KAFABUSA WERIKHE MICHAEL 
38.	KAGABA HARRIET 
39.	KAGIMU KIWANUKA MAURICE 
40.	KAGONYERA MONDO 
41.	KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA VICTORIA 
42.	KAMANDA BATALINGAYA COS 
43.	KAMUNTU EPHRAIM 
44.	KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKWOMU 
45.	KASULE LUMUMBA JUSTINE 
46.	KATIRIMA PHENHAS 
47.	KATONGOLE BADRU 
48.	KAYONGO TOM 
49.	KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO LAWRENCE 
50.	KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA ISRAEL 
51.	KINOBE JIMMY
52.	KIRASO BIRUNGI BEATRICE 
53.	KITYO MUTEBI 
54.	KIWAGAMA WILLIAM WILBERFORCE 
55.	KIYONGA 
56.	KOLUO CHARLES PETER 
57.	KUBEKETERYA JAMES 
58.	KYATUHEIRE JACQUELINE 
59.	LOCHIAM MILIGAN ROSE 
60.	LOKERIS APARITE PAUL 
61.	LOKERIS PETER AIMAT 
62.	MADADA KYEBAKOZE SULAIMAN 
63.	MASIKO KOMUHANGI WINFRED 
64.	MATEMBE MIRIA 
65.	MATOVU BYATIKE 
66.	MATOVU DAVID 
67.	MBABAZI KABUSHENGA 
68.	MEHANGYE IDAH 
69.	MIGEREKO DAUDI 
70.	MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA 
71.	MUGAMBE JOSEPH 
72.	MUHWEZI KATUGUGU JIM 
73.	MUKASA ANTHONY HARRIS 
74.	MUKULA GEORGE MICHAEL 
75.	MUKULA RICHARD 
76.	MUKWAYA BALUNZI JANAT 
77.	MULENGANI BERNARD 
78.	MUTULUUZA PETER 
79.	MWESIGE ADOLF 
80.	MWESIGYE RUHINDI HOPE 
81.	NABETA NASANI 
82.	NAMAYANJA ROSE 
83.	NAMUSOKE KIYINGI KYAMA 
84.	NAMUYANGU KACHA JENIPHER 
85.	NASASIRA JOHN 
86.	NAYIGA FLORENCE SEKABIRA 
87.	NSABA BUTURO JAMES 
88.	NSHIMYE SEBUTULO AUGUSTINE 
89.	NSUBUGA WILLIAM 
90.	NYANZI VINCENT 
91.	OBBO HENRY JOSEPH 
92.	OGOLA AKISOFERI MICHAEL 
93.	OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY 
94.	OKUMU-RINGA PATRICK  
95.	OLUM ZACHARY 
96.	OMACH MANDIR FRED 
97.	OMWONY OJWOK 
98.	ONEK OBALOKER HILARY 
99.	OPANGE LOUIS 
100.	ORECH DAVID MARTIN 
101.	ORYEM HENRY OKELLO 
102.	OULANYAH JACOB 
103.	RAINER KAFIRE JULIET 
104.	RUHINDI FREDDIE 
105.	RUKUNDO SERAPIO 
106.	RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI MARY 
107.	RWAKIMARI BEATRICE 
108.	SABIITI JACK 
109.	SSEMPANGI KEFA FREDERICK 
110.	SSENTONGO NABULYA TEOPISTA 
111.	TIPERU NUSURA 
112.	TUBWITA BAGAYA GRACE 
113.	TUMWESIGYE ELIODA 
114.	WABUDEYA MUKAYE BEATRICE 
115.	WAMBUZI GAGAWALA 
116.	WONEKA OLIVER 
117.	YERI OFWONO 
118.	YIGA ANTHONY 
119.	ZZIWA MARGARET 

THE CHAIRMAN: The results of the voting on the title are as follows: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 119. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding._)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE FROM THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the House considered clause 97, and adopted it with amendments. The House further reconsidered clause 23, which was stood over and adopted it with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. When we started, I was a bit – I did not know that we would make it because being a Monday – but I thank you very much for having come and rescued the proceedings. Please continue this way so that as I said, we finish this by Thursday. If we do as I indicated, I will give you a break of at least a week so that you come back with energy to handle other business like the Budget and other matters. But this will depend on - if we finish it this week.

Before we adjourn, I want to inform members of the Appointments Committee that there is an important meeting for the committee on 17 August 2005 at 9.00 a.m. to handle an important business, namely to consider the nominations of members of the Public Service Commission. This is because the term of some of them is expiring tonight and we need this Public Service Committee so that it can handle recruitment of public officers. Please come on time, it will not take long and then we can continue with our business of Constitution amendment.

With this we come to the end of today’s business. I understand this young lady, Inzikuru, - maybe tomorrow is when we shall handle the official statement by the minister, which we shall give about 30 minutes, because we have already dealt with the subject before, so that we can go on with our normal business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 5.34 p.m. and 
adjourned until Tuesday, 16 August 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)


