

Tuesday, 16 August 2016

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I will amend the Order Paper to permit the Minister of Works and Transport to respond to an issue, which we had wanted to know from the ministry.

Secondly, I would like to announce that this morning I launched the online declaration system from the Inspectorate of Government. From now on, you will be filling in declaration forms online- The iPads are on the way. The IGG will communicate with you individually so that you are able to fill in your declaration forms. (Applause)

Thirdly, I am glad to announce that the issue of your mobility has been resolved. (Applause) In October, everybody will be on the road. (Laughter) I do not want to say any more than that.  

Hon. Chemutai has something to say, but use only two minutes. We shall also have hon. Nambooze, hon. Atiku and hon. Oketayot. 

2.52
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the now impassable Kapchorwa-Bukwo Road. This matter, I am sure, has come to this House a number of times. The Government of Uganda has been promising to tarmac the Kapchorwa-Bukwo Road for the last 20 years. The said road has been appearing in the national budget annually and very strong promises are made towards election time; for example, in 1996, 2001, 2006, 2011 and 2016.

Madam Speaker, the Executive Director of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), during her routine supervision, assured the leaders and residents of Suam border that funds had been secured from the African Development Bank (ADB) and that the procurement process had already started. She said work would start by June. Our neighbours in Kenya, working on the other end of the Suam Road with funding from the same bank, are soon kick-starting their construction. 

The road has caused economic setbacks to the farmers, given that farming is a major activity for both commercial and domestic consumption. This has increased the level of poverty in the region.

Madam Speaker, Kapchorwa-Bukwo Road has also become a death trap. A young mother, the late Esther Chelimo, and her unborn baby lost their lives on Thursday after the ambulance failed to reach Kapchorwa Hospital where she had been referred for delivery. Last evening at 6.30 p.m., a 16-year-old girl gave birth to a baby who turned out to be a snake –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for you to conclude.

MS CHEMUTAI: The young girl needed urgent medical attention, but there was no way out. By today morning, she was still lying in her mother’s hut. As a Member of Parliament, I was not able to reach my district because of the status of the road. Many other people have equally passed on because of the same poor status of that road. 

The pregnant woman would have crossed to Kenya for treatment because Kenya has been a place of rescue. However, as we speak, before one crosses to Kenya they will ask for a yellow fever vaccination card and yet our people cannot acquire it from Bukwo; they will be asked to go for immunisation in Kampala. It is only issued at KCCA after you have paid Shs 100,000. The poor peasants cannot afford that money or even transport to Kampala.

Madam Speaker, I kindly ask the Government of Uganda, through the help of the Ministry of Works and Transport as well as the Ministry of Health, to treat the Kapchorwa-Bukwo Road as an emergency. I know the Government will come here and say they are in the process of starting construction or maybe -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Betty Nambooze, we welcome you back from hospital.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.56
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move under Rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to make this personal explanation.

On 11 June 2016, I suddenly fell sick and on 1 July 2016, after unsuccessfully receiving treatment locally, I travelled to South Africa to receive medical treatment after the advice of the doctors here. I had developed sudden abdominal complications for which doctors advised that I needed medical attention from a superior facility.

I rise, first, to express my sincere and most heartfelt gratitude to all who extended moral, material and financial support as well as all nature of support when I was sick. In a special way, I am grateful to you for availing your prerogative and personal effort towards ensuring that I underwent proper treatment. In the same vein, I am very grateful to the Clerk to Parliament, the Leader of the Opposition and fellow members of Parliament. I recognise, in a special way, the medical staff at Mukono Church of Uganda Hospital and the International Medical Centre, Kampala where I first received treatment.

I am inclined to draw your attention and the attention of Parliament to the bureaucratic process of getting cleared for treatment abroad by the medical board. Unfortunately, the procedure does not cater for emergencies since it takes the next board sitting to decide on a case. Besides, Madam Speaker, one’s doctor is required to personally go, present and defend a case before the board. The board actually takes little interest in individuals to whom these facilities are available, as a matter of entitlement.

Above all, the bar set for those who qualify to travel abroad for treatment is very high. One has to prove that he or she has exhausted all local options before being cleared and yet it is not easy to determine that one has exhausted all the local options. 

Therefore, with such delays, we might find ourselves funding funerals for deaths that could have otherwise been avoided. After all, facilitation for a funeral of a Member of Parliament is much more immediate than that for treatment abroad. 

I had to meet my medical bills and attempts to have the money refunded have since proved futile. It is on record that Uganda has one of the worst healthcare records in the world. In Uganda’s failing health sector, insurance funds are hard to come by, health facilities lack adequate medicines or doctors and the best doctors are frequently found working in poor conditions with outdated equipment. For my case, for instance, the endoscopy machine in Mulago, which was needed for my primary investigation, had broken down three years earlier. Worse still, Uganda’s story is that we have a doctor to patient ratio of 1 to 24,000. 

It is, therefore, incumbent upon us to intervene at the level of policy, to rebuild the health system, improve service delivery and deal with the disease burden. Madam Speaker, due to the poor health system in Uganda, the country is now spending up to US$ 70 million every year on medical tourism. Ironically, after spending a lot of money to travel for treatment, you end up in the hands of Ugandan doctors employed at some of those foreign medical facilities; for example, I was treated by a surgeon called Dr Kasumba in Brenthurst Hospital in South Africa -(Interjections)– He is from Nateete, Kampala.
 
My opinion is that Parliament should give priority to legislation and policy formulation on the key challenges facing Uganda’s health sector by moving Government to shift focus to overhauling the health sector with a more deliberate approach.

In the meantime, I am under post-surgery observation, until I am declared medically fit. That means I will be travelling to South Africa soon to continue with the treatment. However, I wish to report that although I am still weak, my health is steadily improving and I look forward to resuming my legislative role fully as soon as I am well. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We note your situation and we shall see you from time to time. 

PERSONAL STATEMENT

3.01
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure to present a statement of personal explanation.

I wish to present a statement on behalf of members of Parliament from West Nile region who were involved in a serious accident along Entebbe–Kampala Road, around Namasuba, at a place commonly known as Bata Bata. I happened to be at the scene of the accident as an eyewitness shortly after it occurred. The honourable members have requested me to present this statement on their behalf to save time since they would all be presenting the same story.

On 15 June 2016, around 5.48 p.m., while returning from a meeting called by His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni at State House, five members of Parliament, namely hon. Moureen Osoru, Woman Member of Parliament for Arua; hon. Jessica Ababiku, Woman Member of Parliament for Adjumani; hon. Zaitun Driwaru, Woman Member of Parliament for Yumbe; hon. Isaac Etuka, Member of Parliament, Upper Madi-Okollo; and hon. Tom Alero Aza, Member of Parliament for West Moyo Constituency, who is also the chairperson of NRM Arua, got involved in a road accident. 

According to the members and eyewitnesses whom we found at the scene, the accident was caused by reckless driving by two taxi drivers who were competing for passengers. In the course of this competition, one of the taxi drivers happened to overtake the vehicle in which the honourable members were travelling in and in the process, ended up knocking their vehicle causing the front tyre to burst. The vehicle eventually overturned and rolled several times. 

This accident caused a number of body injuries to the members both internally and externally, as stated in the medical reports of each of them. We thank God that this accident did not disable or cause any fatality to any of the members involved despite the vehicle being written off the road after the accident. 

As stated earlier, I was driving a few metres behind their vehicle and soon after the accident, I was the first Member of Parliament to arrive at the scene. I witnessed, in shock, people stealing the handbags and phones of the Members. However, on the other hand, some good Samaritans tried to give help and rescued one or two bags.

On finding out that they were my colleagues, members of Parliament, I stopped and with friends, we evacuated them to a nearby medical centre from where they got first aid care. We immediately got in touch with State House and Office of the Speaker, from whom we were able to get timely assistance.

Madam Speaker, at this juncture, allow me to recognise and appreciate the support extended to the honourable colleagues by the following offices: the Office of His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, which responded very fast. The President directed that the honourable members be transferred from the medical centre to Nakasero Hospital, where they were admitted until they recovered and their medical bills were settled by State House. 

I also would like to thank the Office of the Speaker. This office facilitated the evacuation of the members from Namasuba to Nakasero Hospital using the Parliament ambulance. Thirdly, I wish to thank the Office of the Government Chief Whip for its spirited coordination and emergency support, as well as the Uganda Police traffic officers at Namasuba Police Post, who responded quickly and are still helping with investigations to take the culprit before courts of law.

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank honourable colleagues for the support they extended to the members while in the hospital - material, moral and by physically visiting them at their sickbeds. 

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, allow me to request Government to take serious measures to address the rampant indiscipline among taxi drivers on our roads in the country and particularly in and around Kampala. 

Further, allow me to request the honourable members in question to stand up for recognition because some of you may not know them. I beg to move and thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Atiku. We welcome you back, honourable members, and I thank the medical services for supporting them. The honourable members were evacuated by the Parliament ambulance. It is not just an ambulance that stays here but it is available to members, staff and the public. Thank you.

3.08
MS LOWILA CD OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance.

There are incidences that have been occurring in Pader District and they have become very disturbing. Some people are dying in police cells and the Uganda Prisons cells in Pader. Yesterday, we buried a one Oyo Francis. He was a very responsible person who was working with Nile Breweries in Jinja. He was picked up last week by a complainant, saying that he had failed to pay costs slapped on him by a court after losing a court case in a land dispute. He spent only one night in the prison but the following day, he started complaining of being unwell and in the night he died. Earlier on, we had also lost another suspect in the prison, who they claimed died instantly after he was hit by another prisoner using a chair. These two incidences took place in the prison. 

From the police cells, we have also lost two people. One was a person who had been involved in an accident. He hit somebody’s house in the town with his vehicle before he was arrested and detained by the police. He complained that he was in pain, but the police officers ignored those complaints. He spent one night there and died in that police cell. Another person also died in the police cell; they claimed he committed suicide using his shirt.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, my people are so worried. They would like an explanation as to who is going to take responsibility for the lives that are being lost in the police and prisons cells. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

3.10
MR ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance regarding a peculiar disease that we have in Pokot County called Kala-azar or visceral leishmaniasis. Kala-azar is caused by a protozoan parasite. It is transmitted by a sandfly and it has symptoms like breathing difficulty, skin ulcers, nose bleeding, swallowing difficulty and an enlarged spleen. 

I bring this as a concern because so far, the only treatment centre in Uganda is Amudat Hospital. They have so far treated 3,600 patients. The treatment is very expensive; it is about US$ 400 per patient, which our ministry cannot handle. Previously, the treatment was being handled by Médecins Sans Frontières but as we talk, it is being handled by Drugs for Neglected Diseases (DNDi), which is based in Nairobi. They have a principle investigator in Makerere who handles cases from Uganda. 

The disease is only in Pokot County in the whole of Uganda but with only a treatment centre at Amudat Hospital. In Ethiopia, they have it in Gondar Hospital and in Sudan, it is in Khartoum. I beg to move. Thank you.

3.12
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Kahinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance about the refusal to release funds to some districts by the Treasury. It is now one and half months into the new budget but some districts have not received funds allocated to them to implement some activities. While the Public Finance Management Act requires the Treasury to release funds to respective spending agencies by the 10th day of July, it is now coming to two months and those funds have not been released.

This is where we get issues of corruption. This is because at the end of the day, funds will be received late and yet on issues related to procurement, some districts will say since funds were released late, they had to do direct procurement. That is where we normally lose funds.

We cannot play around with issues of health. Those health facilities are not funded. The civil servants in those respective districts have not been paid up to today, particularly in Mitooma. My prayer is that the Treasury should release those funds by Friday such that the districts can be allowed to implement activities.  Thank you.

3.14
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise on a matter of national importance on behalf of the people of Nakawa Division. As you may be aware, Madam Speaker, the Member of Parliament for Nakawa Division is still incarcerated under unclear circumstances at Kigo Prison and the Woman Member of Parliament for the area is not well and unable to be with us here.

This matter was raised by the residents of Nakawa Division who reside around or operate businesses close to the former Naguru Housing Estates. As you may be aware, around 2010, the people who occupied the Naguru Housing Estates were thrown out. A developer called Opec Prime Properties had been sourced by Government to put up low-cost housing facilities. They were informed that sitting tenants in Naguru Housing Estates would be given first priority to occupy these palatial homes. 

The residents of that area are saying that since the time demolition took place, no development has taken place. They also complain that the place is becoming a death trap for the residents because it has become bushy and thieves and iron bar-wielding people are now hiding in those bushes. Even for the people who are around Nakawa Market, if it is a little late, they are in danger. So, they asked me to report this matter to the -(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. Madam Speaker, in the year 2010 Government, through the Ministry of Local Government - Kampala District was still under that ministry then - proposed to take over the Naguru-Nakawa estates for development. By that time, the sitting tenants were told they would be given priority when the development of low-cost houses would take effect.

Madam Speaker, that developer, by the names of Opec, was given the land titles for the Nakawa estate. However, what we saw afterwards was the developer presenting artistic impressions of how the estates would look like and when the plans were presented to the then KCC, they did not depict what had been proposed.  

Later on Government, through the Ministry of Local Government, again gave a big chunk of land to an Asian developer. Unfortunately, what we see now are only small bits of development coming up. That is the information I wanted to give.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, with that information at the back of our minds, I find it a little bit disturbing that as a country we just give our land to developers - We can take an example of Shimoni land; we gave out Shimoni land to developers in 2005 but up to now, that land is not yet developed to the standards that we thought it would be. It is an abandoned site.

The people who were living in those dilapidated Naguru estates structures were thrown out and the majority of them were in tears. Some of them even petitioned Parliament. The way they were evicted was actually degrading and inhuman. It is unfortunate, therefore, that this development has not taken shape. 

However, as we consider how we can move forward to ensure that development takes effect, can we look at a way of rescuing these residents so that these iron bar-wielding Ugandans do not harm our people? Can we do this so that we do not turn these sites into a den for thieves and Ugandans can be secured? I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, I think Suam-Kapchorwa Road qualifies to be a scandal. I was the Minister for Regional Cooperation in 1996 and that is when we started talking about that Suam-Kapchorwa Road. Can anyone explain why we have not constructed that road? The last time we asked, we were told that it had been advertised and that contracts were to be awarded. This was in the last Parliament. This road is a national scandal really, honourable members. I hope the minister can inform the House about what is happening.

We shall ask the Minister of Health to examine the issue of the bureaucracy in the medical board. I do not think many of us know how to get there. It is only when you fall sick that you have to. Maybe the minister will inform us about what is involved in applying for that and what the qualifications are, so that we know what to do to assist our members.

On the release of funds to the local governments, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development we want to know whether the money has been dispatched. The Member says that in Mitooma, the money has not reached.

On the disease in Amudat, which hon. Anyakun has mentioned, the Minister of Health will inform us about it. 

On hon. Oketayot’s concerns about the deaths in prisons and police cells in Pader District, we shall require to hear from the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

On Opec Prime Properties, I do not know what to say; interestingly, my school is now an abandoned construction site here in Shimoni. That was my school and if I am asked to give the features of my school, I do not have them because my school is gone. I grew up in Naguru which is no more too. Therefore, we would like to know what happened to Shimoni land and Naguru estates because we evicted a school here and people there. I do not know if any minister is ready to speak on this issue. I am now a street girl! (Laughter) Is anyone ready or we give you time to answer? 

3.22
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Ali Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the members for raising these issues because it means there is continuity. You are sons of your fathers and therefore you do not want to lose what your grandfathers did. 

The issues have been properly summarised by the Speaker. I would ask that the ministers responsible, especially the Minister for Constitutional Affairs who is also holding the portfolio of Ministry of Local Government and is now the Minister of Justice - I will brief him so that he gives you a full explanation about what is happening in those places. That is all I can give for now.

THE SPEAKER: I am directing that all those ministers answer all these issues on Thursday. 
Honourable members, we have lost one of our members of staff, Mr Francis Mukasa Lubega. He has been a lithographer for the last 18 years. He died this morning at International Hospital Kampala. I would like to invite you to stand up for a minute of silence. Burial arrangements will be communicated. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week we adjusted the membership of the standing committees. The NRM side and the Opposition gave in their names. Can I ask hon. Aja to present the nominations for the Independents?

3.24
MR ANDREW AJA BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Independent members who had not been allocated to standing committees have now been allocated as follows: 

On the Committee on Equal Opportunities, the new members will be:

    1. Hon. Francis Zaake; 
    2. Hon. Francis Mukula;
    3. Hon. Kalwanga Lukyamuzi; and 
    4. Hon. Kato Lubwama.

On the Committee on State Authorities and State Enterprises, also known as COSASE, the independent Members will be:  

    1. Hon. Stella Kiiza; 
    2. Hon. Moses Kasibante; and 
    3. Hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar.

The Committee on Science and Technology will have only hon. Jacklet Atuhaire. 

On the Public Accounts Committee, we will add hon. Julie Mukoda.

The Committee on Education and Sports will receive only hon. Moses Kasibante while the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs will have only hon. Jacklet Atuhaire. 

On the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, there will be hon. Stella Kiiza. 

Those are the Independent members who have been added to those committees. There is also a Member of Parliament who was given the position of Vice-Chairperson of COSASE but had been allocated the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline; that is hon. Anita Annet Among. Her prayer is that she is removed from being a member of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline so that she can remain as vice-chairperson of COSASE. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that those members be approved to serve on those committees. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR and SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) (Mr Herbert Kabafunzaki): Madam Speaker, I submit to Parliament a statement on the externalisation of labour, which I promised to present with comprehensive facts.

In a bid to manage unemployment pressure and maximise the gains of labour migration, Government initiated the Externalisation of Labour Programme, which is regulated by Statutory Instrument No. 62 of 2005 – The Employment (Recruitment of Uganda Migrant Workers Abroad) Regulations, 2005. Under these regulations, private companies are licensed to source and formally or officially place people to work abroad.

The overall objective of the programme is to reduce unemployment and underemployment in Uganda by facilitating access to decent employment opportunities abroad, which substantially contributes to poverty eradication.

Madam Speaker, Ugandans have been migrating for employment abroad through three channels: licensed recruitment companies, individuals sourcing jobs themselves, and unlicensed companies. Over the last 10 years, the number of Ugandan migrant workers abroad, who passed through the Externalisation of Labour Programme, is 50,385 as indicated in the table. Honourable members can refer to the monthly reports from the recruitment companies.

Madam Speaker, around mid-January 2015, there were continuous media reports of violation of the rights of Ugandan migrant workers, especially domestic workers, in the Middle East countries. After a visit by Uganda’s Ambassador to Saudi Arabia, it was confirmed that 21 Ugandans were indeed held at a Saudi Arabia Government detention centre in Riyadh. The majority of these migrant workers reported that they had run away from employment characterised with violence and other forms of human rights violations.

Consequently, on 22 January 2016, the Minister Gender, Labour and Social Development imposed a temporary ban on the export of Ugandans for domestic work and constituted a committee to look into the reported illicit export of labour and any violations of human rights. Following the ban, there are measures that were taken by the ministry and they include:

1. 	The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development issued a press statement on 28 January 2016 to create awareness not only about the ban but also about reasons why the ban had been imposed. Furthermore, there have been several engagements with both the print and electronic media on this matter.

2. 	Aware of the role of the Embassy of Saudi Arabia in implementing the ban, on 2 February 2016 the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs met with the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia in Uganda. Among others, it was requested that the Saudi Arabia Embassy should issue visas only to candidates vetted and cleared by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

3. 	Inter-agency guidelines for the implementation of the ban on the export of domestic workers were developed by the ministry.

Madam Speaker, because of time, I wish to request the honourable members to read the guidelines. The guidelines for implementation were given to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Internal Security Organisation (ISO), External Security Organisation (ESO) and Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI).

Madam Speaker, these are events that happened after June 2016 and this is the period that I was appointed by His Excellency the President, vetted and approved by this august House as a state minister for labour.

Despite the ban on the externalisation of domestic workers imposed on 22 January 2016, further adverse reports of violation of rights of workers were published in the Red pepper, on WhatsApp and other media attracting Parliament’s concern. As the Minister of State for Employment, Labour and Industrial Relations, I promised to look into the issue and report back to Parliament.

We have since met the various stakeholders, including the committee members that were tasked to investigate this issue; the recruitment agencies through their umbrella organisation - the Uganda Association of External Recruitment Agencies - and some groups of Ugandans who have been affected by the ban in one way or the other. We reviewed the intended objectives of the programme, the challenges and violations that have arisen, and we came up with both interim and long term measures to handle the situation.  

The following were some of the considerations: Before we decided on these recommendations, we considered the benefits of the programme. We are aware that it boosts foreign exchange inflows; remittances boost Uganda’s absorptive capacity through increased investment and consumption; poverty reduction; and the reduction on the pressure of the domestic labour market. Migrant workers who have gone through the Externalisation of Labour Programme remitted on average US$ 2 million every month in 2015. We got these figures from Bank of Uganda.

There were also concerns by recruitment agencies and they included:

1. 	Loss of employment to Ugandan youth. Opportunities are now being taken up by other countries.

2. 	Workers who came back home for various reasons with intentions of returning to work are now stranded in Uganda, having lost jobs, income and other aspirations.

3. 	Foreign companies are suing Ugandan companies for breach of contract due to non-performance.

4. 	Some companies have financial commitments/obligations with banks and partners and are being sued due to failure to meet their obligations. 

Madam Speaker, it is also important to note that many female domestic workers are illiterate, semi-literate or school dropouts due to lack of school fees and/or unwanted pregnancies. Their chances of getting alternative employment are, therefore, very limited. In any case, they normally earn Shs 50,000 per month as housemaids compared to the US$ 300 that they would have earned.

As a Member of Parliament for Rukiga County, the House will agree with me that I am fanatic and I vow to fight against the violation of rights of migrant workers – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you have moved out of your speech.

MR KABAFUNZAKI: Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that the plight of every Ugandan is my main concern. No amount of benefit should be achieved alongside violation of human rights.

Investigations have indicated that most of the violations were done by individuals who take Ugandans without any accountability. The Government of Saudi Arabia stopped the issuance of visas to individuals; they now issue block visas to companies in Saudi Arabia, who in turn forward these visas to licensed companies in Uganda. This new policy will certainly keep out most traffickers in this business. There is no more individual sponsorship for Ugandans, which is commonly called kefala.

The committee’s draft report on violations of migrant workers’ rights and illicit labour export was completed and is now with our ministry. The committee came up with various recommendations as follows –

THE SPEAKER: Members can read the recommendations.

MR KABAFUNZAKI: Capacity and Role of Institutions

1. 	More manpower to be recruited to enable the externalisation unit effectively implement the relevant laws and regulations, including monitoring the activities of recruitment agencies.

2. 	The ministry to conduct seminars for all directors and staff of all recruitment agencies on pre-departure orientation, relevant local and international instruments, rights of migrant workers, and the role of recruitment agencies in promoting international rights of migrant workers.

3. 	The ministry to obtain compliance of recruitment agencies with regulation through a judicious mix of sanctions and rewards. Accordingly, the ministry shall issue guidelines for classification and ranking of agencies for purposes of recognising exemplary performance as required under regulation 18.

4. 	The ministry to provide guidance in selection of medical centres that can be used for medical examination of candidates.

5. 	The Internal Security Organisation to vet candidates and share the list of those cleared with other sister security agencies.

6. 	Renewal of licences not to be granted to agencies that do not periodically submit reports on their foreign exchange earnings to Bank of Uganda as required under regulation 80.

7. 	The ministry to establish a database on foreign exchange payments of recruitment agencies resulting from their overseas transactions such as service fees and airfares.  

8. 	The ministry to undertake an analysis of the labour markets and institutions of the key recipient countries.

Madam Speaker, the following are the legislative reforms:

1. 	A Bill for an Act of Parliament on the externalisation of labour should be drafted and subsequently enacted. Madam Speaker, we have started on this as a ministry.

2. 	Media houses to be made criminally liable for carrying job adverts that have not been cleared by the ministry.

3. 	The ministry will issue guidelines on fees chargeable by recruitment agencies as a measure of controlling extortion.

4. 	Standard employment contracts to be signed by the employee, local recruitment agency, foreign recruitment agency and foreign employer. 

5. 	The foreign and local recruitment agency be jointly and severally liable on matters pertaining to the recruitment, hiring and deployment of Ugandan domestic workers, including the full implementation of the standard employment contracts. 

6. 	Only foreign recruitment companies that have been accredited by the Government of Uganda on the recommendation of the Embassy of Uganda in the recipient country will be allowed to recruit workers from Uganda. 

7. 	All demand letters and powers of attorney from foreign recruitment agencies to recruitment agencies in Uganda should be vetted by the embassy of Uganda in the presumptive recipient country.

8. 	Every standard employment contract signed by a domestic worker to be authenticated by the embassy in the receiving country before a domestic worker is cleared to leave. 

9. 	Recruitment agencies only to refer candidates to medical facilities accredited by the Ministry of Health of Uganda.

10. 	Candidates to work abroad to only be referred to Government of Uganda accredited pre-departure orientation seminars.

11. 	The bilateral labour agreements will require foreign recruitment agencies to conduct mandatory orientation of foreign employers on the standard of employment contracts and related liabilities in case of non-compliance.

Pre-departure Orientation

1. 	The ministry to develop a pre-departure orientation manual, which we have started on, and accordingly, ensure that all recruitment agencies adhere to it.

2. 	During the pre-departure orientation seminars, candidates should be provided with sufficient information so that they are enabled to take decisions on whether to proceed abroad or not.

3. 	The ministry should ensure that all companies make a verified undertaking to conduct pre-departure orientation prior to licensing.

Protection of the Rights of Migrant Workers

1. 	The Government of Uganda should include bilateral agreements with other potential recipient countries and also ensure that the mechanisms for monitoring are included in the agreement.

2. 	The bilateral agreements should categorically indicate that migrant workers will enjoy the same labour rights as nationals.

3. 	In particular, bilateral agreements should provide an 8-hour day, at least one day of weekly rest, overtime pay and regular payment of wages, protection from unlawful deduction of wages, medical insurance, annual leave, provision of sufficient food, medical care, the right to means of communication and protection from confiscation of travel documents.

4. 	The bilateral agreements should also provide for a robust inspection and monitoring mechanism. Madam Speaker, on this point, the ministry is engaging an international recruiting company to monitor all the domestic workers in the concern countries to make sure that their conditions are well catered for.

5. 	Funds and manpower should be made available so that the ministry can second labour officers to Uganda missions in the Middle East, apart from providing support services to migrant workers abroad.

6. 	The labour attachés should also help in reviewing and verifying foreign principles including employment contracts.

7. 	At departure, migrant workers should be issued with a return ticket not a one-way ticket.

8. 	Local or international recruitment agencies should not withhold workers’ travel documents.

9. 	The ministry should also, in line with regulation 54, establish a labour assistance centre at Entebbe International Airport.

Raising Awareness on this Activity

1. 	Since it is so easy for recruiters to work under disguise or underground, it is essential to combine regulatory measures with promotional campaigns to ensure compliance with the law. 

2. 	The ministry should, therefore, conduct mass media campaigns about the dangers of being deployed abroad by unregistered recruitment companies.

Orientation of Migrant Workers and Employers in the Host Country

1. 	Mandatory orientation programmes to foreign employers on the legal status of migrant domestic workers and diversity of cultures should be encouraged in labour recipient countries; and 

2. 	Introduction of mandatory orientation programmes should be done for migrant workers on their legal rights and obligations upon arrival.

The Human Rights Services in the Host Countries

1. 	Translation services should be made available to domestic workers in police stations and in other Government offices in the destination countries; and

2. 	The host countries should be urged to notify embassies about detained Ugandans.

Proposed Reforms in the Middle East Countries

1. 	The traditional kefala system should be reformed or abolished so that only recruitment agencies accredited by host governments are allowed to sponsor migrant workers;

2. 	Accordingly, a migrant worker should have the right to change employment without the permission of their first employer and without losing their legal status; and

3. 	The Middle East countries should be urged to eliminate the requirement of migrant domestic workers to secure the consent of their sponsors for exit visas to leave the country.

We also recommend that the ban on export of maids to the Middle East be maintained until there is a concrete mechanism to abolish the kefala system. I would like to say that Saudi Arabia has already enacted a law prohibiting trafficking and also the kefala system has already been abolished only that the documents have not been sent to the ministry yet.

Way Forward

1. 	A detailed memorandum arising from a report on illicit export of labour and violation of rights of Ugandan migrant workers be presented and considered by Cabinet;

2. 	Strict timelines to be set by the various stakeholders involved in the implementation of the committee’s recommendations, which I have just mentioned. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that already, the ministry has set the strict timelines;

3. 	The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development shall set up a committee to ensure that in the interim, all labour exports comply with the guidelines in the press, which I have already mentioned; 

4. 	The responsible sector minister will review its work periodically. I would like to assure you, Madam Speaker, that I will do that perfectly;

5. 	Review of recruitment agencies’ guidelines to incorporate proposed recommendations. This is also being done; and

6. 	Review of all labour exporting companies under the new guidelines. That is already finished, Madam Speaker. 

Conclusion

The ban on the externalisation of domestic workers is to be upheld with exceptions as follows:

1. 	Where there are already running contracts, these must be verified by the committee set up by the minister to ensure compliance to all the setups I have mentioned; 

2. 	Where the committee is satisfied that the receiving countries are willing to execute and adapt the standard employment contracts for Ugandan migrant workers; and

3. 	Where there are no existing discriminatory terms against the workers. 

I beg to submit. For my God and my country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. When is this Bill coming?

MR KABAFUNZAKI: Madam Speaker, I humbly request for two weeks and the Bill will be here.

3.26
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also thank the minister for the report. 

I am concerned about the gravity of this activity, which is now rooted in our district. Last week, two of my brothers were invited to Arua where a company from the Middle East was advertising. However, I told them not to continue with the workshop until I inquired from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Therefore, Madam Speaker, there is need for us to join hands to sensitise our communities. For us to be able to do this, I request that the minister submits to us a list of all the companies that have been licensed. This will enable us to identify the unlicensed ones from those that have met the requirements.

I also propose that we start with the processing of visas. The minister talked about travel documents but I think there is the process of acquiring visas. For many of the missions operating in Uganda, you will find that people even go to attend interviews and detailed information is obtained from them, verified and then they are given a visa. Can we look at adopting that process so that when our people go abroad, we can be assured of their safety?

Lastly, I propose that we make it mandatory that when we travel out of the country, we register with the Uganda mission. One may go for business or employment but in case of any eventuality, our missions are responsible. Therefore, if we do not make it a must, our missions will always be used for fire-fighting and rescuing people. Why don’t we make it mandatory so that our missions register our nationals’ presence in other countries? Thank you.

3.51
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the report. 

The International Labour Organisation Report of 2010 said that three in every 1,000 people are forced into labour and 4.5 million are sexually exploited. Worse still, 5.5 million people are below the age of 18.

Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to give us the full list of licensed companies. He points out three ways in which labour has been deployed abroad: licensed companies, individuals and unlicensed companies. However, I believe that Government works through the companies. Therefore, we would like to know those companies. We would also love to know which companies have been sued since he mentioned that they were sued for breach of contract. 

Secondly, the graph on page 1 shows the monthly reports from recruitment companies showing deployment. I would like to know from the minister whether these companies only give him statistics on deployment. Why can’t we get progress reports on our people? This is because we hear about sexual exploitation, non-payment, withdrawal of their travel documents and so forth. Why do these countries stop only at the deployment reports? We would like them to make a follow-up on our people and submit to the House the report about the torture that our people go through in the Arab world and other nations. 

Perhaps on a peculiar note, why is that it is only the United Arab Emirates which has dominated this report? Aren’t our people also exported to other countries? Don’t they provide labour in other countries? Thank you.

3.53
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am privileged to stand here to ask the minister for clarification. When you say that you are going to issue a return ticket for two years, that is impossible. Recently, we were in Dubai and I interacted with many Ugandans who would wish to come back. The problem is that when they get there, their passports are confiscated. How are they going to enforce the issue of having a return ticket and ensure that all Ugandans who are there have their passports in their possession? Thank you.

3.54
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has mentioned three channels through which these workers go abroad. However, he has not given us clear guidelines on those individuals who wish to seek for employment on their own. How will the ministry help such people?

Another issue that the minister has raised in his statement is criticism from the media. The media brought up the issue of how Ugandan workers are being mistreated in other countries. Of all the people involved in the recruitment and export of labour, he has only singled out the media. That is another issue of concern. Let us not intimidate the people who give us details of what happens out there. Thank you.

3.55   
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the report presented. When this issue was raised, actually some of our women came back. I have women from my village who found their way back to Uganda. However, there are still some women who are being held in camps in Saudi Arabia and they want to come back but they cannot find their way out. I, therefore, would like to urge the minister to trace those people and bring them back home.

I wish to comment on the issue of legislative reforms. I thank the ministry for developing these reforms, and I think it is the first time I am seeing these reforms. However, I would like to state that regarding the fees charged by recruiting agencies, our people are being robbed by these companies. They ask them for management fees, passport fees, air ticket and visa fees, and when these people get to wherever they are going, they are again charged air ticket and visa fees. 

I do not know how we are going to moderate and monitor them because people are being fleeced left, right and centre. Even after being promised a certain amount as pay, they are paid much less and some of them end up regretting why they went. I, therefore, request the minister to include the management of these fees in the regulations. The country should know how much those people will earn when they get out there. That will help us know how much taxes we shall get from the exported labour. I know other –(Member timed out.)

3.58
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will recall that this ban was effected about seven months ago and it emanated from a resolution of Parliament, after we listened and physically saw what was happening. Some of us had to visit some countries to get a feel of the pain our people were going through. 

That notwithstanding, the haemorrhage still continues almost unabated. It is useless for us to say that the ban is on when over 100 girls and other individuals traverse this country through Malaba, Busia and Jomo Kenyatta International Airport on a daily basis. 

I do not know whether the minister is aware that over 100 girls and boys probably go, not only to Saudi Arabia, which you are emphasising, but also to Bahrain, Oman, Kuwait, Qatar and Malaysia. You are putting emphasis on something small and only punishing the people you licensed. At the end of the day, you deny the claims without negotiating terms with the host country. 

Look at your unemployment rates; just last night, two people from my village left and others are leaving the country without going through any formal company because you banned them. However, they are going every single day and this is real. I would like us to look at it a little bit more soberly. If we have licensed companies, why don’t we -(Member timed out.) 

4.00
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Labour for the comprehensive report. For the first time, we at least have a report on the externalisation of labour. 

Madam Speaker, there was a team that went to Iraq to make a follow-up on our girls, who were just dumped there. We managed to rescue some of them but up to now, we do not know where the rest are. I think this Government should get serious. I remember being in contact with the American soldiers in Iraq and during that time, when it came to our girls, they questioned the existence of our government. It was very unfortunate.  Luckily, we are now deliberating on these issues because back then, we would not even talk about them and yet people were being trafficked every day. 

The issue of externalisation of labour cannot be avoided. It is a global trend and very many countries, including the Philippines, are earning a lot of money from it. However, they are organised and know the whereabouts of their citizens; they know when they are moving, where they are going to and how and when they are coming back.

The issue of our girls working as domestic workers should be prohibited. Other countries do not accept it. Madam Speaker, girls who work in people’s homes sleep in hostels. In the morning, they go and work and then go back to their hostels. This arrangement is very simple to do but our ministry - (Member timed out.)

4.02
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, who has given us a good statement regarding the export of labour, although there are some details still required. On page 6, he explains that in order for us to have accountability of our labour export, we need to implement 11 of the executive reforms that are still lacking in the Ugandan labour force. 

Madam Speaker, on page 2, the minister’s statement shows us the benefits of externalisation of labour to Uganda. He says that Uganda has been earning $2,000,000 per month from externalisation of labour. This has got a positive effect on our national economy given that Uganda is experiencing trade imbalances, which have affected our shilling and seen it devalued. Therefore, this matter is of serious importance. We need to support the externalisation of our labour force so that we can earn money. 

The bar chart on page 1 shows that in 2010, Uganda exported a labour force to the tune of 8,363 people, which was great work. What is worrying now is the decline which has been experienced since 2010 to date. I, therefore, feel that a lot must be done- (Member timed out.) 

4.04
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development for this very well presented paper. It is comprehensive and the effort is commendable. 

The objectives of the paper are very clear on page 1; they are to: reduce unemployment, underemployment and to earn some foreign exchange for this country. This paper is timely because there is terrible unemployment in this country and so any effort to address this issue is a welcome gesture.

My concerns are the dehumanisation, torture and mistreatment which our children face when they are in these countries. However, these concerns have been addressed on page 8 in (d), 1, 2, 3 and 4. 

However, honourable minister, I noticed that you did not address matters of social security and yet this lies within your ministry. People should work and at the end of their retirement, they should have some social security and pension. Please –(Member timed out.) 

4.07
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, may I seek clarification from the honourable minister; in compliance with the provisions contained in the National Employment Policy of 2010, where externalisation of labour is domiciled, what plans do we have as a Government to expand the horizon of exporting our labour from unskilled to skilled? That is the spirit of the National Employment Policy. The whole statement talks about housemaids, but we have surplus human resource in Uganda. We want to see engineers, doctors and social scientists being exported. What plans do we have?

Secondly, I would like to know from the minister what penalties and sanctions we have put in place or that we should impose on those licensed private companies that fail to comply with the terms and conditions set in our licences. Can you give us examples of companies whose licenses have been cancelled or blacklisted? 

Thirdly, apart from the plight of these licensed companies that are also crying, we must also know that they are cheating our people with so many charges and the ministry must take centre stage. In the statement, the minister talks as if he is throwing the responsibility to Parliament. The entire responsibility on behalf of Government of Uganda rests with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, to ensure that action is taken on the regulatory framework put in place by this Parliament.  I rest my case. Thank you.

4.09
MR GRACE BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister’s statement is full of action to be done and followed up by Parliament. That means we are still waiting for him to come back and present whatever he has said he will present. 

However, note should be taken by this Parliament that all the countries in the Middle East have very strict labour laws, which we do not have here. Our counterparts in Kenya and Tanzania have signed memoranda and treaties of understanding with those countries as far as labour is concerned; in Uganda, the minister depends on these agencies that come here. 

In the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Saudi Arabia, even a housemaid has a document from the Government of Saudi Arabia and UAE. It is our Government that is reluctant. We wait for things to be published in the media and then we react. Honourable minister, can you travel, go and see for yourself and ascertain what exactly is happening there? 

Most of those Ugandans abroad - housemaids and doctors, among others - are actually suffering because our Government does not have an understanding with those governments. Otherwise, we would not have all these issues disturbing us today; we would be discussing other issues. It is because we lack clear understanding as far as labour is concerned. We only have an understanding of other things. We do not have an understanding of labour. 

For other issues like the military or borrowing, we have an understanding but when it comes to issues of human labour, we do not have. (Laughter) It is, therefore, wrong for the minister to come here and tell us – He does not even know the ministers there. Therefore, go and meet your counterparts on the other side and come back and give us a position of clear understanding. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.11
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the minister for this statement on the externalisation of labour in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development does not seem to take the issue of labour in Uganda very seriously. Who licenses these companies? It is the same Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. What measures have you put into place for these people who have been exporting our young girls and boys to these countries and they end up in very bad conditions? Since the Externalisation of Labour Programme, I have not seen any company being prosecuted or brought to book. 

However, very importantly, as we speak of externalisation of labour, even internally in Uganda, members of Parliament have buried children. These companies pick children from upcountry and claim that they are bringing them here for work but they are sacrificed while others end up in labour activities and others are not paid at all. Therefore, as the minister comes with a Bill, he should also bring a Bill on the “internalisation” of labour in Uganda. This is because internally, Ugandan children are also being mistreated. I thank you very much.

4.14
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement. I think the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has become serious on this issue of our girls because from the report, they are bringing on board everybody: ISO, CMI, ESO and the police. I pray that with this big team, our girls will be rescued from illicit exportation.

Taking our girls out of the country to work as housemaids is not the best job that we can secure for them. Instead, we need to export professionals; people who are trained. In the last Parliament, I was on the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the girls who managed to escape testified before us about the sexual harassment they suffered and the way they worked for long hours. They would wake up as early as 5.00 a.m. and retire as late as 2.00 a.m. in the morning. You can see the level of suffering our girls –(Interruption)

MR OTTO MAKMOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank you, my friend, for giving way. There has been a lot said about licensing in this country. I practiced immigration law in Canada and I was a secretary to the board of the Uganda North American Association. Part of the challenge is that we are focusing on the licensing here but the people who normally come as agents come from those countries and we do not know much about them. I think that is where the problem is.

In Canada, there are people who would call themselves immigration consultants. Many of these people were not regulated; they would bring in people, make money and abuse people until recently. Licensing should, therefore, not be only by the ministry here; people who come here should also be licensed from there because we need to know what they are doing there. That is where the problem is, in my view. For as long as we have licensing on the other side - As a lawyer you would lose your licence and your mortgage, literally everything, if any of these things happened. 

We also need to know, like somebody said, the nature of labour in those countries. If you look at bawdy houses in Canada, they are licensed and people do – (Interruption)

MS NAUWAT: Honourable member, can I now take over? (Laughter) Madam Speaker, Government should really interest itself – (Member timed out.)

4.17
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI SSEMAKULA (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of labour in Uganda has become an issue of survival for the fittest. Recently, I was in Dubai and I was appalled by the conditions under which Ugandan labourers work. 

Secondly, most of these companies are hard to regulate, especially in Uganda, because they are owned by politicians - the “untouchables”. No matter how much we talk here, nothing much will be done. However, I propose that we should have an electronic register under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and another at the airport in order to register the names of the people who are going abroad, the terms of their contracts, their places of work, city, among other things. This could help us follow up in case they get problems.  I thank you, Madam	Speaker.

4.18
MS ANNET AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, your report is good. However, it would have been better if you had given us the challenges faced by the people who go out there.

It should also evaluate whether the companies licensed respect Article 44 of the Constitution on the human rights of Ugandans. These people should not take our people into slavery out there. I beg to submit.

4.19
MS SANTA ALUUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for what he has presented before us. It is well thought out but I pray that he follows it with implementation.

Madam Speaker, these domestic workers lack serious sensitisation on what they will face when they reach out there. I was reading in the newspapers last week about a girl who left Kampala to go and do a better job in Saudi Arabia. Unfortunately, when she got there, she could not get the contacts that she needed from the other side where she was supposed to work. She later died and her father moved up and down trying to locate this girl but failed. 

Honourable minister, I hope you read that article. I hope you are working on getting an address out there, so that these girls and our people out there have a point of reference because this is fundamental and it seems to be lacking.

I would also like the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to levy the local governments. This is because these girls leave their villages – For instance, three weeks ago, one of the girls from my village rang and told me that she had been informed of a very lucrative job abroad and she asked whether she could apply and do the interviews –(Interruption)

MS AMONG: There is a lady from Bukedea who died. She got frustrated after being taken from Uganda in search of employment in London. She was employed but later dismissed and suddenly, she committed suicide in the house.

Madam Speaker, we thank you very much because you are the one who rescued the situation when you went to London and the body was brought back. This was due to the business of taking people for employment and at the end of the day, they get frustrated.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you so much. Finally, Madam Speaker, the minister –(Member timed out.)

4.26
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement. The last time I received a similar report was in December last year and according to that report, there was supposed to be a joint technical committee, which I am happy the minister has highlighted and said that you were able to meet. My only disappointment is that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is not highlighted in your current report. I would like to know why.

Secondly, I would like to thank the media for bringing up these issues. Unfortunately, as someone mentioned, I think the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development needs to take some of these issues very seriously. Just to bring us on board, the Daily Monitor of Monday, 8 August 2016 carried a story which said, “Oman Based Ugandan Cries for Help.” It was about a Ugandan maid working in Oman and up to today, she is stranded. 

In the same report that the Daily Monitor carried, they referred to a lady called Annet who works as the Executive Director of Rahab Uganda. This is an organisation that reports cases of human trafficking. The lady admitted to knowing so many cases of mistreatment of Ugandan maids especially those working in Arab countries. She talked of as many as 2,000 cases that are still unresolved. 

That same article in the Daily Monitor mentions how the Times of Oman carried a story that read, “Omani families turn to Uganda for Hiring Cheaper Housemaids.” There was also a quotation from Sami Muctar, the Ethiopian Airlines country manager, saying that the influx of Ugandan housemaids into Oman is one of the reasons they have increased their flights’ frequency. He says every flight to Muscat has about 15 to 25 Ugandan maids travelling from Uganda. 

Some of these people are, by the way, degree holders. He continued to say that the Oman families begun hiring housemaids from Uganda when Oman stopped issuing visas to domestic workers from Ethiopia, Kenya, Senegal, Ghana and Cameroon in order to curb the spread of diseases as well as restrict criminal activities in the kingdom. This report also says that it is very difficult to get an exit visa. Much as you may apply -(Member timed out.)

4.26
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving us this detailed report. However, it is lacking because even on page 3, it says that in mid-January 2015, it was ascertained that 21 Ugandans were incarcerated but the statement does not give any solution. It is assumed that even after finding out the fact that 21 Ugandans were erroneously held in detention, Government has not helped to rescue them.

On page 4, he says ISO, ESO, CMI and the Ministry of Internal Affairs were tasked in mid-January 2015 but to date, the minister cannot give a report of what has been done so far to rescue Ugandans. The statement barely considers helping those Ugandans who intend to go abroad in future. How about those who are trapped in the Arab countries? I think this is a matter of urgency -(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. I recall that from 2012, in the Ninth Parliament, we started crying to the honourable minister that there were many Ugandans suffering out there. Up to now, we have never received any information on action being taken by Government to help those people. 

Madam Speaker, the point my colleague is raising is very important. Let Government take action at this time. Thank you.

4.29
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Most of these recruiting companies have their offices in Kampala, including Parliament. That is the information I have received. 

It is true that unemployment in Uganda is a critical problem, and the minister and others have talked about maids being recruited. However, we know that many of these people are not illiterate; some have qualifications but go under the guise of maids because they have looked for employment here and failed. You see someone with a diploma or a degree going to work as a maid. When talking about maids, we are not talking about people who have not gone to school; they are maids in our context but they are qualified people who due to unemployment, rush to those countries.

Madam Speaker, I believe that we need to assist the recruiting companies as a country and as a ministry. We have just been condemning these recruiting companies. However, looking at how many Ugandans have gone and how many have suffered, let us try to see to it that these companies, especially companies that have a record of taking Ugandans who are not well looked after, are blacklisted. If we have companies that have proper records once they are registered –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know this is very interesting but we have taken more than an hour.

Honourable minister, ever since the Seventh Parliament, this House has been demanding for a law on this issue. I do not know whether we should continue sending people abroad without a law from this House.
	
I would like to propose that you fast-track that law and bring it here before October. People are buried in the sand; let us stop talking and lamenting. We want the law so that we can discuss as Ugandans and agree on how to move officially.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As a country, we hear of our people suffering and Government has come to make a statement. However, the biggest problem which you should start with is that the Government has undertaken a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with some of these existing companies but as Parliament, we do not have an idea of what is entailed in those agreements. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that as he prepares to bring a law, he brings those MoUs that the country has undertaken with those companies so that we look at the details? What is the binding agreement therein? Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise an additional point of procedure. On top of what you have already stated, that the previous parliaments had a position of expecting the law, we were also expecting bilateral negotiations between Uganda and those countries. However, he has now shifted the burden to the companies. Regulating is okay because it has been lacking, but we expected the bilateral agreements with these host countries. 

We derive the labour laws from these countries’ bilateral agreements and then the enforcement and regulation of these service providers becomes secondary. I would like to request the minister to take first things first; the law, the bilateral agreements and MoUs therein. The regulation will become our internal matter.

I would also like to caution that in international relations, there is what we call reciprocal behaviour. When doing this to these countries, what are we expected to offer? This is because at that level of bilateral agreements, these issues of engagement will have to be involved. 

THE SPEAKER: This is an important subject but we have another paper and we have the State of the Nation Address debate. Honourable minister, what are you going to do because we are tired of lamenting, we are tired of statements. When will you bring the law? That is what we would like to hear. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. I am moving on a procedural matter under rule 50 (1) (k) in particular under motions without notice. We have heard from the minister and the members about nothing but slavery. While the minister is reading from the book of Lamentations, I would like to move the House under rule 50 (1) (k); motions without notice. 

Madam Speaker, these are matters involving the lives of our young people languishing, crying out for help, being enslaved in lands we cannot access, seemingly with the tacit knowledge of the powerful who people are mentioning in whispers. I would like to move that the House resolves to constitute a select committee to investigate: one, companies; two, memoranda; three, individuals involved in this illicit act of enslaving Ugandans. Any legislation coming thereafter would then be informed and conceptualised by that report. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether we would like to help the Ugandans or to prolong their suffering.  How many months will an investigation take? You will need to go to Malaysia, Qatar, Kuwait, Iraq, UAE and come back to write a report; we are talking about next year. You cannot investigate without going there and then you will have to investigate the companies.

Honourable members, we can investigate but I would like us to regularise the export. Let us have the law. You can investigate but I want to see the law passed. It will take a year to get that report into this House. We sent a team to Malaysia, another team went to Kuwait and the reports are here.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I am alive to the fact that we need the law. In fact, this has nothing to do with the absence of legislation to make sure that the companies and individuals involved actually act within the available laws of the land.

We know for a fact that rules in this House are known to take generations. You are much more aware than I am that ministers disappear when particular Bills are demanded from them. Before we know it, we shall be advised that Cabinet is yet to sit. This is a parliamentary internal mechanism that can actually quicken solutions to suffering Ugandans because we seem to be reading from different pages from those of the minister.

The minister seems to have different information from the information that members are submitting on this Floor. I heard the partial submission of hon. Santa Alum and the submission of the honourable here which was bordering on criminality. Parliament cannot abdicate its duty to undertake to protect and preserve the sanctity of our borders and the dignity of Ugandans. I would like the House to move and gazette time to investigate and report accordingly. Madam Speaker, I so beg.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, Uganda is a member of the United Nations (UN) and there is an organisation called International Labour Organisation, which is based in Geneva. The organisation has laws and all countries that export workers - Nepal, Bangladesh, Egypt and others - are helped by the UN. 

Therefore, it is the country that is exporting workers that should sign agreements with those countries. You cannot leave these companies to sign agreements on behalf of Government. Because the ministers in those ministries do not know what to do, the UN is there to help. 

I remember I went with the late Ateker Ejalu to the UN in Geneva. The laws are very clear and many of these workers send back a lot of money but these people do not know. The UN is there to help you and the laws are written. You cannot leave our people to suffer under private companies. That is the contribution I wanted to make.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Ali Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Member of Parliament for Mbale Municipality for having brought in the information that I was going to give. This question of law and migration of labour is not an invention of Uganda; there are laws governing it. 

I would only request, as I agree with you, Madam Speaker, that the minister be able to go and get all the laws and bring up whatever is required so that we pass it here. From here, we shall be able to administer this migration of labour. Thank you very much.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, when you look at the minister’s statement on page 9 - the ban on external deployment of housemaids - he says that the ban on the export of maids to the Middle East be maintained until there is a concrete mechanism to abolish the kefala (individual sponsorship) system. 

When you go down, there is a contradiction. Point No. 6 says that the ban on the externalisation of domestic workers is to be upheld with exceptions. When you look at these exceptions, they create a gap for those who can export maids and others without the law being put in place and this is going to be exploited. Let us stick to what we resolved as Parliament; that there is a ban on exportation of maids until we have a clear legal framework under which we are going to operate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to remind the House that this matter was examined by the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and a report was brought to this House and adopted. The Committee on Equal Opportunities also went, brought a report and we adopted it. 

Select committees are important but I do not want to issue a vote of no confidence in the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. We can task them to look at this matter and give them a timeframe. If we set up a select committee, it means we have no confidence in the gender committee and I do not want any committee to feel that we do not have confidence in them. Let us task them to follow it up. 

About the demands for the law, honourable minister, we are tired; you better bring that law. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. I was here when those two committees reported and they ably did their job. 

I was actually intrigued by that particular sub-section on the way forward, especially No. 6(1) and (2), which states that the minister still wants to uphold particular running contracts. We are saying that there are no legally binding contracts and it is enslavement. The minister must withdraw recommendation No.6 because he cannot be the one investigating. He has already failed in this job, which is why we are seeking for an independent committee of Parliament. 

The minister wants to investigate himself by virtue of this particular sub-section. I decline to allow the minister to go away with this and claim that he is going to put up a committee to look at contracts. We are saying the contracts are invalid. In fact, they are non-existent and are enslaving contracts. Actually, they are invisible and only the contractors know them. Those contracted are not equal parties in this contract, which is why we had wanted to internally – (Interruption)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I sincerely appreciate the work that was done by the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development as well as the Committee on Equal Opportunities. Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) also interested itself in the matter and these issues came out visibly. 

I attended some of the sessions as a member of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development as well as a member of UWOPA. It was discovered, during those interactions, that some of the members from the ministries who were sitting on those committees actually had companies that were responsible for exporting labour. Even in this particular case, we have members who are responsible for selling Ugandans out of this country –(Interjection)- They are members of Uganda, who are out of this Parliament. 

That is why we think that it would be very important for us, as we discuss this matter, to find out which companies these are, so that we can see whether some members who are not on these committees have an interest in the matter. Some of them will pass companies that they know are their own companies. A separate committee should therefore be put in place to assist the ministry to come up with a better position that will help us to come up with the law.

Madam Speaker, we are all interested in the law but we are also aware of the fact that our laws take long to come up. We wanted to look at a situation that will actually bring this matter to quicker dissolution as we prepare to bring the law.  You will realise that even when we are coming up with this law, we shall have to consult Ugandans for their input; there is a process. The minister may say, “Yes, I am going to come up with the law” but we do not know how long he will take or whether he will be given a Certificate of Financial Implications and whether it will not be put under the carpet like the Marriage and Divorce Bill. 

Madam Speaker, it is our duty, as the people’s representatives, to ensure that the lives of Ugandans, who are facing modern-day slavery, are rescued. We are also not blind to the fact that there are companies, which are doing work genuinely. However, what is disheartening is for the minister to put it categorically that the people they are taking are illiterates and that they are people of low calibre in society. 

Madam Speaker, the majority of the people who are taken by these labour organisations are asked for money. If you know that someone is illiterate and cannot meet the standards of life, why are you asking for as much as Shs 3 million for the process to be completed? Maybe what he did not know is that some of these companies deceive our people; for example, they are told that there are Iraqis who want English teachers and that they are being taken as teachers but when they reach there, you find a diploma holder babysitting. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that it is not true that the majority of these labourers who are going out are illiterate. Yes, some of them are, but not all of them. Just a few of them; and this is on minor occasions.

May I, therefore, request that a scrutiny of the companies that are involved in the exportation of labour is done before we come up with a law that is going to give these interested parties measures to continue dehumanising our people? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have no problem with inquiring into those companies. However, I would like to assign our Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development to do this. They only have one Bill; the Minimum Wage Bill. That is the one business they have. Therefore, let us assign that committee to carry out that exercise. 

However, honourable minister, you are not off the hook; we want the law and we do not agree with your No.6. This House made a resolution to ban, after very careful discussions. Therefore, there are no exceptions to the ban. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall formulate the terms of reference and approve them tomorrow but in principle, we have agreed.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

4.52
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba Ntege): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Wednesday, 20 July 2016, hon. William Nzoghu, Member of Parliament, Busongora North, moved a motion on the suspension of construction of new roads. He stated that Parliament appropriated funds for the construction of roads in the FY 2016/2017 budget. He quoted media reports that Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) Executive Director had suspended construction of new roads.

This statement is in response to issues raised in the statement made –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, the statement is being circulated. 

MS NTEGE: This statement is in response to issues raised in the statement made under rule 25(4) on halting construction of new roads in the FY 2016/2017 by Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA).

Madam Speaker, allow me to respond to the issues raised. It was observed by the honourable members of Parliament that during a media briefing by the Executive Director of UNRA on the progress made in the FY2015/2016 and the plans for FY 2016/2017, she indicated that there would be no commencement of construction of new roads in the FY 2016/2017. I would like to give a background and context. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda National Roads Authority was established to maintain, operate and develop a national road network, which comprises of 20,554 kilometres of paved and unpaved roads, bridges and ferries connecting various parts of the network in the country. On 8 June 2016, Parliament appropriated a budget of Shs 2.9 trillion to UNRA, under Vote 113, whose source and breakdown is as follows:

Recurrent wage - Shs 71 billion
New wage, recurrent - Shs 29 billion

Development expenditure  
Uganda Government - Shs 1.264 billion 
External financing - Shs 1.689 billion 
Uganda Road Fund - Shs 274.4 billion.

This came to a total of Shs 2.9 trillion. Out of this, Shs 2.533 trillion was allocated to roads development with Government of Uganda contributing Shs 1.264 trillion and the balance of Shs 1.268 billion coming from external financing.

I would like to inform you that the budget left shortfalls in the development programme and maintenance budget; the deficit is Shs 1.7 trillion and Shs 322 billion on the maintenance side. The details are highlighted in the table below. I think I need not go through the table.

THE SPEAKER: They can read it on their own; just go to the conclusion.

MS NTEGE: This, therefore, requires the implementing agency to reprioritise its programmes to ensure sufficient utilisation of the resources.

Madam Speaker, road development alone constitutes 87 per cent of the UNRA budget. I wish to throw some light on how the budget for road development is to be implemented in the FY 2016/2017 and the prioritisation rationale. 

At the end of the FY 2015/2016 financial year, UNRA had outstanding payments for completed work and services totalling Shs 259 billion. This debt was carried forward to the FY 2016/2017. Priority was given to making good the debts in this financial year to avoid paying interest or claims arising out of delayed payments. This means that the approved budget, which is Shs 1.264 trillion for the year, is less by the same amount of the debt, which was carried forward. If we do not pay the debts, we will end up paying much more.

Commitments on Completed or Ongoing Projects 

Uganda National Roads Authority is currently implementing a road development programme, which includes rehabilitation and upgrading of 1,400 kilometres of roads -(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, the statement the honourable minister is reading is very important but the document that we have been given is one-paged, repeated twice. What she is reading is quite different from what we have here. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you have it? I think many of the members have it. Hon. Olanya, you can take my copy.

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, we have only one document.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the mistake they made was to bring another statement on Kigumba Road in the middle of the UNRA one. What she is dealing with is the one where -

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. Given the significance of the information presented by the minister and the observations made by us, could the minister be given time to reorganise the report and come back so that we do not waste time and instead proceed to other issues? She can go and reorganise herself and come back tomorrow with a better document. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, look at the conclusion on page 5; it says, “Madam Speaker, in conclusion, all road projects approved by Parliament for FY 2016/2017 will be implemented as planned. There are no roads that have been suspended from the plan.” 

Just finish your statement but for the time being, leave out the one of Kigumba and Bulima. We are dealing with the one of UNRA stopping roads.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is about the Kanungu Road. She should have put it among these ones so that we get concrete information. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, she is responding to the question by hon. Nzoghu. We know Kanungu is important but let the minister complete her statement. Let us listen as it is a very short statement.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have that document but the pages may not be the same with what you have. The conclusion of the one you have is on page 5 while in the one we have, it is on page 6.

The point of procedure I am raising is that this is a very important document from the ministry and it has to be recognised by Parliament as an authentic document. However, it was not signed by the minister so we cannot be sure that this is an authentic document.

THE SPEAKER: She is the Minister of Works and Transport and she is the one presenting. Honourable minister, please complete your statement.

MS NTEGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the maiden speech of the minister and you know our rules. Leave the minister to present her statement. There is no order or clarification. 

MS NTEGE: Madam Speaker, there are two statements and the one I am reading is the one on halting constructions. 

Commitments on Completed or Ongoing Projects

Uganda National Roads Authority is currently implementing a road development programme, which includes rehabilitation and upgrading of 1,400 kilometres to paved bitumen standard. The required funding for this financial year for the ongoing projects is Shs 2.97 trillion as stated in the table. However, Shs 830 billion was allocated to ensure uninterrupted progress of the project, leaving a deficit of Shs 1.6 trillion. 

One hundred and seventy-five billion shillings (Shs 175 billion) was allocated as counterpart funding for acquisition of land for externally funded projects to enable them - I will explain here. Government made commitments with some donors and UNRA has to put aside money for counterpart funding for acquisition of land to ensure that there is progress.

In the Financial Year 2016/2017, externally financed projects will be implemented as planned. However, land acquisition, due to limited local counterpart funding, may affect implementation of some projects.

Madam Speaker, UNRA implements multiyear projects and, therefore, their commencement must be phased to avoid choking the budget in one year. It was, therefore, not prudent to bring on board new projects in the Financial Year 2016/2017 with such over commitments as shown above. The rational approach is: as we complete ongoing projects, we commence on new ones as the resources are freed up in the subsequent years. This will result in optimisation of our resources and avoid stretching the budget thinly, which has often affected the performance of projects.

The projects to be implemented in FY 2016/2017 are indicated in a table. You will find an attachment at the end of the presentation, which gives details of all the roads that are being implemented. 

This is not part of the statement but I wish to explain to members that implementation of a project starts right from land acquisition and design. You might not see the equipment on the road but that road is under implementation. Madam Speaker, I wish to add that the lifecycle of development projects starts with the studies, preparation of the projects, designs, identifying and financing. Once the financing is confirmed, the procurement process commences, followed by implementation. This is an entailing process and it takes some years. Therefore, it is important that sufficient plans are put in place. It should, therefore, be noted that whereas projects are shown in the budget framework, it does not mean that construction will commence that very year as they must first undergo the pre-construction phase.

The selection process for the development of the network is primarily based on a network lifecycle cost analysis, a process through which the technical interventions are determined scientifically and objectively. The analysis also addresses the socio-political needs, whose objective is to support primary growth sectors like agriculture, tourism and others. The multi-year programmes are anchored in the road sector and the five-year National Development Plans. Projects, which are under various stages of the cycle, are shown in the project status attached. 

I would like to assure you that all funds appropriated to Uganda National Roads Authority under Vote 113 for the Financial Year 2016/2017 will be utilised as planned. The externally funded projects will also be implemented as planned. However, limited counterpart funding - the Shs 175 billion that I talked about- vis-à-vis the requirement of the Shs 388 billion for land acquisition and taxes is likely to affect their effective implementation. This is because, as you may know, certain elements according to the financers have to be done before their money comes in.

The Government medium and long-term road development programme will be implemented as planned. Between Financial Years 2015/2016 and 2019/2020, UNRA plans to upgrade to paved bituminous standard over 1,200 kilometres. Thus, the achievement of the NDPII target of 6,000 kilometres of strategic paved road coverage by 2020 is very well in sight.

There will be no reallocation of funds across Votes to finance the Standard Gauge Railway construction as some people were made to believe. Funds for the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway are drawn from the Railway Fund. More detailed information on the above projects can be obtained from the national roads development status, which is attached.

In conclusion, all road projects approved by Parliament for Financial Year 2016/2017 will be implemented as planned. There will not be any halt to the budget as some were made to think. There are no roads that have been suspended from the plan. The media briefing was intended to inform the public on the progress made by UNRA in the Financial Year 2015/2016 and to show the plans for FY 2016/2017.

The remarks made by the UNRA Executive Director during the briefing of 30 June 2016 were made to elaborate on the UNRA budget implementation plan and not to announce policy plans. They were meant to enhance transparency with the public so that they know which roads are going to be done and in good faith, but not to usurp the powers of any institution or person. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I think you have answered hon. Nzoghu’s question; there will be no halting and no roads will be affected. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

5.11
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal to borrow up to USD 14 million, equivalent to SDR 10.1 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank to develop the Great Lakes Trade Facilitation Project.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the request is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back at the earliest opportunity. 

I saw a second statement from the Minister of Works concerning the Kigumba-Bulima Road. May I invite the minister to handle that?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

5.12
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba Ntege): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the Prime Minister’s Question Time on Wednesday, 20 July 2016, hon. Jalia Bintu, Woman Representative for Masindi, raised a matter concerning the construction of Kigumba-Masindi-Bulima Road.

Madam Speaker, this statement is in response to issues raised in the statement made under rule 25(4) on procurement of civil works contract for Kigumba-Bulima Road by the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). 

I would like to give the background and context. Uganda National Roads Authority commenced the original bidding process for civil works contractors on 17 April 2013 and completed in September, 2015. The original bidding process commenced as planned. However, due to failure by the selected bidder to meet the requirement following due diligence, the procurement was cancelled and the works re-tendered.

On 25 September, the African Development Bank (ADB), who are the funding institution, approved the request to re-tender after cancellation. Uganda National Roads Authority then restarted the procurement process and bids issuance commenced on 7 October 2015. The bids were received on 2 December 2015, as planned, the evaluation was completed and the report was then sent to the bank at the end of January 2016. I would like to add that after several submissions, the bank, in their letter dated 22 March 2016, responded by giving its no objection to the civil works contract to be awarded to China Railway No.5 Engineering Group. 

One of the bidders by the name of Dott Services Ltd applied for administrative review on 11 April 2016. The accounting officer reviewed the appeal and found no merit and communicated the decision to the bidder on 29 April 2016. The bidder, Dott Services, then applied to the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) for administrative review on 11 May 2016. The PPDA reviewed the appeal and found no merit and communicated its decision to the bidder in June 2016.

On 15 June 2016, Dott Services referred the matter to the PPDA Tribunal, which ruled on 30 June 2016 that all the bids be re-evaluated. The detailed ruling was written on 26 July 2016. Uganda National Roads Authority has gone ahead to re-evaluate the bids and will submit the revised bid evaluation report to the bank on 22 August 2016. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to assure you and all honourable Members of Parliament that although the process of procurement was affected by a bidder who did not even meet the requirements after due diligence and administrative review, the process is now on course and we expect to sign the contract in September 2016. I thank you. 

5.16
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It takes two and half years for the ministry and the minister to inform the country and the world that there were problems with the procurement process. This is not good for our country.

Madam Speaker, you remember very well that we passed a loan request here and I know that this loan is now generating penalties and the Government and country is losing a lot of money because we are not utilising the loan. We need to tighten up especially on UNRA and the Ministry of Works –(Interjection)- Yes, because I hold the Government, the ministry and UNRA accountable. The money is there. You cannot come today to tell the people of Bunyoro that the Kigumba-Masindi-Bulima Road had problems when actually, during campaigns this road caused so many members to lose their seats.

I would like to request, honourable members, that if we are not ready to absorb the loans, which are brought here, let us not pass them because our children, grandchildren and the generations to come will continuously pay the interest on those loans. This money is not free; we are paying.

Madam Speaker, I got an assurance in the last Parliament that the agreement was going to be signed in September of that year. I prepared myself because they had asked us to accompany the ministers to witness the signing. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask that the Committee on Government Assurances takes this up and ensures that projects where we have passed money are implemented within the stipulated timeframe -(Interruption)

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, I would like to give her information about these loans that we are getting from the bank and specifically, concerning the Mbale-Lwakhakha Road. Last week, the honourable member from Kanungu also brought up the same matter. 

We approved loans in November, 2014 but to date, the Mbale-Lwakhakha Road is not mentioned anywhere. When I looked at the table here, there was something blank, meaning that the road is not going to be worked on. What is going to happen? What about the loan and the interest accrued? What is going on? I think we need an explanation. I thank you for giving way.

MS BINTU: Thank you. We need to have our committees investigate these projects where money has been approved, where Government is losing a lot of money and yet there is no communication from anybody. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.20
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister submitted two statements this afternoon. In the statement that she has just read, I understand that there is money for the Kigumba Road. However, in the previous statement, there is nothing on the Kigumba Road. Therefore, where is this money coming from and if it is there, why has it not been reflected in the earlier statement?

Secondly, I also see that the Ishaka-Kanungu Road, through Mitooma, has nothing and yet it was on the plan. Could it be that there is money for it somewhere but it has not been reflected here? When will construction commence on that road? I thank you.

5.21
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this statement, there is nothing indicated on the Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishaka-Kanungu Road. We thought that construction works on this road would be ongoing by now but there is no information anywhere. Even when you go to UNRA, you are told lies; they say that very soon they will be starting and that we should remain patient.

May I implore the minister to look for reliable information on the Kanungu Road, which she can share with us by Thursday? This is because the people of Kanungu may plan to walk to Kampala anytime if we do not work on it. They are desperate and cannot bear it anymore. I thank you very much.

5.23
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. In 2012, Madam Speaker, you were the only one who gave the people of Kanungu leeway to have their road discussed in Parliament. I was part of the delegation that came here and I am now here as a Member of Parliament.

In 2014, the President of the Republic of Uganda came to Kanungu and said that the money had been found. In May 2014, the ADB team came to Kanungu and met the residents and timelines were made. This Parliament then passed a loan request to construct the Kanungu-Rukungiri Road to Ishasha.

In February this year, the President of the Republic of Uganda and the Executive Director of UNRA, while in Kanungu, assured the people that the road was going to be implemented beginning March of this year. We had a meeting of the MPs from Rukungiri and Kanungu together with the UNRA team, which assured us that by July, construction of the road would commence. 

Madam Speaker, I am now seeing blank spaces on the Kanungu-Rukungiri Road. Could this be a gimmick or another way of hoodwinking the people of Rukungiri and Kanungu with timelines? Can the Government come up with a clear statement on what the problem could be that is causing these roads not to be constructed? If it is that company called Dott Services, why are they causing all these hiccups?

Madam Speaker, I am requesting that all the roads with loans be cleared -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have made the point - assurances, visits and pledges.

5.25
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I also thank the minister for the statement. 

I was the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy six years ago when these loan requests came to the Floor of Parliament. The Kigumba-Masindi-Bulima Road is just one component of the three lots. The Kyenjojo-Kagadi-Hoima-Masindi-Kigumba Road was a road that was pledged by Dr Apollo Milton Obote during Independence, by Idi Amin, again by Dr Obote when he returned and President Museveni also pledged it at the swearing-in. However, up to now, these three roads are still a promise and yet even where there were no roads, cattle are now walking on tarmac. 

These roads were brought up as oil roads. You want money for oil but you are borrowing for other places using oil money while the community of the greater Bunyoro-Toro has been denied roads including Biiso-Butiaba-Wanseko and Kinyara roads where you get sugar.

I know that the minister is a mugole and she is saying that there is no counterpart funding and no money for land acquisition. By priority, you cannot have a Government loan without counterpart funding. That means that you do not know what you are doing in budgeting.

It is very unfortunate that we, the people of greater Bunyoro, are being lied to when it comes to our roads. Although the President advised that the contractor continues with the Butiaba Road, the ministers refused. That is why the ministers are saying that they are not starting - We have seen this happen. The President says, “Do this road” and the minister says, “Yes” but the junior minister says, “No”. When the minister says, “Yes”, the UNRA Executive Director says, “No”. This is the practice that we have seen in Bunyoro.

I would like to request that if the new minister is going to keep this assurance to Parliament, can we see these roads being worked on this time round, because what we have seen in practice for all these decades has been lip service, rhetoric and lies. Our people are not going to look on –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information that I would like to give my brother and the people of Bunyoro is that a place that appears to be marketable in borrowing terms is used to generate a loan, but the loan is used elsewhere. 

In West Nile, we had 21 bridges ostensibly set to be funded under a loan from BADEA. One of the bridges is the Kia Kia Bridge that connects the road from Pakwach through Rhino Camp to Obongi-Moyo-Kajo Keji and Juba. However, several years down the road, this money was diverted and the bridges have not been built. Therefore, Bunyoro will be used to borrow money but the money will be used elsewhere. That is the information I had to give. Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, my plea to my honourable colleagues, to the Ministry of Works and the Leader of Government – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for Bunyoro.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. My plea to the Prime Minister and the Minister of Works is: is it possible for the minister to bring us a statement next week on how they intend to make sure that all loans under the sector are implemented? 

Your statement is lamenting about counterpart funding and land acquisition. That means that this country is going to incur a lot of costs on monies borrowed but not disbursed, at a time when we are crying about foreign exchange and current account deficits. Would you like to give an assurance to Parliament that you can immediately report on all these roads, not only for Bunyoro, where monies have been committed by Parliament but are not being absorbed?

5.29
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel insulted when the honourable minister mentions Dott Services. In my understanding, Dott Services should have been blacklisted a long time ago – (Interruption) 

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, the information that I would like to give the honourable member is that the Ninth Parliament recommended the blacklisting of Dott Services arising from the fact that even the services that they were offering on our roads were dotted in nature. We recommended, as a Parliament, on the Tororo-Soroti Road. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Madam Speaker, if the Ninth Parliament recommended that Dott Services be blacklisted, is it in order for the honourable minister to waste our time here telling us about Dott Services?

5.32
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether every pledge the President makes in our constituencies is also put in the National Development Plan II. He talked about the Bunyonyi road and when the budget was read, it was reflected but right now, I am not seeing it reflected as a tourism road. I wonder whether our ministries always plan for the pledges that the President makes. 

Right now, I can see that the President’s pledges are in trillions of shillings. I wonder how the minister is keeping in sync with the presidential pledges. Should we always say that when the President pledges it is a hoax? He is the custodian of all these things and he is the leader of Government; I do not know whether you want to remove the title “Fountain of Honour” from him. It needs to always rhyme with what he pledges. 

Indeed, in the Ninth Parliament we agreed with the Executive that Dott Services should be blacklisted. However, I see it appearing time and again; I do not know why.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there may have been existing contracts, which have not been concluded, but the minister will tell us.

5.34
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate that our President is focused on doing the right thing by having our roads done the right way so that we move forward as a country. However, my heart is bleeding because of one thing - nothing is being done on the road from Tirinyi to Pallisa, connecting to Kumi. On this table I can see a figure of Shs 12 billion and they are talking about land but the total budget for constructing that road is lacking.

Dear citizens, it is terrible for us to get loans and we do not do anything and yet the President has his eyes set on the right thing. Do we want to let down our country and our President?

I beg that the minister concerned comes and contains the fire. I know that we are welcoming you in a situation that is hot but accept that the situation is like that and take it on. This is a challenge for our nation; we have to move the country forward. I thank everybody. May God bless us this time so that we act as Ugandans and take Uganda forward. Thank you very much.

5.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I would like to make a quick comment in reference to what members have been mentioning. 

I would like to invite members to go ahead and read the Auditor-General’s report of  FY 2014/2015. This report talks about how heavily we have insulted the borrowing processes; how we are borrowing and not utilising the loans and how these loans are acquiring a lot of interest, which we shall eventually pay as a country. 

I, therefore, would like to suggest - the report is here - that you get in touch– Actually, it is a document of Parliament and the Speaker received it. Read it and internalise it. You may even ask yourselves why we should continuously borrow when we cannot utilise the loans that we are getting. I am not surprised that this afternoon, we are again presented with a request to borrow when we have not been able to finish the money that we have borrowed.

Madam Speaker, I request that as we discuss this issue, our Committee on National Economy gives us a report on how we have performed regarding the utilisation of our loans. Let this committee bring this report so that we can discuss if we should continuously borrow or not. If we are to borrow, can we finish a project and see it commissioned and then we go and borrow more? 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I call upon our Committee on Physical Infrastructure and the Committee on Government Assurances to ensure that they follow up these assurances that the minister has given. What was also not clear in the presentation of the minister is something on page 14 and possibly crossing over to page 15, where they are talking about the development budget estimates. There are other codes mentioned but we do not know what the project name is. I would like to know what you are talking about when you say, for example, the project under No.1, transaction and all that you have mentioned; No. 4, FS and DD of Kabwohe-Bwizibwera, Nsika-Ibanda-Kabujogera-Masyoro - what are you talking about? 

What is the project name, so that the committee may be in a position to follow up what you have promised to do? We would like to know what those are on pages 14 and 15. We would like to know what the project name is so that in case of a follow-up, we can be able to understand the issues that we are following up and whether they have been fulfilled. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is expecting a statement from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on loans passed by the Ninth Parliament. Therefore, minister, you are due to appear here after the State of the Nation Address debate. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, tell us where you stand and then we shall have the Ministry of Works.

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are in the process of preparing a statement to be laid before this Parliament for debate regarding the status of all loans that have been contracted by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

However, suffice it to say that when we were in Kyankwanzi at the retreat of the Cabinet and accounting officers, the low absorption of funds by Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) was extensively discussed. There were quite a number of challenges that were raised and one of them stems from planning, which is the responsibility of the MDAs. The second one was the procurement issues bedevilling UNRA and Ministry of Works and Transport and these are a result of weaknesses in the procurement law.

Madam Speaker, I have undertaken the responsibility, because of my experience, to try and see if we can standardise procurement and contract documents. For those of you who have the opportunity, you will know that Botswana is the least corrupt country in Africa. The way we did it is that we standardised all contract documents. I hope that one day we will have a session with accounting officers to try to advise them on how we can minimise administrative reviews, court injunctions and so on.

Madam Speaker, I will give you an example of two measures that we took, and I hope that those in the responsible committees will take this up. For major infrastructure projects that needed to be implemented urgently, having standardised the documents that contractors only fill for ease of comparison, we put all the evaluators in one room, we installed CCTV to watch what they were doing and tapped all their phone lines. We watched what they were doing and listened in to the calls they made and that brought down corruption in the country. 

I hope that one day we will have such measures here. I have been talking about this for the last, I think, four years since I joined Parliament but there hasn’t been interest. However, I think now there is interest. Awaken the interest to try to sort out the issue of procurement in this country. We can actually sort this out. Some of the solutions are administrative while others require amendment of the laws.

The other issue is counterpart funding, for which we, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, are always blamed. Madam Speaker, we all have been involved in it. When the MDAs bring their budgets to you for scrutiny, if there is a loan component, the first thing you should ask for is the counterpart funding for a particular project. It should be a priority and not even an unfunded priority because we will have already borrowed money for it -(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I am at pains, but I have no choice but to raise a point of procedure against my good friend, hon. Ajedra. According to budgeting principles, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should not come to Parliament with an MTEF without counterpart funding. Repayment of loans, wages, counterpart funding – those are the first call so why are you trying to shift it to Parliament? 

Madam Speaker, is the minister procedurally right to offload their failure to appreciate priorities of the budget from the Executive side to Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are moving on very slippery ground. First of all, you are the ones who bring loans here and then the next day you will tell the President that Parliament has delayed your loans- you people of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Do not even talk about us following up on counterpart funding; you are the ones who bring them late and they are all from your ministry.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, can the minister also clarify to the House the World Bank evaluation of the portfolio of loans of Uganda? This is because on the World Bank website, the issues they are raising with Uganda are very touchy. Uganda is not absorbing all these loans.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we shall answer that question when the ministerial statement comes. Honourable minister, please conclude; I have other work.

MR AJEDRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is important also. We are not saying that we are negating our responsibility to ensure that MDAs budget for counterpart funding. What we do as Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is, we give ceilings according to the available resources. Therefore, it is really the responsibility of the MDAs to know that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has procured this loan here and, therefore, they need to budget for it as their responsibility, as the MDA implementing that project, and include that counterpart funding. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what about when your ministry decides that it is an unfunded priority? It is your ministry that decides. They budget for it and then you call it “unfunded priority”. You are the ones who decide; do not shift the blame to the agencies because they budget for them and then you cancel them out. (Applause) Not hon. Ajedra, but Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. (Laughter)

MR AJEDRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we have taken note of that. We will have a lot more debate on this issue when we bring our statement on the status of loans. 

However, suffice it to say that I think MDAs also need to improve on their project management skills and expertise. It is a challenge that although there are very many options available for purposes of procuring services, works and contracts, traditional methods are always used. That is why we have all these unnecessary delays. At the time when we bring the amendments here, especially for PPDA and others, I think we will be able to debate this a lot more. Thank you.

5.39
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege Azuba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the House that this statement was on halting the construction of roads as announced by the UNRA Executive Director. We will come back with a comprehensive report on all the roads. It was not my intention to debate all the roads. Having said that, I would like to comment on some of the issues raised, as much as I can, but we will come back with a report. 

Honourable members, I request you to read the statement that I have given you. Somebody talked about the Mbale-Bubulo Road and it is there; Kyenjojo-Kagadi and Hoima-Masindi is also there; Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi is also there. Somebody also talked about Shs 12 billion but we have to start with land before we continue. 

The other comment I wish to make is that as much as there were mistakes made, and we all know that, they are now being addressed by the new management in place. Many of these roads were inherited. Therefore, I am requesting for your understanding until we come back with a comprehensive report. Thank you.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 31 MAY 2016

(Debate continues_)

5.48
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I stand to raise very pertinent issues regarding the Address on the State of the Nation that the President delivered in May. 

First of all, I would like to start by thanking the President for delivering this State of the Nation Address as well as the Leader of the Opposition for the response. However, we still have very controversial issues that were not addressed in the State of the Nation Address. I listened keenly to what members raised on the Floor of Parliament today and these issues include the schools under the education sector, the Ministry of Tourism, the estate in Naguru,construction of roads, killings that took place in Kasese, and the President’s promises to this country. 

I have also taken the trouble to research about what other heads of state said in their State of the Nation Addresses. The President is the chief implementer of what we pass in Parliament. It is his duty and responsibility to update Parliament and the people of this country on what is being done at the implementation level. 

In his Address on the State of the Nation, however, you do not see the President’s plan on the promises made to Ugandans, which have now gone to trillions. You do not see how the chief implementer of this country is trying to address problems of hepatitis B in the health sector. You also do not see what plans have been put in place to address the problem of unemployment. 

I compared our President’s Address on the State of the Nation to that of the South African President, Jacob Zuma, which he gave in February this year. I also compared it with that of the Philippine President, the Angolan President and the President of the People’s Republic of China. Unlike these, our Address on the State of the Nation does not provide details of the implementation of our programmes.

Our country is already paying huge amounts of money because we have not adhered to the implementation of laws. In his State of the Nation Address, I expected the President to have raised this and informed us on how the nation is responding to that. However, nothing has been addressed. When you read it, it does not cover all the sectors. Who else is going to act on behalf of the chief implementer to tell Ugandans how we are addressing sector by sector -(Member timed out.) 

5.52
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to give my comments on the President’s State of the Nation Address.

A number of critical issues were left out; for example, the health issue. Before you can think of going to the garden or coming to Parliament, think of the health sector. The people of Toroma, whom I represent, have no health centres. The few existing ones have no drugs. Even the medical personnel are few. You may find one nurse attending to thousands of patients. Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is very important that the Government of Uganda focuses on the health sector, especially the medical personnel, their welfare, their housing and their remuneration, among others.

The agricultural sector, which is a backbone to Uganda’s economy, is still lacking in many areas. Most farmers in Uganda do not have inputs. Even when they go to financial institutions, the interest rates are extremely high. Therefore, Ugandan farmers cannot afford to till the land and yet agriculture is a great contributor to the development of Uganda’s economy.   

The issue of land is crucial in Uganda and it is important for the Government of Uganda to address it. Most Ugandans’ land has been taken by landlords who own square miles of land and in most cases are not available. In my constituency, for example, my people have been evicted. Therefore, it is very important for Government to bring -(Member timed out.)

5.55
MR EDWARD MAKMOT (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank the President for a clear, concise, functional and pragmatic approach to national issues as reflected in the State of the Nation Address. Before I proceed, allow me to thank God for the blessed nation that I am in today and for the leadership that we have in this country, including you, Madam Speaker, and everyone else in this House. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the President did set a goal. We have been moving without direction. The President clearly stated that we need a middle-income economy. I think the goal has been set. He has clearly set the parameters of achieving that and I think it is achievable. I, therefore, thank the President for the wisdom reflected in the State of the Nation Address. 

Having said that, allow me to say the following: while we talked about a middle income economy, we did not define it. According to the Oxford Dictionary, a middle-income economy is a per capita income between US$ 1035 and US$ 12,650. The problem I have with this definition of per capita income, which we are supposed to achieve, is that it negates a lot of factors that are important for our well-being and yet this is what we want to achieve. 

It does not deal with income inequality; the gap between the rich and the poor. In a country like Uganda, where we do not file individual tax on a yearly basis, it becomes very difficult to get proper records on what our national income is, which is generally divided by the number of population members. I, therefore, think that there is lack of credibility with respect to what a middle-income economy is. This is part of the problem.

However, I think that this is achievable, if not already achieved if you look at what our farmers do –(Member timed out.)

5.59
MR EDWARD KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have risen to give a comment on the State of the Nation Address given by the President. 

Looking at the statement made by the President, he appreciates the Government of Uganda under the NRM leadership for extending water to rural areas and I really do appreciate this. National Water and Sewerage Corporation has taken up many projects and it is doing good work, but my concern is that members of Parliament and ministers in charge need to know that the people out there are not using this water. 

You take a project like a gravity scheme, with water running on its own, and you charge the people of Kanungu who have their gravity water the same amount you are charging those people in Kampala. A Member of Parliament who stays in Kampala pays the same amount as an old woman in Karamoja and Kanungu. There should be different tariffs because the rural woman needs to see this water being put to use. These people are going back to using unhealthy water from the wetlands.

I found a woman being charged Shs 70,000 for water in a rural sub-county, which has been taken up by National Water and Sewerage Corporation. That is a lot of money and it is alarming for a rural woman. The Ministry of Water and Environment needs to re-visit this law and this Parliament needs to wake up and we represent our people. This water is highly priced. If we put these different tariffs, we shall have arrested the problem. 

Madam Speaker, I appreciate your ruling –(Member timed out.)

6.02
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address. However, I have some few comments to make. 

The issue of tourism is becoming admirable to Ugandans, especially the people who border national parks. I am talking especially about Kanungu District because it borders both Bwindi National Park and Queen Elizabeth National Park. However, it has been unfortunate that people cannot bear with the animals in those forests. They have really destroyed people’s gardens and we have made noise but nothing has been done about it. 

Our women who are always gardening are struggling for nothing. About three days before the President delivered this Address on the State of the Nation, there is an area in my constituency where the mountain gorillas attacked the whole village and ate all the crops they came across, apart from coffee. We came here and made noise but nothing was done about it. The people were not even compensated. 

It is always good that when you give with one hand, you receive with another. Our people are really getting problems from those animals and yet they are not being helped. I would implore the ministry - it is unfortunate that I cannot see any minister in charge of tourism here –(Interjections)- Okay, the Prime Minister is there. 

Rt hon. Prime Minister, we need to look out for our people on a serious note. I have one prayer: whenever we are giving out jobs for game rangers, for example, - those people who stop these animals from escaping and straying- we should consider people who are born in those areas. This is because animals are destroying their crops and yet their children can never be employed there. You will find that the chief warden is from Karamoja or the northern part of Uganda and when they are employing people, they get only people from outside the region.

The villagers and the people surrounding those parks therefore do not appreciate our animals at all, much as they bring a lot of income to our country. It is a very big issue and I believe if it is addressed, all of us will be happy; the Government will be happy and the people who look after those animals will also be happy. (Member timed out.)

6.05
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate His Excellency the President’s State of the Nation Address. I would also like to associate myself with this speech because of the fact that Kibale County is one of the beneficiaries of the democratisation process in recognition of marginalisation. For that matter, I would like to appreciate the President.

Secondly, the President spoke about hydroelectric power generation. I think we have invested a lot in this sector. However, I would like to say that this Parliament needs to support the President and fill the gaps where we find them. Specifically, I am talking about alternative power. 

We are generating power and I appreciate the fact that this is because of manufacturing and industrialisation, but we have a bigger majority of our people out there in our villages who cannot afford power. Secondly, this power will definitely not reach most of the people. Therefore, I would like to say that we need to think about alternatives. 

We need to find power for lighting our villages. You will realise that most of our children in the villages cannot afford to read at night whereas their counterparts in the urban centres are reading. We, therefore, need to think about lighting the villages; not power for industrialisation but at least for lighting, so that people are able to do some things, especially to improve the education sector in the rural areas.

Madam Speaker, the other issue I would like to hint on is what the President lamented about, that this country is a supermarket for foreign imported goods. I am aware that the President has ministers in that line and we have the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. These goods are not only flooding here but they are substandard goods. When you buy an electrical appliance, for example, when you plug it into power and it ceases to function immediately. 

I think that as Parliament, we need to support the President on this, and that means that the people who have been assigned to do their jobs must do them very well. Short of that, this Parliament must be serious and we must to track these people and stop this. They should not just remain statements on paper. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue is an appalling one, and it is the issue of corruption. We need to support the President on the issue of corruption. We have talked many times about these things. In my view, I think we need to put in place monitoring teams that should be able to do physical audits because this is where the problem is. The Auditor-General’s report and other reports are just theory; we need to put in place agencies –(Member timed out.)

6.09
COL FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join other members in thanking the President for giving well-guided direction to our country for the next five years. 

Most importantly, I thank him for his stance on how to deal with commercial banks’ interest rates, moneylenders and the corrupt who have been depriving our people of their money. He coined this kisanja as one of “hakuna muchezo” and I think if we all eliminate “muchezo kwa kazi”, Uganda will definitely join the middle-income status countries come 2021. 

However, I would like to draw your attention to what the President undertook to achieve in respect of attaining middle income status, particularly transforming about 68 per cent of the population from subsistence farming into a cash economy. In my opinion, I feel it is pertinent that we define and segment the 68 per cent of the population.

If you scan through this population, you will realise that there are those who have perpetually made themselves beggars, those who are always out to attend burials, gossips and things like that. However, if you also scan through, you will see some people who have land but are not using it substantially. In addition, you will also find a section that would like to farm but do not have land or the inputs that they would require for them to do their work.

In this way, I think we shall be able to come up with solutions that are tailored to these different segments and I am sure we will get appropriate solutions. We are now only looking at NAADS, but we have forgotten that there are those that are not into farming.

Secondly, I realise that 68 per cent of our population may reside within the local governments. However, the reports we are getting from local governments say that funding has reduced over the years from around 24 per cent of the budget to 12 per cent in this financial year. Their demand is that in order to have local governments working appropriately to a substantial level, they should be given at least 38 per cent. 

In addition, there is the matter of staffing. They are crying that some districts are at 56 per cent- (Member timed out.)

6.13
MS ANNIE LOGIEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Government of Uganda under the leadership of His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. He has tried his best, based on the achievements gained despite the limited resources and the competing needs. Look at the infrastructure like roads, water etcetera.

I know in his State of the Nation Address, he did not mention health, but this is a well-researched report. When you look at the health centres that we have in the country, they are well spread at every five kilometres as per 2012 and 2013. This captures at least 70 per cent of the population within five kilometres. You will realise that we also have health centres in some sub-counties, which we did not have in the past. We also have to accept our situation and to try to reach a desirable level of development, which we are steadily moving to.

Madam Speaker, as the members on the opposite side said, the ratio of 1 to 30 million is not acceptable. However, when you look at one doctor attending to 30 million people, do you want to say that we have only two doctors in the whole country? (Interjection) Madam Speaker, this is a maiden speech - (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MS LOGIEL: Madam Speaker, when you look at the human resource, we have improved- (Member timed out.)

6.16
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As other members have said, I thank the President for the elaborate Address on the State of the Nation. 

The President normally speaks about privatisation and when he spoke on privatisation, there are issues that he gave more time and money to, leaving out the health sector. Many members have spoken about it but I would like to also say something. However much we talk about structures, we should ask ourselves what is in the structures that we are talking about. 

At one point, I raised a concern to the Rt hon. Prime Minister that many Ugandans are affected with cancer of different types, especially the women who face the challenge of cervical and breast cancer. We heard that Mulago Hospital has a machine for radiotherapy and other private hospitals have CT scanners but many Ugandans cannot afford. It is my prayer that this Government’s next programme for the health sector tackles equipping our hospitals and health centres.

Currently, in our referral hospital called Busolwe in Butaleja District, we do not have a mortuary. When somebody dies, he or she is just covered and left there amidst other patients. This is not normal. Our patients are referred to districts that are very far away and they cannot even afford transport –(Interruption)

6.19
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, Persons with Disabilities, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I wish to join my colleagues to thank the President for the clear State of the Nation Address he gave on 15 May 2016. 

Madam Speaker, the President mentioned many important issues and challenges that the country is facing. Therefore, our duty as Parliament is to ensure that we critically analyse these issues and give solutions to them and these include appropriation and oversight. (Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, we are debating the State of the Nation Address that was delivered on 31 of May 2016 but the honourable member is debating the State of the Nation Address of 15 May. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have very little time; do not waste time. Just continue.

MR KATURAMU: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. His Excellency the President mentioned very important issues but I have picked out two or three because of time constraints.

The first one is on investment. His Excellency the President on page 11 said that there are unpatriotic Ugandans who frustrate investors in this country and he said, “Do not delay any project.” Madam Speaker, this matter of delaying investors has been talked about in this House time and again. Can we ask the minister in charge of investment to establish a one-stop centre where an investor will apply, get his or her licence and start operating without delay?

Secondly, there is a role banks play in the development of the country. From the speech of the President, commercial banks cannot foster development in this country because of the high interest rates they charge. The President also informed the nation that Government is going to capitalise Uganda Development Bank (UDB).

Madam Speaker, it is this Parliament that passes resolutions to capitalise Uganda Development Bank. Uganda Development Bank now is the only bank which was not privatised. Therefore, the Government should have leeway on how UDB should function in the interest of developing this country, since we do not have a commercial bank in this country that can cater for farmers and agriculturalists. Can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development put a till in UDB to cater for the small and medium entrepreneurs in the country?

The third issue I wanted to tackle was mentioned on page 15, and that is Islamic banking. I wish to thank the President for spearheading this new philosophy in the banking sector. I also want to inform this House that Islamic financing is being carried out in many countries including the United Kingdom, Kenya, Malaysia and now in Rwanda, India and others. Therefore, this opportunity -(Member timed out.)

6.23
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues in thanking the President for his elaborate Address on the State of the Nation. I will mainly tackle what I believe he did not talk about extensively, and I will start with salaries. When you tell us we are moving to a middle-income country, we expect better pay and once you expect better pay, you would think that by this time some salaries would be increased by 100 per cent. 

Look at a graduate at salary scale U4 being paid around Shs 540,000 to Shs 550,000 of which only Shs 250,000 is untaxed and the rest attracts Pay As You Earn (PAYE) of 30 per cent. These people fall sick like we do, they have children in school like we do and they also need a living.  This attracts corruption. If a person is not earning a good salary and the child at home is sick or lacks school fees, he may think of stealing public funds. I thought we would have better payments in terms of salaries. 

Secondly, if someone is well paid, this is purchasing power for our industrialists. They cannot remain here when they do not have good market for their goods. I, therefore, think that it is better for us to pay them so that industrialists can also enjoy.

We have the highest power tariffs in the region in terms of industrialisation. The bills here are between 31 per cent and 39 per cent while for our neighbours in Kenya, the bill for power is between 18 per cent and 12 per cent. Therefore, industrialists will run to those countries where the bills are much cheaper. I believe it is better for us to have better pay in order to attract industrialists because of increased purchasing power and in order to get rid of corruption.

I will immediately switch to education briefly. Our children are suffering, especially the very young ones in private schools. How can a child in nursery; baby class, wake up at 5.00 a.m. in the morning to go to school and yet all Government schools agreed to the policy of 8.15 a.m. We need to create a policy to stop this practice. We curbed down on teaching children during holidays -(Member timed out)

6.28
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank His Excellency the President for his very elaborate Address on the State of the Nation. 

I appreciate the President for being a very democratic leader and even associating with vanishing tribes like the Ik, Tepeth and others. He has done well because he was the power behind giving these people constituencies. However, I would like to point out that some of these communities still live as hunters and gatherers. Much as there is affirmative action for that region, there is still need for affirmative action for those communities within the already existing affirmative action. 

The President also talked about the tourism industry and how we are going to work with our partners to ensure that the country gets 4,000,000 tourists per annum. This is good but the other aspect of tourism, which I want us to look at, is domestic tourism and cultural tourism. We sit here as Ugandans waiting for foreigners to bring us income in the tourism sector and yet we, the owners of this industry, do not even visit some of these national parks. 

We need to have a strategy, first as leaders, to visit and appreciate what we have in some of these national parks. We can even organise trips for some of our constituents to visit and appreciate what Uganda has other than depending on a muzungu from Denmark to come and give us money. 

The other thing which the country needs to do is to revive what we used to call “conservation clubs” as well as the wildlife clubs in schools, so that our children can really appreciate what we have as a country. To go further, the country also needs to revive its national carrier. It is a shame that –(Member timed out.)

6.31
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero): Madam Speaker, I add my voice in thanking His Excellency the President for this wonderful vision. 

I would like to draw your attention to pages 12 and 13 of the speech where we have a target of raising about 4,000,000 tourists. This country needs to realise that dark tourism or black tourism is of paramount importance to invest in areas of suffering. At this point, let me talk about the five-year gorilla war in Luweero. The skulls are rotting and most of them have been stolen, and the sites are bushy. 

I have very many friends who want to visit Uganda and look at these. Therefore, it is my prayer that a war memorial centre is built in Greater Luweero so that we can realise this number of tourists. The 30 years of peace we are enjoying was not just a chanceful accomplishment. It was an invaluable effort of a few individuals who braved many difficulties to have peace in this country. We need to preserve it and tell the future generations about this so that it does not fade away.

I would also like to draw your attention to pages 15 and 16 of the State of the Nation Address, which talks about helping 68 per cent of subsistence farmers to join the money economy. I note with concern that many estate developers out there are impacting negatively on this drive. Every day, these people are targeting arable land for fragmentation. 

We know that the rate of urbanisation all over the country is moving at a supersonic speed. Last time, I was trying to review a consultative meeting of local governments by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and recommendations were made. One recommendation was that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries comes up with a policy on urban farming, and they communicated that they had a draft. In fact, I will welcome that information at a later stage if the minister has a policy for urban farming.

Madam Speaker, let me conclude by talking about the inevitable from pages 9, 10, 11 and 24, which is corruption. First of all, I would like to applaud His Excellency the President for the indomitable courage and determination to continue the fight against corruption. However, corruption takes very many forms. I think performance contracts should trickle down to scale U8. We have it at U1 –(Member timed out.)

6.35
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the President for the Address on the State of the Nation. However, allow me to comment on one of the issues. 

Comparing the State of the Nation of Uganda to China’s and South Africa’s is erroneous. This is because Uganda has its uniqueness. South Africa is an upper middle-income country, while China is a highly developed country. Uganda is an emerging economy. Therefore, we cannot compare. In fact, we had the best address because we touched on our priorities. Our priorities cannot be the same as China’s or South Africa’s as alluded to by our colleague. I do not think it is in order to compare Uganda to South Africa and China. I thank the President.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have 18 Members on my list but I would like to adjourn the sitting for now. Tomorrow, we shall start with hon. Timuzigu Kamugisha, followed by hon. David Mutebi, hon. Odria and hon. Twesigye John Ntamuhiira. All those who have registered are here on my list. We shall resume the debate tomorrow.

Honourable members, House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.36 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 August 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)

