

Tuesday, 25 August 2020 


Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

	PRAYERS	

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back after this short break. Thank you for the work you have done in your constituencies. In relation to that, I am aware of your recent interactions with the population, in preparation for your elective pursuits.

I also want to inform the House that in the most recent COVID-19 tests conducted at Parliament in July, there was not a single positive. Therefore, I really congratulate ourselves on the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). However, as we resume, we have arranged again for new tests at Parliament. Therefore, Members are welcome to attend our medical facility with effect from today, 25 August 2020.

Secondly, I want to thank all the members of Parliament who campaigned for me for the post of Second National Vice Chairperson of National Resistance Movement (NRM). Although, it is a party post, I still want to thank all the members of Parliament across the board who gave me support. I would like to thank the Members who acted as agents in all the districts.

Honourable members, I have continued to receive appeals from different parts of the country; one, from the 40 districts still under lockdown; they would want to know when their normal lives will resume. 

I have also received from the operators of the bars and casinos and their employees who remain without work and income for over six months. They say they are ready to arrange SOPs to enable them operate. They would like the consideration of the Government.

I have also received an appeal from the mobile market vendors of Greater Luwero in addition to other vendors of non-food items, whom we talked about three weeks ago before we went for the short recess.
	
There is still the unresolved issue of rent for the tenants in the arcades who are not able to work but are still required to pay rent. Therefore, I hope that the Government will be able to address those issues.

However, amidst all these, we also had some very happy moments. After 16 years, two months and 14 days, Kenenisa Bekele’s reign as the 5000-metre world record holder is over. Uganda’s Cheptegei ran 12:35.36 at the Herculis Diamond League Meeting in Monaco taking almost two seconds off Bekele’s record. 

No man in history has held that record for that long. Cheptegei is now the World Champion in cross-country and as you know, in the 10, 000 metres, he is our new king.  Therefore, let us celebrate the contribution of our golden boy Joshua Cheptegei and wish him well together with his colleagues, Halimah Nakayi and Nanyonga and all the other athletes. 

2.52
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, upon being elected to one of the most important organs of NRM. Though I am on that side, you had our prayers. We are grateful for all those who voted you; they made us proud. There are those who decampaigned you. I will not go into details but God was on your side. 

Secondly, you talked about those who are still under the lockdown. This is a very important element because there are many Ugandans who are still under lockdown up to now. For example, in a market like Owino, there are those who were selling merchandise who up to now are still under lockdown.

These people are facing many challenges. How I wish the Government came to their rescue because there is no Government programme to assist these categories of people, dealers in vegetables and other commodities of this kind. I propose that Government lifts the lockdown on the people who have been there for the last six months.

Finally, the houses of worship have said that they will make sure they follow all the SOPs. Since our motto is “For God and my Country,” there is no justification for not opening places of worship. I pray that the Government listens to the religious leaders. We shall follow the SOPs. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.55
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker for taking top positions in NRM.

There is a lot the country has learnt from the recent elections. It is possible that we can hold elections in this COVID-19 environment. However, observing from what we saw from a distance, although we are not part of the NRM systems, I pray that when it comes to general elections and even NRM primaries for the members of Parliament, we remove the two elements, which we observed glaringly.

First, was the commercialisation of elections and intimidation. This is what we observed as outsiders and I believe that as NRM goes through primaries and as we wait for the general elections, let us pray that the two elements will be removed.

Secondly, you have said that we have been in touch with our constituencies and indeed, we have. We found that most of the places that are used for gathering the delegates are the churches and other places of worship.

If we are gathering people in the churches and talking politics, why can’t we gather people in the same place to talk about God and our spirituality? 

We are pretending because if we are really protecting people, right now, there is absolutely no order. People are not putting on masks, they are gathering massively in churches and yet, things are going on normally.

It is our duty, as an organ that represents the people of Uganda, to demand that the churches and mosques be opened so that some of us can worship our God. It is an essential service to nourish our souls and spirit.

I would also want the Prime Minister, at some point, to tell us what happened to the masks that were supposed to be given to the population. In Dokolo, we have not seen the masks distributed. People are massively gathering without any form of protection. We have not even seen the soap distributed to the people. 

Therefore, people are at risk and the Government has to take action. Whether you like it or not, the process of election has started and yet, we have to protect the population.

2.58
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I would like to add my voice to those who have congratulated you and your deputy. More importantly, I would also like to congratulate candidate Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, who was chosen unopposed as the presidential flag bearer for NRM and as the National Chairperson of the party.

This House has produced a number of Central Executive Committee (CEC) members. Hon. Chris Baryomunsi and hon. Godfrey Kiwanda have joined the CEC of the NRM and we congratulate them. 

Let us also congratulate those who tried because one of the four principles of NRM is democracy and where there is competition, people have to choose. However, what happens thereafter is critical to the party and this Government. 
I sincerely congratulate you all.

Madam Speaker, thank you for calling us amidst pressure from the NRM side, where we are expected to elect our candidates for members of Parliament on 4 September 2020. Let me wish every member of Parliament - both from the Opposition and from my side - success through this exercise, which we are going to embark on.
 
A number of points have been raised about districts, which are still under lockdown. 

I am also furious about the masks. Kiboga has not received any mask much as we had made an arrangement that we distribute masks along with the mosquito nets. The mosquito nets are being distributed minus masks in many of the districts.

I understand that tomorrow, the COVID-19 National Task Force is going to sit under the leadership of His Excellency, the President. I am a member and I will make sure that I raise the concerns of the Speaker and this House, regarding the border districts, the markets, the places of worship and the distribution of masks. However, we have a challenge because we are registering many deaths in Kampala and other parts of the country. Here we are, arguing for the opening up of some places but the situation is worse than when we started.  At that time, we had not registered any death. 

Therefore, the COVID-19 National Task Force will tomorrow be challenged to come up with decisions, which will instil hope into Ugandans. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.02
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to those who have congratulated you and all of us who prayed for you to succeed. Congratulations.

We are concerned about the preparedness of Mulago National Referral Hospital after the many cases that are coming out each and every day. Today, we had a meeting with Mulago Hospital and the information we got is that among the institutions that were facilitated, Mulago National Referral Hospital was not included. We are concerned about the money that was allocated for the fight of COVID-19. We need accountability of all the released funds.

Also, allow me to thank you for bringing the testing services here at Parliament. Most of us have tested but we have not yet got the results. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the COVID-19 situation is still on but I think the Government should concentrate more on trying to help people to live with it. We do not know when it is going to end. 

However, my worry is that I have not seen the local leaders involved. You people are hanging in the air and nothing is happening on the ground. If you involved the local leaders, something would happen and I hope that you will make use of their existence.

Honourable members, our colleague, hon. Ssekikubo has lost his father, Mzee Kitayibwa. I do not have the details about the burial date but I was informed that he passed on. Let us stand up for a minute of silence before hon. Lubogo comes.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

3.04
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to beg for your indulgence that I make a comment on your address and then, I raise my issue of national importance. I would like to congratulate you on your victory in the recent elections. I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate the rest of the people who ascended to the highest organ of the NRM.

Secondly, I would like to congratulate Joshua Cheptegei; the gallant son of Uganda, who has rewritten history by breaking the 5,000 metre world record. I request you to allow me to bring a motion at an appropriate time, to appreciate our son for that achievement. 

Turning to the issue of national importance, I have received information that Uganda’s Embassy in Brussels and a number of other embassies are going to be renovated. However, the costs that are involved in renovating these small buildings are exorbitant. The one in Brussels alone is going to cost about Shs 10 billion - to renovate a small house of a few rooms. I think this should not be just watched and then, later conducting forensic audits when the work has already been done and money has been spent. We need to do this now before the work starts. How can Shs 10 billion be spent on repairing a small house? 
Therefore, I would like to raise this by urging Government to explain to us the details of the works involved and possibly, interest the Auditor-General to get into this matter and establish the amount of money being spent on the work of renovating - not acquiring land and building but renovating existing small buildings.
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lubogo, is it a proposed renovation or it is already ongoing? 

MR LUBOGO: As far as I know, it is proposed.

THE SPEAKER: But this is planned money?

MR LUBOGO: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We will ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and explain to us the proposed costs for the renovation of our mission in Brussels together with the plans. If you could do it in a fortnight’s time.

3.08
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. The country is fully aware that our people from Kasese were arrested and remanded to Kirinya Government Prison and other prisons in 2016 but to date, no trial has been undertaken. 

Sadly, given the conditions in some of the prisons, our people have fallen critically ill. As a result, they need urgent critical medical attention but again, that has not been done for them. 

One day, when I visited Kirinya Government Prison, I found one of my constituents hospitalised. It occurred to me that it was too much. I was overwhelmed and broke down. This man was in need of urgent operation. He had been in the hospital for 18 days but with both his hands and legs chained onto the hospital bed. 

I wonder whether we still qualify to be called a country. Injustice anywhere is injustice everywhere and justice delayed is justice denied. Our Constitution is very clear about how long somebody is supposed to spend in jail and how much it is supposed to take to process whatever issues they could be having. 

We have continued to lose our citizens. Just two days ago, we lost the seventh royal guard. What troubles me is that their families are living in the deepest anguish and eternal misery. 

My question is, when or how shall Government account for the loss of these lives? They have never been subjected to processes of court for Government to pronounce itself on whether they are guilty or innocent and yet, we continue to lose lives. 

My prayer is that Government, without further delay, undertakes a fair, speedy, independent and credible trial.

If that does not happen, I ask my fellow citizens and the leadership of this House, my honourable colleagues to demand that Government causes the unconditional release of these citizens. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is required to come and update this House on the prosecution status of the cases involving the royal guards. That will let us know when they will be tried. We give the minister a fortnight to come and give us that update. Let us go to item no. 3. (Members rose_)Please, read item no.3.  Honourable members, please, hon. Katusabe raised an issue and I have made a ruling on what to do.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INLAND WATER TRANSPORT BILL, 2020

3.13
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Madam Speaker, allow me also to join those who have spoken before me to congratulate you on your recent successful election to the position of the National Vice Chairperson of the NRM CEC. Congratulations, Madam.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

GEN. WAMALA: Allow me now to lay on the Table, the Inland Water Transport Bill, 2020. 

The objectives of the Bill are:

    a) To harmonise and mordernise legislation governing the inland water transport subsector;
    b) To create the maritime administration to regulate the water transport subsector;
    c) To establish a maritime institute to professionalise those employed in the water transport subsector;
    d) To carry out state duties, which include surveys, inspections, registration and licensing of vessels to be able to improve their safety on water; and 
    e) To advise Government on notifications, access to international maritime conventions and their implementation process.
Accompanying the Bill is a certificate of financial implications. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. The Bill is sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for urgent perusal and report back. 

May I commend the Minister of Works and Transport for responding to the public outcry about the absence of legislation on the inland waters. Thank you very much.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNERS’ REGISTRATION BILL, 2020

3.16
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beti Kamya): Madam Speaker, may I also add my voice to the voices of those that have congratulated you for winning and retaining your position as National Vice Chairperson of NRM CEC. Congratulation, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Rubaga was particularly good. (Applause)

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill titled, “The Physical Planners’ Registration Bill, 2020” be read for the first time. 

The objectives of the Bill are: 

1. 	To provide for the establishment of a Physical Planners’ Registration Board;
2. 	To provide for the powers and functions of the board;
3. 	To provide for the registration of physical planners;
4. 	To provide for disciplinary procedures for errant physical planners; and 
5. 	To provide for other related matters.

This Bill is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. I beg to lay both on the Table. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. The Bill is sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. It is equally urgent, taking into account what has been happening in the sector. We ask the committee to expeditiously handle it and report back. 

Honourable minister, you still owe us the Uganda Land Commission (Amendment) Bill.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $169.2 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE IRRIGATION FOR CLIMATE CHANGE RESILIENCE PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had received this report and debated it. There were questions for the minister to answer but I do not see him here. Let us go to item no.5.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS (SDR) 72.7 MILLION (EQUIVALENT TO $99.8 MILLION) ADDITIONAL FUNDING FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE COMPETITIVENESS AND ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (CEDP-AF)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is another one where we had received and debated the report but there were areas of dissatisfaction, which required the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and explain. Again, I do not see him. Yes, minister in charge of tourism – and congratulations. (Laughter)

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (TOURISM) (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Was it just for you or for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as well?

MR KIWANDA: This loan is for both of us; the minister in charge of lands and I. There were some issues that were raised to the minister in charge of tourism.

First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Madam Speaker. Congratulations. Mityana was particularly very good. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not here but this is a loan about competitiveness. It is going to help the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to increase international arrivals in the country. This loan is going to give us more capacity to employ more Ugandans and increase the export of non-traditional products up to 10 per cent. 

This is an additional loan. The first one was the loan that we used for the development of the labour force for the tourism sub-sector, particularly on the Hotel Tourism Training Institute (HTTI), strengthening the capacity of our tourism school in Jinja and also the capacity of the ministry and the Uganda Wildlife Authority, to ensure that we increase our competitiveness. This is a US$ 99.8 million loan but the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities will be allocated US$ 45 million.

It is a loan that has been pending for a long time and our donors are getting impatient. I request that this House allows us to go ahead and use this loan.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think we have no problem with your side. There are issues that the ministers in charge of finance and lands have to answer.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the loan request that the minister has placed before us although we are yet to hear from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Tourism is important to all the regions. We would like the Minister of Tourism to tell us; where are you concentrating your efforts in the north, for example? Where are you concentrating your efforts in the east, west and central? It is important for us to know. 

We have some historical sites. For example, in Dokolo, we have two sites where the King of Bunyoro was kept for safety and where the King of Buganda was also kept for safety. These are historical sites to prove that although we are Langi, we protected the lives of the King of Bunyoro and the King of Buganda. Up to now, there is no emphasis on trying to build those sites to make the people learn about our history and our past. That is why people are not united. 

Why would the Langi be ready to die to protect the King of Bunyoro and the king of Buganda when the Baganda themselves could not protect their king? This is very rich and we need to understand this.

Madam Speaker, the minister must tell me why they have refused, for all these years, to develop that tourism site. We have got some very rich sites. For example, I was in Busoga and I saw the climbing of the Kagulu Hill but there are no visible investments that can attract tourists to that site. People are just trying to make people go there but actually, you are not investing to attract tourists to those areas. 

We would like to know the regional spread in your investments so that we can all support you. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I beg to remove the mask.

THE SPEAKER: No, you should learn to use it.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, congratulations. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR MACHO: Busia gave you the biggest percentage, I think, in the whole country although it is disappointing that some of our colleagues betrayed us and they are looking at you as if they are angels. That is politics –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I need your protection from the Government Chief Whip. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I have risen on a point of procedure concerning the loan from the minister in charge of tourism. Truly, I agree with Mama Dokolo that most loans that are approved here are concentrated in certain areas. The northern and eastern regions have been left out. We have areas like Budimu and Lumino in Busia where the remains of Bishop Hannington were laid. We have areas like Sofia where it is believed that our grandfathers originated from. We need this loan to benefit the whole country so that tourism in Uganda can be developed to benefit everybody. Tourism is one of the best earners whereby every person in the country can benefit. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It is a pity that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not here. One of the reasons we waited on passing this is because the funds had not been utilised. We wanted to know why the funds in the other loans have not been utilised; - the Private Sector Foundation, etc. It is a big issue. We pass money here and it sits in the agencies and people cannot access it.

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that when such loans are approved here, they are given to different ministries and departments. Of course, when you have not utilised a loan, it is very expensive because first of all, you are maintaining that loan in terms of interest and when it is not utilised, we definitely lose as a country.

Allow me to respond to Mama Cecilia Ogwal, concerning some tourism sites in Dokolo. I have personally visited these tourism sites at Kagai in Dokolo. They are very monumental to our country and tell a lot about the history of this country, Uganda. 

They talk about the unity our people used to have – I do not even know how they used to communicate when Kabaka Mwanga would move from here to Dokolo and I do not know how he used to communicate. While growing up - when the King was there - the story remained in Buganda and we used to call everyone who came from the north “Abadokolo”. The implication was that our King was in Dokolo and we thought that whoever crosses the Nile that side is a Mudokolo.

The history is so rich and I would like to appreciate hon. Cecilia Ogwal and the district. They have tried to maintain this place but we need to come up as a country.

Tourism is divided into two; there is product development and product promotion. We have been lagging behind on the issues of product promotion, when you see the amount of money we put into tourism to do promotion.

However also, when you do a lot of promotion and people visit these sites and they are not well looked after properly, you will not be able to have the two S's that we have in tourism - stay and spend.

For example, Madam Speaker, you know about the programme we have for the source of River Nile. We have a special programme for Kagulu Hill and Bishop Hannington –(Interjection)– Yes. We need this and I think at an appropriate time - either in this Parliament or the next one - we need to allocate money into tourism product development.

Some of our sites have been destroyed. I visited one of the best hills around Lira town and people had already crushed the stones and had turned this site into a stone quarry. We are losing this.

The last time I was in the East - I think that is hon. Oboth's constituency - you could see footsteps. There are also footsteps of Jesus in Dokolo, where you see - I do not know how - footmarks on the rock -(Interjection)– Yes, on a rock in Nyero and all these.

Madam Speaker, because of the land issues today, we need to also come up. How do we own these sites as Government? Most of these sites that we are talking about are on private land and people are free to do whatever they want to do on the particular land.
So, as we plan for the survival of these sites; if it means coming up with a special loan or special funding to make sure that we own these sites, their promotion and development is very important.

However, first of all, on the ownership; today, we have issues with Nyero Rock and Madam Speaker, you know the trouble we have gone through with Kagulu Hill. If it was not for you, the whole of it would be off today. People had already taken over most parts of Kagulu because the hill is not just a hill but even the surroundings. You need hotels; you need facilities around this hill.

Therefore, as Government, one of the things that we should think about - and soon, I think we shall bring this on the Floor of this Parliament - is how do we own or procure these sites?

On the issue of promotion; when we look at this loan, it is basically about promotion because we want to see how we support, facilitate and increase private sector investment in the tourism sector and strengthen the effectiveness of the land administration system. That is why it even has the land facility. 

It is unfortunate that my brother, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not here but this loan is long overdue, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall defer the decision to tomorrow. We really want answers about money, which has got stuck in the Private Sector Foundation Uganda and other places, so that we know why it is not moving before we add more money.

Thank you, honourable minister. You know we support tourism and we shall assist you with this one but let us get the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tomorrow, so that we complete this loan.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LABOUR DISPUTES ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development? Honourable members, this matter has been on the Order Paper for six sittings and the ministers are all not here, yet in other quarters, we are accused of not doing work of the Government but look at this! Let us go to the next one.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development? Well, we all have campaigns to do but these are important Bills. Where are the ministers?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, my apologies but I guess that they are aware, as other members of Parliament are. I pledge to do more whipping so that they can come to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my intention is to release Members at the end of this week. I do not want them here after Thursday. So, I wanted all this work to be done so that Members can go.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Let me do the whipping, Madam Speaker.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: The mover is also not here.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ACCREDITATION FOR CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives? Let it be noted that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is absent; the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is absent and the mover of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019 is absent.

3.35
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I think the parliamentary team should be ready with the report from the COVID-19 committee, which was put in place. Since the ministries or the Executive do not seem to be very vigilant in following up the business, would you give time for the COVID-19 taskforce to come up with their report so that we can read and reflect on what we had proposed and whether those proposals are being implemented?

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly. If they are ready, they should bring the report and then, we put it on the Order Paper.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE EVICTIONS AND DISPLACEMENT OF THE PEOPLE OF APAA COMMUNITY

THE SPEAKER: On this one, the report had been presented. We had handled the debate but we were waiting for the Government to update us on the actions taken by the Prime Minister. Honourable minister of lands-

3.36
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beti Kamya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Permit me to correct an oversight that I made when I congratulated you; I should have continued to congratulate all the other people that won positions in the NRM CEC. In the midst of it is my own - of the central region - hon. Godfrey Kiwanda. I congratulate everybody. 

This is a statement to Parliament on the Apaa land conflict, by my ministry, as required by Parliament.

On the 22nd Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fifth Session of the 10th Parliament of Uganda, on Tuesday 28 July 2020, you ruled that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should make a statement regarding the Apaa land conflict on the Floor of Parliament. 

This is the progress made by Government in resolving the imminent land conflict in Apaa: 
Whereas Parliament appointed a six-member select committee on 6 March 2019 to inquire into the evictions and displacement of the people of Apaa community in Amuru District, and whereas the committee has submitted its report to the House, the office of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister also prepared a Cabinet memorandum on Government efforts to resolve the Apaa land conflict. 

The memorandum was, therefore, presented by the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. It informed Cabinet that in 2012, the Uganda Wildlife Authority attempted to evict people from the East Madi Wildlife Reserve located in North Murchison Falls National Park in Adjumani District, North West of Uganda. Some occupants had voluntarily accepted to leave the reserve. However, along the way, some information alleging military/game ranger brutality was presented by some politicians from the Acholi community, hence, stopping the eviction exercise. 

This gave an opportunity to people, who had voluntarily left, to come back and occupy the land. It was actually believed that the number tripled thereafter. The move was in anticipation that Government could, after all, de-gazette the reserve or, at the very minimum, offer compensation to the illegal occupants, before they could be evicted. 

The paper further informed Cabinet that the illegal occupants had created an illegal market in the community. 

Cabinet considered the above mentioned Cabinet memorandum and under Extract 71, CT2019, Cabinet made the following decisions: 

    1. Cabinet approved a proposed resettlement package of Shs 10 million, 20 iron sheets and cement for each household occupying the reserve to enable them to move and resettle elsewhere. 
    2. Cabinet directed that the rest of the households in the reserve, who had been misled by local politicians to occupy Government land, be identified and compensated with Shs 2 million and directed to vacate the land. 
    3. Cabinet further directed the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to direct UWA to close the illegal Apaa Market by the end of March 2019 and the Minister of Local Government to ensure that the alternative market is established in the area. 
    4. Cabinet authorised the Committee on Apaa to move to the next phase of implementation of Cabinet decisions on the matter. 

From the time that Cabinet decision was issued, Government has gone ahead to implement the decisions, as indicated below. 

    1. On the issue of the Shs 10 million, 20 iron sheet package and cement for each household, the resettlement process was due to begin but it was halted because a group of elders petitioned H.E. the President that they were not consulted before arriving at the compensation package. 

    2. On the directive that the rest of the households in the reserve, who had been misled by the local politicians to occupy Government land be identified and compensated with Shs 2 million and directed to vacate the land; in the same way, there was no progress on this matter because of the petition that was presented to H.E. the President by some elders in the conflict area. Negotiations are still on-going. 

    3. On the directive to the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to direct UWA to close the illegal Apaa market by the end of March 2019 and the Minister of Local Government to ensure that an alternative market is established in the area, this is the progress:


	The illegal market was indeed closed by the Minister of Local Government and Uganda Wildlife Authority. The Minister of Tourism together with the Uganda Wildlife Authority and Amuru Local Government, have identified a new location for the establishment of the new market. 

    4. On Cabinet’s directive authorising the Committee on Apaa to move to the next phase of implementation of the Cabinet decision, a comprehensive committee report is being compiled. 

In conclusion, the resettlement process was halted because of the petition to His Excellency the President by the elders from the Apaa community who needed to be consulted and further discussions. Government will resume the process once H.E. the President has considered the petition and guided accordingly. 

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the update from Cabinet. I do not know whether we are able to relate it to the report. We can probably conclude it tomorrow. Let us pass on the information to the chairperson of the committee so that she can compare with what they had proposed to enable us close the matter. So the decision is deferred to tomorrow. The chairperson of the Apaa ad hoc committee should look at the Government action and then we complete the report on Apaa. 

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE GENETIC ENGINEERING REGULATORY BILL, 2018 AS RETURNED BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3)(B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not see the minister but I also think we do not have the numbers to deal with that issue. Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE NATIONAL LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2020 AS RETURNED BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3)(B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the President returned the Bill with some areas of concern. It was supposed to be resubmitted for further review but I do not see the mover. So, it is deferred to tomorrow. 

STATUS REPORT ON THE INQUIRY INTO THE EVICTION OF PEOPLE NEIGHBORING KYANGWALI REFUGEE SETTLEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, Committee on Presidential Affairs. She is not here. Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORTS ON 122 DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, 42 MUNICIPAL COUNCILS, 1042 SUB-COUNTIES AND 355 SECONDARY SCHOOLS AND TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). She is also not here. Item 15 – Is the chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports here? Okay, he is also not present. Let us go to the next item. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THE PETITION BY THE FEDERATION OF UGANDA MEDICAL INTERNS CONCERNING TRAINING, SERVICE DELIVERY AND WELFARE OF UGANDA JUNIOR HEALTH WORKERS

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson of the Committee on Health is also not here. It seems the committee members, chairpersons and ministers are not here. Let us go to item No. 17.

RESPONSE TO THE RAISED BY HON. LUBOGO KENNETH ON THE NEED FOR CLARIFICATION ON THE PLEDGE BY H.E THE PRESIDENT DURING HIS ADDRESS ON THE STATE-OF-THE-NATION ADDRESS ON 6 JUNE 2020, TO SUPPORT THE PRIVATE SECTOR IN OFFSETTING THE COST OF UTILITIES

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are questions for the Prime Minister. Is there anyone sitting in for the Prime Minister? That also goes for item No. 17(a)(i), (ii) and (iii). Reflect it on tomorrow’s Order Paper. Let us go to segment 17(b).

RESPONSE TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON MUHUMUZA RICHARD GAFABUSA ON THE MANAGEMENT OF FLOODS IN KASESE AND BUNDIBUGYO DISTRICTS AND IN OTHER PARTS OF THE COUNTRY 

THE SPEAKER: Minister responsible for disaster preparedness - This question has been outstanding on the Order Paper for a long time. Yes, hon. Katusabe.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you are fully aware, the people in Kasese are living a devastating life because Government has not been quick to bring relief to their aid. This is about may be the seventh sitting in which the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is missing in action.

Floods swept off bridges. We have subcounties, especially in Bukonzo West - Kitooro and Karambi - that have been permanently separated from the rest of the country. I see the Minister of Works and Transport, Gen. Katumba, in the House. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister of Works and Transport to assure the citizens in Bukonzo County West on how long they should keep waiting for the much-needed bridges? 

This has taken a heavy toll on those especially seeking health and medical services in the lowlands, given the fact that they are cut off from the rest of the communities –(Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I am raising a supplement on the issue of bridges that have been washed away and have caused some places to be inaccessible in this country. 

I stood on this Floor some time back and raised the issue of Saaka Bridge that connects Kaliro and Pallisa or Busoga to Bukedi and Teso. It was washed away around December last year but up to now, no work has been done on it. People cannot cross from one side to the other. Commerce has been completely disrupted. In addition, children who were studying across could not study up to the point when schools were closed because of COVID-19. 

I have tried to inquire from the responsible minister but it seems there is not quite a lot being done to see that bridge restored. Therefore, my supplementary issue to this is that as you explain what has happened to other bridges, it is my interest and the interest of the people of Busoga, Teso and Bukedi that you also explain to us the exact position of Saaka Bridge. 

Many people have died there. The minister is also aware that many vehicles have also plunged into the swamp and sunk; several bodies have been recovered and some have been lost. Therefore, we need to know exactly what is happening. Our communities are listening; they would like to hear from you. Thank you, Colleague.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I do not know who is going to ensure that the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees really comes and answers these questions. This matter has been on the Order Paper for a very long time.

MR KATUSABE: Gen. Katumba is in the House, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, he can say something about the roads but about the general situation, I am told that those people do not have food, etcetera.

MR KATUSABE: About Isango Bridge, I saw the letter about two months ago from Gen. Katumba saying he was going to attend to my request and I really appreciated it. All we still have is Gen. Katumba’s letter assuring us that the bridges will get done. I have just returned from my community and people are living in anguish because of the lack of those bridges. Assure the nation, Gen. Katumba - (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Colleague. I want to first remind the House that power belongs to the people and the people shall prevail. That is why you are there, Madam Speaker. Nobody has more power than the people. That is why in 2021, those who think they can fight others should wait for the power of the people.

THE SPEAKER: Absolutely! 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I just want the honourable minister to explain to this House why money for roads for the fourth quarter of the last financial year has never been released. Even the money for roads for this first quarter has not been released. 

Madam Speaker, the mess that is being experienced in the different constituencies is squarely because monies for district roads, community access roads and urban roads have not been released. Gen. Katumba, where is the problem and why are you not releasing money?

Secondly, there are quite a number of places in the Rwenzori sub-region, which have been cut off - Busongora County North, Busongora South, the municipality and many bridges that were washed away by the floods. It would be fair that Government explains to the people what exactly is happening. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We were looking for the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees but there is so much emphasis on the roads in those areas. Gen. Katumba Wamala, you can answer the questions under item 17(m). You had already answered (m)(i), the one on MV Templar. It came in by accident. You need to answer the following one, the one on Mbulamuti-Bukungu.

3.58
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the issues of concern raised by the Members of Parliament. 

On our inability to respond quickly and efficiently on the current disasters, especially the washing away of bridges, I am as much at a loss because my ministry now only receives money for salaries. I do not receive all the monies that hon. Nzoghu is talking about for other roads. All that money is not forthcoming. When I talked to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, he said that revenue collection is very bad, therefore he is unable to give us the money to address these issues.

However, most of the bridges, which are being talked about, are already captured in our next year’s plan, which I will soon bring to the Floor, because you directed me to bring the next five years’ plan. I will bring that here and you will see that most of those bridges being talked about have been captured in the plan.

On Saaka bridge specifically, there was an attempt to redo that bridge because it had broken down earlier on but when the heavy rains came, we learnt a big lesson that what needs to be done now is to redesign the bridge and give it a new setting, different from what was there before. That bridge is already captured in our next year’s plan. It has already been designed and once the budget starts operating, we will address the issue of the Saaka Bridge.

On some of the bridges and effects of the rains in Kasese, over the weekend I got a call from hon. Centenary and I was able to talk with Uganda Road Fund. I linked the two together with the district for them to address some of the emergencies with the little funds, which are available under the road fund. However, that does not address the major installations and restorations of the bridges. (Interruption)  

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Congratulations for the victory you got. I would like to thank the minister for giving way.

I would like to seek clarification from the minister. If I remember the Uganda Road Fund Act, this is money that is supposed to be collected and saved by the Uganda Road Fund. It could come in very fast to help solve all these matters. However, the honourable minister is saying that when he goes to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, they say there is no money at all. This is very unprecedented. 

Honourable minister, the clarification I would like to seek from you is: Can’t you seek funds from Uganda Road Fund? This is because under the Act, this money is supposed to be there and if there is extra money, according to the Act they can even invest it to generate money. 

The matter of Kasese is an emergency and more issues are going to come up. Yesterday, I saw on television hon. Mukitale and the Prime minister in Buliisa. These are emergency matters. What can you say about that? We are always going to the Uganda Road Fund and sometimes, they come out to give relief vis-à-vis the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Thank you very much. That is a very good question. I propose that when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is in the House, that question is raised. This is because the Uganda Road Fund has failed to grow to the second generation as was envisaged by the Act. It still awaits appropriation from the Consolidated Fund and that is still a challenge.

Madam Speaker, specifically responding to the Mbulamuti-Bukungu Road, we are now out of the woods. We have already got a contractor, Sogea. Although the Chief Executive Officer (CEO)is in London, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has already talked to him and the papers are already moving. 

I have told UNRA that we must fast-track the contracting documents so that by November or December, we see the contractor on site. That is the response I can give and I will try to ensure that I keep my word in terms of timelines.

THE SPEAKER: I remember that in 2018, that same company was awarded that road and nothing was done.

GEN. KATUMBA: There were some back and forth issues but I think we have sorted those out.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, it seems many of the ministers are not here to answer the other questions. However, I saw the Minister of State for Water and Environment. Perhaps, we will go back to item No. 4 and finish with that loan. There were queries about irrigation. Hon. Kibuule, take over the Floor.   

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $169.2 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE IRRIGATION FOR CLIMATE CHANGE RESILIENCE PROJECT

(Debate continued.)

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (WATER) (Mr Ronald Kibuule): Colleagues, this loan request came and you raised three questions, which I considered relevant. One was on the master plan. It is very true that we have been doing this basing on consultations. We consulted Cabinet; district and sub-county local governments; Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Ministry of Local Government; and the scheme users, who are the farmers. 

We have a draft, which we prepared in mid-March 2020 with consultancy input. However, in order to finalise this draft, we carried out investigations on the existing infrastructure to be informed on the final master plan. Unfortunately, one of the consultants was affected by the lockdown; the Germans, were unable to finalise this assignment simply because of travel restrictions.

Colleagues, based on case by case experience, we were able to identify the progress made by irrigation as we wait for the master plan to come up when the lockdown is eased and the travel of the Germans, who are our consultants, is cleared. (Interjections) The airports are not open, and these are our consultants. 

Therefore, this cannot affect our performance. I am of the view that since the draft is here, we can continue so that we do not miss this opportunity for our people’s economic benefit.

The other question was on the farmers’ contribution. It is true we needed the farmers to contribute. This contribution is commitment and would also assist in the operation and maintenance of the scheme. It is also true, based on experience that in the irrigation policy and the schemes to be constructed under this project, the following considerations shall be made:

The project will provide a start-up capital fund for the operation and maintenance of the schemes in their first year. This means that they are not paying in the first year because the project provides for that. 

In the second year, however, after harvest, each farmer household shall make a one-off contribution of Shs 20,000 to Shs 30,000 as part of operation and maintenance of the scheme.

The third one was the volumetric water fee. This means that the irrigation schemes under this project shall be piped. This is a departure from the previous schemes, which have open canals that have been found to be wasteful in terms of water and more costly to operate and maintain. 

The volumetric water fee shall be paid by the farmers based on the actual quantity of water they utilise. That means no one will pay for wastage; they will only pay for the water used. This will be monitored by water meters. Experience from similar schemes in the East African sub-region have shown that an irrigation water tariff is in the range of one hundred thousand to one hundred and fifty per acre per year. This is sufficient to meet operation and maintenance of this irrigation scheme. The final fee payable by farmers shall be determined by the farmers’-based organisations per scheme.


Purchase of on-farm equipment: A variety of on-farm equipment, such as movable rain-gun sprinklers, fixed sprinklers and drip pipes shall be availed to farmers depending on suitability and preference of each individual farmer. This project will finance 50 per cent of the cost of this farm equipment. 

The project shall also ensure availability of affordable credit services, which the farmers can access to finance the 50 per cent contribution that is required of them. The farmers shall only pay back the credit facility after harvesting and selling their produce.

Counterpart funding: One of the issues raised on this was the need for clarification on the allocation of the $2.4 million budgeted as counterpart funding to facilitate the resettlement action plan. These groups of farmers will require a lot of land which will lead to the displacement of people. I am seeing a situation where some people may want to misappropriate this money meant for this project. 

The project will construct new large irrigation schemes at Kabuyanda on about 3,300 hectares and Matanda, which is 2,700 hectares, among other interventions. The project shall also finalise the designs for Nabigaga Scheme in Kamuli and Buyende, Amagoro in Tororo, Nyimur in Lamwo, ready for phase II of this project.

The large and medium-scale irrigation schemes will be established when a key water source is available in conjunction with a sizeable irrigation area, offering the chance for developing economies of scale as well as for marketing and value addition.

All farm infrastructure comprising of dams, diversions, water transmission pipes, distribution networks shall be required to ensure availability of water throughout the year. 

Therefore, land compensation shall be required for permanent land uptake for dam construction, reservoir area, water transmission lines, distribution pipes, scheme offices and associated facilities. No land compensation shall be required for the farmland as such land shall remain productive and the property of the individual farmers.

This summarises the questions raised by colleagues, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had debated and those were the answers we required. Therefore, on the motion for the adoption of the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow $169.2 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the irrigation for climate change resilience project, I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House does approve the proposal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, it seems that many of our colleagues are probably still on the road. So, I propose that we end today’s work at this point and the House resumes tomorrow at 2.00p.m.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to bring it to your attention that I did get approval from your office about the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) motion. I patiently waited for you to get out of the elections, for which I thank God that you came out successful, and I want to seek further indulgence from you on this issue because the NSSF contributors still have the desire to access their monies. 

Madam Speaker, aware that the conditions in this country are now worsening and they continue to get worse, it would be fair and befitting for this House to pronounce itself on this motion, so that the country can know that they are somewhere. I wish to seek your indulgence on that, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am alive to your motion. I just want it to come together with the Bill so that we do not take decisions at different times on the same issue. So, I will put it back on the Order Paper immediately after the NSSF Bill. They will come at the same time. Thank you. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 26 August 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)

