Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.





Thursday, 15 August 2019

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to thank you all for the work done, particularly the members of the Cabinet. There has been improvement in the turnaround time in answering questions. Thank you and I ask you to keep it up. There were a few issues of national concern - hon. Kaluya, two minutes.

2.54
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning Bugoma Forest Reserve. On the 30th July, I led a delegation of the Committee on Natural Resources on a fact finding mission over allegations of land grabbing in Bugoma Forest.

When we got there, we realised that a very big chunk of this forest is being encroached on. This forest covers over 40,000 hectares and at the moment, 7, 000 hectares are under threat.

This forest is being encroached on by Bunyoro Kingdom, by the veterans, who call themselves “tulipona” and other companies and individuals.

In that forest, National Forestry Authority (NFA) is using security agencies to support their own security. It has a total security force of 48 personnel for the whole country. This forest alone that is under threat has four personnel of NFA police who are called the Environmental Police Force, about 15 UPDF soldiers and 15 Police Field Force Unit personnel.

The security commander in that area says that if UPDF and police decide to withdraw their personnel, it is going to remain with nothing.

However, I am coming up today because I have got information that the commander is under immense pressure to withdraw the security forces deployed there. He is insisting that he is going to withdraw them for as long as his superiors are ordering him. 

The withdrawal of these personnel was supposed to be on Monday last week but was only delayed by a group of concerned Ugandan citizens who went on social media, made a lot of noise, forcing the commander to rescind his decision but I know that this was only a temporary measure.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is: I would like assurance from the relevant authorities in Government that these forces will not be withdrawn. I also pray that there is increase of security personnel in that forest because we are trying to investigate so many forests, which include Namanve and Mabira. They are all being attacked by land grabbers. If the security personnel there are not adequate, that means these people just go in.

This forest was gazetted in 1932 but the land titles that those purported owners present are of three years old. They are cutting down trees of over 50 years; I saw it with my own eyes and I am speaking from a very informed point of view. If someone is saying that he had that land and is cutting down trees at that rate, I think we need to address this.

Finally, I also pray that NFA is given Environmental Protection Force that can rhyme with their works in terms of size. As of now the whole NFA has only 48 staff. I pray that we increase it to about 150 to ensure that all the other forests are guarded very well. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know why Government is reluctant to address the issue of Bugoma Forest, which has been in the news. It is being cut to grow sugarcanes. Imagine cutting down a forest to plant sugarcanes.

Who is behind this and who wants to withdraw the security? If you answer those questions, you might find that it is the owner of the sugarcanes. 

Can we ask the Minister of Water and Environment to come and brief us? Isn’t this the same where the court also said that they were free to cut the trees?  There was a case in court about a forest. I do not know whether it was this or Budongo but court allowed them to cut trees. Honourable Minister for Water and Environment -

MR KALUYA: Madam Speaker, right now, there are two court cases about Bugoma and Kagombe forests but NFA lost the first court case and they appealed. The Kagombe case is still in court but the problem is, even as they are waiting to hear the outcome, these people want to start using the land.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Kaluya for bringing up this matter. Protecting a forest is not only done physically. He said that the land title was gazetted in 1932. Let the relevant authority go back and re-demarcate that forest and whoever is enclosed should know that they are within the forest. Let us re-demarcate these forests. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we cannot give a directive on this until the ministers come to tell us about what they are going to do about Bugoma Forest.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of environment is very pertinent but as the Minister of Water and Environment comes in, the Member’s fears are that they are going to withdraw the armed forces, yet, we have the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs here. 

I beg that you direct the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs that the army should not leave. The Member said that when they leave, they will take over. Since the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is here, direct him to redeploy more because by the time the minister comes, maybe all the trees would be gone. 

THE SPEAKER: We cannot begin debating this issue. No. Honourable members, the people of Uganda would like to know the Government’s stake in Bugoma Forest. 

Honourable minister, please, ensure that the soldiers remain there until the minister comes to tell us here what to do because if they withdraw, it will be a bonanza for those who are cutting trees. So, please, keep there but the Minister of Water and Environment should update us on Tuesday next week. This is a very serious matter.

3.02
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. We have heard complaints, right from my constituents to even some Members. People have approached us about missing people in our respective areas. We have heard various complaints that so and so is missing, was kidnapped and they have not been seen for four or five months or even one year. This is a nationwide concern.

Over the weekend, I got more alarming information. I was approached by those who managed to escape. They told me that there are very many Ugandans who are being held in ungazetted areas. They are picked up by Internal Security Officers (ISO) and other security operatives. They are taken to Katabi and then they get canoes and boats and are taken to a place called Lwamayiba in Kalangala Island.

It is alleged that Lwamayiba is the new Nalufenya. There are many containers. People are being kept in containers and are severely tortured. He told me that over 400 Ugandans are being held there. They informed me that people from ISO are the ones responsible for torturing Ugandans. They even told me that it is suspected that even Ziggy Wine was tortured from the other side and later dropped where he was found.

Madam Speaker, this is a serious case. Lwamayiba is in Kalangala and the place is well known. I would like to request the indulgence of this House that if Ugandans are being kept in such ungazetted areas and are tortured – They also told me – that is why I am saying it is alleged - that the bodies of those who have been tortured to the extent of even death are thrown in the lake.

This is a serious allegation that needs our investigation so that we can find out because we have heard that many people are missing and they are nowhere to be traced. They are not in prison, police cells and nowhere to be traced.

I request your indulgence that this Parliament investigates the Lwamayiba safe house and the torture that is being committed from there. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we direct the Committee on Human Rights of this House to proceed to Kalangala to establish whether there is a safe house and what is going on there and give us a report. We give you a fortnight.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, they also informed me that there is a hard-core criminal who used to be in Kampala called Sobbi. He is now being used by ISO to head that safe house.

THE SPEAKER: Our committee will investigate. I am told there is also a house in Kyengera and Lwamayiba in Kalangala. Thank you very much. 

3.06
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, concerning a case of kidnap, violation and abuse of human rights.

On 17 April 2019, a one Jamila Asha Atim, a resident of Rivoli Division in Arua Municipality and a Records Clerk of Arua Regional Referral Hospital, was kidnapped by men in a white vehicle as she was walking home. After some time, the relatives reported to police, which had no succinct information.

As the relatives went further to try and find out from other security agencies, it was later discovered that Atim Asha is being detained in Kyengera safe house along Kampala-Masaka Road. In this same safe house, these people have undergone horrendous torture. They are given one meal in four days.  At the time when Atim was arrested, she was carrying a four-months’ pregnancy, which she lost through a miscarriage as a result of the torture that she underwent, together with her colleagues.

In the same safe house, she is there with a one Akram who was arrested from Nwoya District. There is also Salima Absram, Hagan and Najma of Somali origin, among others, who are detained in that place. Patrick Kidega was with them; he has stayed there for one year but recently, he was removed and taken to Kalangala.  I believe that is the same detention centre that my colleague, hon. Sebaggala, is talking about.

My prayer for this voter of mine and others is that if there is any reason for which they were arrested, having been under detention for this long, there is more reason for them to be charged and brought to a competent court of law, where their rights can be respected. In the alternative, if there is no credible reason for further detention, let them be unconditionally discharged from these places of detention. 

Madam Speaker, we keep getting information from that same safe house that other men have lost their manhood in that same place and the rest cannot be talked about. It is so inhuman, so horrifying and these are things happening to nationals of this country.

Let something be done to save these people. They are in hundreds in Kyengera and that place should be visited so that we really get to know what is happening there. I hope the committee to Kalangala will not be treated like the committee that went to Lubowa, who were barricaded and denied access. So, I hope this time, the security apparatus will be able to respect the institution of Parliament so that it can be allowed to carry out its oversight function. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Committee on Human Rights will handle that issue as well and give us a report but also, I think we need to demand from the Minister of Security information about these safe houses, both in Kyengera and Kalangala and others. The Minister of Security should come here and inform this House why they are holding Ugandans in those safe houses. He should come on Wednesday next week.
3.11
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to address myself to the behaviour of the muscular men of Multiplex Ltd, which is responsible for parking in Kampala. The men that move on these pickups – Multiplex is contracted to manage parking, not stop overs. Not all those that move in Kampala live in Kampala.

At times, some people drive in Kampala. He or she pulls over to receive a call or somebody stops for a bit to find out about the street or building that he or she is looking for or to drop off someone.

These gentlemen simply drive ahead of the person either inquiring or receiving a call, park their pick up in front of the vehicle, jump off and clamp the car. On several occasions, people have complained. We have expressed this and even sent it to the concerned authorities –(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I am giving my colleague is actually alarming. Yesterday, I was driving on some street and someone called me. I decided to park on the roadside to receive the call so that I do not cause any problem. The boys swarmed me and I thought           they were not serious. I said, “You mean you just chase people like that? I have just parked to receive a call and I am not staying here for long. Just give me time and I finish my call.” They refused and chased me. I had to leave before finishing my call. So, what he is saying is a big problem within the city. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, hon. Karungi was lucky that those who were on the pick-up were understanding and reasonable. On several occasions, these guys do not understand. They do not even reason. They just jump off and clamp your vehicle. People have suffered at their hands. These guys in Kampala did not go to the bush like the others. They were just put in Kampala here – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister for Kampala Capital City is here. We require an answer – are you able to answer that now?

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable colleague for raising that issue. One time, I was called by hon. Esther Anyakun and she was complaining about the same thing. I thought it was an isolated case but the fact that it is very rampant, the ministry is going to take it up and define to these people what their responsibility is. 

What I am realising from this is that they do not even differentiate between parking and stopping and yet, the two are different. So, we are going to engage them and let them know what they should do and how they should do it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can you then come back and give us the guidelines you have agreed upon with them so that we also know? 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you come back on Thursday? 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, can I be given two weeks, please?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you are given a fortnight. (Members rose.) What are you clarifying? We have finished with the cars and the minister is going to handle it.  

3.15
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise a matter of national importance. All Central Government roads that pass through Agago District are in a sorry state. They are impassable and I am afraid other people and I who would like to access the district will find it impossible to do so because of the nature of the road. 

Particularly, the road that passes through Corner Kilak to Abim and Moroto via Abim is very bad. The road that passes through Adilang to Namukora via Paimol, Lapono and Omiya Pacwa is impassable. The road that passes through Luke Bridge to Bulugi Bridge via Kalongo Hospital is impassable. Even public vehicles like buses are no longer able to pass via those roads. 

Worst still, people who want to access the only hospital in the district; even with boda bodas are not able to do so.

Fortunately, the people have been very patient. We have reported to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) because we know that they are mandated to maintain these roads every now and then. However, for the last three or four years, these roads have not been worked upon and they are in terrible conditions.

I am finding it very difficult to stop the people from mobilising to strike. We have tried as a district to calm down the anger of the people but every morning you wake up, the people of Agago District are calling on every local radio station to express this concern.

I would like to ask the minister responsible to tell us when they are going to commence work on these roads. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Works and Transport is instructed to urgently address the issue of roads from Corner Kilak to Abim, Moroto via Abim, Adilang to Namukora, Lukee Bridge to Bulugi Bridge via Kalongo Hospital, which have been impassable for several months. The minister should come back to us on Wednesday next week.

3.18
MR HENRY MAKUMBI (NRM, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on matters of national importance to do with the extension of power in this country. This rotates around the Rural Electrification Agency. 

You remember we approved about three loans from the Islamic Development Bank, World Bank and Exim Bank to finance this programme. 

Madam Speaker, I will give an example in my constituency, Mityana County South. This programme is not moving on well because the distances that we agreed upon on the formation of this programme are not covered. There is no monitoring by officials from the Ministry of Energy and Rural Electrification Programme. Even the work that was planned to be done is not on schedule. 

These people would have finished some of the districts but they are halfway. When you bother to go to the Rural Electrification Agency offices in Kamwokya, the officials there are very uncooperative. They cannot explain anything and they always blame us for mixing politics in their operation.

When we pass loans here, it is very important that this House takes the responsibility to monitor the operation and performance of these loans to make sure we realise the worth of the money. 

It is, therefore, my prayer that the relevant ministries like the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development produce comprehensive reports about the performance of these loans for rural electrification, especially the loans from the Islamic Development Bank and the Exim Bank.

Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Makumbi for giving way. The other day, I raised a matter here that Members of Parliament never get to know the specific details of the contracts. We never get to know the specific milestones at which time these contractors must implement their activities. 

Hon. Makumbi is here raising a matter, which is very crucial. We left here and told our people in the constituencies that with the money we had approved, power was coming. Unfortunately, we are coming to the year of completion of the project and yet, nothing has been done, especially in my constituency. 

I hear the contractors are already in place. I do not know those details. I have requested for them and they keep saying, “We shall give you the information.” 

The reason why –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member. You are now smuggling in a contribution.  Hon. Makumbi, what is your prayer?

MR MAKUMBI: Madam Speaker, my prayers are that you dictate on this matter by directing the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to first of all, give us a performance report on these loans to do with Rural Electrification Agency and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to give us a technical report so far on what has been done to the areas where these projects are being implemented. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is that countrywide or only Mityana?

MR MAKUMBI: It is countrywide because although you have also heard complaints from Kassanda, other Members are also complaining. However, the case in point is Mityana South.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is directed to come and update the House on performance of the loans relating to rural electrification and give us information especially about Mityana South. Let her come on Thursday next week.

3.22
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker for allowing me to go back to the important issue of encroachment on our forests. I would like to seek clarification - because I was concerned that Bunyoro Kingdom was listed by hon. Kaluya as one of the entities that are encroaching on the forests.

Bunyoro like Busoga and Buganda kingdoms is a very important institution. We have a member here in the House who is also Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs. I am not sure what those affairs are but I believe the forests in Bunyoro should be one of them.

Therefore, I would like to seek to enjoin the Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs to the Minister of Water and Environment to also give a statement on the situation pertaining to the status of Bunyoro Kingdom on this matter. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, His Majesty, the Omukama cannot come to this House. We therefore, request the Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs to come and speak on his behalf regarding the issue of the forests especially Bugoma Forest where the kingdom has been cited. The minister should come on Wednesday, 21 August 2019.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS ON ESCALATING MALARIA PREVALENCE IN KITGUM DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: As the Minister of Health comes, I would like you to join me in welcoming a delegation from Kassanda. Is that you? Please, stand up. They are from Kassanda; they have seen their Member of Parliament at work. They are represented by hon. Patrick Nsamba. We do not have elections there yet, so, the woman representative is hon. Namugwanya. These are her voters. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.25
THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Madam Speaker, the item on the Order Paper talks about Malaria in Kitgum. As you are aware, I have already presented five statements on Malaria in different districts and so, I have brought a comprehensive statement capturing all the affected districts so that other districts also know what is going on.

Therefore, I request that you allow me to talk about Malaria in the entire country. Thank you. I again would like to request Members to refer to the statement that was revised today; the one submitted today and not yesterday.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health would like to inform this august House that there is a Malaria upsurge in the country, which started from June 2019. This is due to the rainy season that the country is currently experiencing, where Malaria cases are gradually increasing from the baseline seasonal peak usually experienced following a rainy season. We usually have a baseline and we are aware of it but when it starts rising up, then we are aware that there is a problem.

The number of Malaria cases has increased by over 400,000 this year. When compared with last year, it is from about l million cases in June 2018, to 1.4 million in June 2019; that is a 40 per cent increase. However, it is worth noting that the number of cases is still low compared to 2017 and 2016 in the same period.

Madam Speaker, with all the efforts of Government and my ministry, major gains have been made in the national malaria response over the last decade. Malaria prevalence dropped from 42 per cent, in 2009 to 19 per cent, in 2014 and now 9 per cent, in 2019. This is according to our malaria indicator survey that was carried last financial year. 
Annual Malaria deaths dropped by 57 per cent from 30 to 13 deaths per 100,000 people - Malaria, as you are aware, is the leading global cause of morbidity and mortality and a global public health priority. In Uganda, it is also a major cause of morbidity and mortality and it is therefore, a big public health priority of Government and the Ministry of Health. 

The ministry’s approach to ensure maximum impact on Malaria, focuses on sustaining universal coverage of the population with an integrated package of the most effective tools against the malaria parasite, the vector as well as community and individual behavioural change especially adaption of individual malaria prevention packages.

Madam Speaker, the package of malaria control intervention my ministry is implementing includes:

    1. Integrated Vector management, indoor residual spraying, larvi-ciding and use of insecticide treated mosquito nets;
    2. Quality control and diagnosis;
    3. Effective social behavioural change communication strategy;
    4. Surveillance monitoring, evaluation and operational research; and
    5. Epidemic preparedness and response.

Madam Speaker, regarding the upsurges that we are seeing, the Malaria phenomena we are experiencing in the country is an upsurge and not an epidemic or outbreak as the various television stations are reporting. An upsurge is a slight gradual increase in cases of malaria while an outbreak or epidemic is a sudden and steep increase in cases that overwhelm the health system as defined by the World Health Organisation.

Cases of severe malaria have also increased by 30 per cent especially in the urban setting but Malaria case fatality rate has not significantly increased.

Madam Speaker, the malaria upsurge has affected half the country with approximately 65 districts involved. And I will name the districts beginning with the West Nile subregion where we have: Adjumani, Arua, Koboko, Maracha, Moyo, Nebbi, Pakwach, Yumbe and Zombo. In the Acholi subregion, we have Amuru, Kitgum, Lamwo, Nwoya, Pader, Agago. In Lango subregion; we have Apac, Kole, Kwania, Omoro, Oyam. 

In Busoga subregion, we have Bugweri, Buyende, Kaliro Kamuli, Luuka, Mayuge, and Namayingo. In Bunyoro subregion, we have Kagadi, Kakumiro, Kibale, Kikuube, Kiryandongo, and Masindi. In Buganda subregion, we have Butambala, Kalangala, Kampala, Kassanda, Kayunga, Kiboga, Kyankwanzi, Kyotera, Luweero, Mityana, Nakasongola and Rakai. 

In Karamoja subregion, we have Amudat, Kaboong, Kapelebyong, Moroto, Nabilatuk and Nakapiripirit. In Teso subregion, we have Amuria, Kumi and Soroti. In the eastern region, we have Bulambuli, Busia, Manafwa, Mbale, Namisindwa and Sironko while in western Uganda; the affected districts include Bundibugyo, Kamwenge, Kanungu and Kisoro.

The increase in Malaria cases is attributed to the following reasons: 

    1. Seasonality. The most number of Malaria cases occur during the period of June-July due to the rainy season.
    2. Climatic change. We have had prolonged, intermittent rains in various parts of the country that have lasted to-date (August 2019).
    3. Reduced bed-net ownership and use due to the aging of nets that were distributed in 2017/2018 mass long-lasting insecticide-treated mosquito nets campaign.
    4. Low malaria prevalence in areas such as Kampala. This has led to laxity or complacency in the population's preventive practices such as sleeping under a treated mosquito net every night, environmental management like closing doors and windows early and seeking of care and treatment early.
    5. High population growth.
    6. Refugee immigration in specific regions.
    7. Movement of populations from high-burden areas of Busoga, West Nile, Northern Uganda and Karamoja to low-burden areas of Kampala and south western Uganda and vice versa; especially during festive seasons, or seeking employment like farming. 

	What happens is that people who have the parasite move to areas that have low parasites and they take it there. This was heavily supported by evidence that we received from Naguru Hospital in July 2019 where 85 per cent of the malaria patients had a history of travel outside Kampala.

    8. People in areas with low malaria such as Kampala and Kigezi that have a parasite prevalence of less than one per cent, are prone to severe Malaria due to reduced or low immunity.
    9. According to statistics from our health management information systems reports, we have registered a total of 820 deaths during this upsurge.

Reported increase of Malaria cases in Kampala

Madam Speaker, whereas there is a slight increase in malaria cases in Kampala in the recent months, this is similar to what was registered in the same period last year. For example, for the month of June 2019, there were 27,159 cases; 28,086 in June 2018 and 36,391 in 2017. 
However, the number of severe forms of Malaria requiring admission has increased by 60 per cent compared to the same period last year. We registered 920 severe cases in June 2019, whereas there were 570 in 2018 and 540 in 2017 severe cases. This is due to the seasonal variations and low immunity of Kampala residents. 

The total number of malaria deaths in Kampala has remained unchanged at an average of six deaths per month despite the increases in the severe malaria cases.

Madam Speaker, the increase in Malaria was anticipated using our prediction based on data collected from all the districts on a weekly basis, early warning signs as provided by weather forecasts from the Meteorological Authority and entomological monitoring by our surveillance officers. 

The Malaria indicator survey and post-distribution monitoring of nets had also indicated declining mosquito net coverage.

The Ministry of Health accordingly initiated its preparedness in advance including; stocking enough medicines at the National Medical Stores, supporting districts to carry out surveillance, capacity building in case management, routine distribution of nets to vulnerable groups (women and children) and community sensitisation.

In order to mitigate this upsurge, the Ministry of Health working with partners has put in place a number of interventions to address the upsurge. These are:

    1. Supporting districts with increased cases to carry out effective surveillance order and get emergency supplies of the Artemisinin-based Combination Therapy (ACTs) and Rapid Diagnostic tests (RDTs) to ensure facilities are well stocked. We have also revised the quantification of ACTs for this financial year to take into account this increase in cases.
    2. Redistribution of malaria commodities from facilities and districts with overstocks to those with inadequate stock of Malaria commodities.
    3. We are working with the private sector to ensure they have adequate stocks of subsidised anti-malarial medication. As you are aware, the Global Fund also supports the private sector.
    4. We are monitoring Malaria cases, admissions and deaths in all districts on a dashboard and using the data to guide decisions at all levels. This has helped us identify and contain what would have been many outbreaks.
    5. Strengthening the management of Malaria by village health teams at community level through training and providing adequate medicine in a programme that we refer to as Integrated Community Case Management of Malaria.
    6.  We continue the routine distribution of Long-Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets (LLINs) to pregnant women in antenatal care clinics and to children in immunisation clinics. This has been on-going.
    7. Fast-tracking the implementation of the 2020 LLINs mass campaign where we shall distribute 26 million nets.
    8. Introducing new channels of LLINs distribution such as school distribution in selected districts with high Malaria burden.
    9. In 2018, His Excellency, the President launched the mass action against malaria drive for every individual to actively take on malaria preventive services and ensure they are malaria-free. In this regard, we are working with leaders to intensify education and prevention.
    10. Community outreaches in high burden areas to conduct testing, treatment and tracking.
    11. We are carrying out mobilisation drives for resources to scale up interventions such as Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS) and routine LLIN distribution. We have been planning to increase IRS beyond the current 15 districts.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health would like to inform this august House that the Malaria cases are expected to decrease a month after the end of the current rainy season with the above interventions. However, as we are all aware, the end of the rainy season is different in the various regions.

Malaria is transmitted by the female Anopheles mosquitoes, which normally bite at night after 7.00 p.m. - many other bites occur during the day and other times. That is not the female Anopheles mosquito. Research has proven that it only bites at night.

An infected mosquito bites a human being and transmits the plasmodium into the blood of the person.

The signs and symptoms of Malaria include: Fever, headache, vomiting and chills (shivering); sweating, backaches, body weakness, loss of appetite and diarrhoea.

The ministry would like to appeal to the general public to:

    1. Sleep under a mosquito net every night to avoid Malaria;
    2. Always seek early treatment from the nearest health facility within 24 hours of onset of symptoms;
    3. Take and complete the dosage of Malaria medicine as advised by the health workers;
    4. Use of mosquito repellents are encouraged for those who can afford;
5. 	Clear all mosquito breeding sites: stagnant water, bushes and broken containers, around the homesteads.
6. 	All pregnant women must attend all antenatal care visits and take the intermittent preventive therapy for malaria.
7. 	Avoid self-medication and sharing of medicine.

Madam Speaker, a special undertaking being done is fast-tracking the implementation of the 2020 Mosquito Net Mass Campaign and distribution so that all Ugandans can have a mosquito net.

Government plans to distribute 26 million nets. Each net costs about $4 and an equal amount for the cost of distribution, adding up to about $8 million to get a net to a person. The total cost of the net campaign will be $ 104 million. Procurement and shipping commenced in June this year and we expect the nets in November. We shall begin distribution in February 2020.

I would like to assure the august House that there are adequate commodities for testing and treating all patients. Uganda spends $ 46 million on malaria treatments annually. We have adequate commodities: ACTs, RDTs and injectable Artesunate for severe malaria at NMS and in most districts. Some districts have excess stock that requires redistribution to the ones under stocked to avoid wastage.

I must explain here that many of the districts were not following the statistics and so, their orders were limited to their routine orders. Therefore, they did not factor in additional commodity for the upsurge but right now, we are supporting them to order additional medicines to cover for the upsurge. 

The country is currently conducting indoor residual spraying in l5 districts in the Eastern region: Tororo, Butaleja, Bugiri, Namutumba, Budaka, Kibuuku, Pallisa, Butebo, Serere and Kaberamaido; while in Northern Uganda, the districts include: Lira, Dokolo, Amolator, Alebtong and Otuke. That is why these districts do not appear among the districts that are having an upsurge. 

Although the plan is to scale up indoor residual spraying to 50 highly endemic districts, we are resource constrained. The required funding for indoor residual spraying is estimated to be Shs 235 billion per year, if we are using the chemical called Sumishield, which is scientifically called Clothianidin and Fudora Fusion Clothianidin and Deltamethrin. Research has shown it to be non-staining, odourless, lasts at least nine months and is also effective on bedbugs. 

To contain malaria, we need to conduct indoor residual spraying for at least three years but it is desirable to continue for up to ten years for better results.

There are also funding gaps needed for scaling up the community case management of Malaria and behavioural change communication.

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that this august House constituted itself into the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Malaria in 2018. This was launched by His Excellency, the President. 

The Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria has since developed a strategy, engaged partners internationally and locally and are in the process of tabling a Malaria Elimination Bill. I wish to thank all the members of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria for their vigilance in the mass action against malaria 

Madam Speaker, I wish to appreciate you in particular for your leadership and commitment towards Malaria elimination.

Our Country is the Pearl of Africa and it is blessed with climatic and environmental conditions that favour mosquito proliferation and Malaria transmission. The challenge is, therefore, huge but we believe that together we can. I thank you all for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for this comprehensive update on the Malaria situation in the whole country. We have debated this a number of times but I will just allow a few comments. 

I would like you to join me in welcoming two guests in the gallery; Mr Mason Van Luven and Rossini Yue. They are students on internship with Engineers Without Borders of Canada. They are here at Parliament and they came to see us as we work. 

I think last time, hon. Ojara raised the question so he can give us a brief supplementary. 

3.47
MR OJARA OKIN (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to thank the minister for her report, although, it is not specific.

When you talk about statistics, it is like you are categorising the entire country; those that do not have Malaria and those that have. In that case, it appears as if the situation is very normal. I think the ministry should have been more specific in terms of the districts that are infected by Malaria. 
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when did you come into the House? What time did you arrive here? She has given you – 

MR OKIN: Madam Speaker, when we talk about the upsurge that she mentioned, it is actually a process. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a list of districts of high prevalence. She named them and that is why I was asking you what time you came into the House.

MR OKIN: I actually listened to her very carefully, Madam Speaker, because I was here. Nonetheless, let me make my submission on the situation in Kitgum District, which is being considered among other districts. We have so far had 21 deaths and there is an unheard prayer that we are giving to the minister. For example, we are saying that the minister should disperse a team of able workers to go and do a comprehensive assessment of this situation but this has not been done. 

Secondly, I guarantee you that if you went to Kitgum Hospital, you would notice that the drug supply, which the minister has stated, is lacking. There is no blood in Kitgum Hospital. Therefore, when we talk about this – and that is why the specificity of the matter now comes up. 

Up to now, Kitgum Hospital is desperately in need of the capacity of the health workers, which is quite limited. Our prayer to the minister is that she adds additional emergency health workers, who are able to assess the situation on the ground. 

In Kitgum, we are not looking at it as an upsurge but as an emergency because life is being lost; day in, day out. If you are trying to say that it is an upsurge and not an epidemic, honourable minister, I would like to disagree with you. Can you, please, take the prayers of Kitgum and make sure that you address the situation on the ground effectively? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in addition to a question raised by hon. Ojara, hon. Franca Akello also wanted to raise a question. However, I told her to wait for the minister to come here with a comprehensive answer. 

3.50
MR FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your protection. I remember that I raised this matter last week and you ordered the minister to come with a statement regarding the same. 

I would like to disagree with the minister – anyway, I am not a medical person. However, from the look of things and the increased occurrences of Malaria in Agago District, I was told by the medical officers of most of health centres – I will mention those that I spoke to. The in charge of Patongo Health Centre III confirmed to me that for every 90 people they test, at least 80 plus are malaria positive. In Kalongo Hospital, they have reported the same; over 90 per cent suffer from Malaria and several death cases. 

Last week, I reported here that in Kalongo Hospital alone, we lost 12 children in one day and you want to call it an upsurge. Madam Speaker, this is absurd. 

If we lost 12 children in one day due to Malaria alone yet we have not counted adults and deaths other hospitals and someone is calling it an upsurge, I feel it is being underrated. Much as I am not a medical person, an ordinary Ugandan in Agago and elsewhere will not understand you, honourable minister.

Finally, even the private health centres that are in Agago, for example, David Fagan Hospital, which I visited last week because when I was in the constituency, my baby fell sick of malaria. I went to David Fagali Hospital and when I asked, I was told that out of every 100 patients, over 90 patients are suffering from Malaria. It is an occurrence everywhere. In the whole district, almost every 10 people, 99 per cent suffer from Malaria. 

The worst of it is that this Parliament pronounced itself three weeks ago and the ministry promised to start dispatching emergency malaria drugs to districts that are affected, especially in Acholi subregion. We told our people to be patient because the drugs were going to be dispatched starting 31 July 2019 to the first week of this month. However, to our dismay, Agago District has not received any single emergency anti-malarial drugs since the pronouncement was made.

Therefore, all the patients are forced to go to the clinics to buy Coartem and other anti-malarial drugs from private clinics and that is for those who can afford. What about those who cannot afford Shs 10,000 or Shs 12, 000 to buy anti-malarial drugs? 

Madam Speaker, the lives of our people are at risk, including I because these mosquitoes do not bite only at night when you are sleeping. Imagine you are seated in the living room or at the fire place in the evening and mosquitos come and bite; even if you slept under the net, it would have already given you Malaria.

Concerning the insufficiency of blood, the whole of Gulu Regional Blood Bank does not have blood. This was a testimony from Kalongo Hospital Administrator. There was a time they needed only 14 units of blood but they could not get even one. We would like the ministry to pronounce itself because most of the malarial cases have already shown signs of anaemia and the patients report when they are already anaemic. Therefore, emergency blood would really help in such cases. We would like the ministry to pronounce itself on these two matters and the Members of Parliament from the affected districts may be able to go and mobilise people even if there is need to go and mobilise to donate blood.

Madam Speaker, we are willing to go and save lives. Thank you very much.     

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a Malaria forum. What are you doing in your constituencies in regard to that Malaria forum? We also need to know what you are doing in your constituencies. As hon. Basalirwa comes, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Mpererwe Primary School. They are from Kawempe Division and this is really their fun day as you can see. They have got lovely faces. They are represented by hon. Sebaggala and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome.   

3.57
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for the statement presented. My concern is in regard to adverts in the public media by traditional healers and herbalists, claiming to treat among other things, malaria. I do not know whether the minister is aware that this category of people is making disclaim and whether they have been able to verify the authenticity of these herbs in treating malaria.

Secondly, there are also concerns that these malaria parasites are becoming resistant to some of the existing drugs in the country. People go to these pharmacies, get the anti-malarial drugs but they still do not cure. Is the minister aware of this? If so, what are they doing to address it?   

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek for clarification from the honourable minister about three things.

First, she talked about February next year, when they intend to have the programme fully. As you are aware, Madam Speaker, sickness cannot wait. I see that February is too far and we are in August. From August 2019 to January 2020 is too far for anything to yield, emergency and upsurge or even any epidemic as she explained. I would like the honourable minister to at least convince this House that it is critical to have the programme brought closer so that people die unnecessarily. 

Secondly, is the issue of the cost. She talked of $4 for the mosquito nets and $4 to have it delivered to the recipient. That comes close to about Shs 30,000. This Shs 30,000 considering the 40 million Ugandans that we have, it means it may not really cause any significant impact. I thought that possibly, the Ministry of Health could work out a mechanism of bringing the cost lower so that many Ugandans can benefit from this programme.

Thirdly, is the money for the campaigns, which is $104. I think the money for campaigns, in my view, could be still be lowered and have more mosquito nets procured and you can reduce on other items on the campaigns for the programme to succeed. Those are the issues that I want to put forward. 

4.00
MR GERSHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Malaria kills very many people. In my constituency, the cost for funerals has increased. There are very many people who die and it is most likely that those people die of Malaria.

Madam Speaker, I lived in the United States of America (USA) for some years and this is a place where people do not sleep under mosquito nets. I asked why this is so and they told me that at one time in history, there was Malaria in the USA but right now there is none because they sprayed. 

My question to the minister is: Why can’t we spray outdoors and get rid of malaria once and for all?

4.02
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Malaria is on the rise in Uganda but there is another remedy apart from the mosquito nets, the spraying and others. 

There is an anti-malarial paint being manufactured here in Uganda and it is very effective. It has been tested and launched. The factory is here in Uganda. I wonder why we cannot take advantage of this and fight malaria through painting our walls internally.

This paint lasts for three years. (Interjections) I request that the Minister of Health finds out the best mechanism on how to apply the anti-malaria paint, which is being manufactured here in Uganda. I rest my case.

4.04
MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. This is my third cry to this House. The terrain of Sironko District is not friendly. I am sure this is the case in some other districts.

Sironko has 26 subcounties. Eight sub counties do not have a health centre at all. Unfortunately, the few health centres we have are small and they are in the sub counties with a small population. These eight have got a big population. 
Can the minister tell this House how places like Sironko that have been waiting for medication in these health centres – who have been waiting for at least a health centre II, which are even being phased out - will deal with their lives because they have actually given up. Someone cannot trek from the mountains down and find no medication in the health centre. They just go back home and give up on life. Thank you.

4.05
MR PATRICK ISIAGI (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the minister. However, the upsurge of malaria for the districts you have named – you cannot name Sironko and Mbale and leave out Kachumbala - and Bukedea as a whole - which is surrounded by the two districts. Ours is the most affected. 

When you talk about the upsurge of malaria – malaria kills – but we want you to tell us, what actions have you also “upsurged”? You have not demonstrated the rise in your activity. You are treating it like business as usual. Malaria is a terrible killer. 

You should clarify to us whether you have sourced for funding. You say you are constrained; have you sourced for funding from the Contingency Fund? This Parliament allocated funds for contingency and this is such an area. Can you clarify what action you have taken and whether you have got those funds to manage that emergency? This is a super emergency, yet you are just giving us stories. 

Please, give us the statistics. How much have you invested where? The distribution of drugs; you are saying they have put in some districts more than what they needed. What transfers have you made so far? Tell us that; “From Kitgum, we have transferred this amount to Kachumbala and we have saved these lives.” We need to know whether you are serious because storytelling is not helping us. Thank you.

4.08
MS BETTY AWOR (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement. However, Madam Minister, you mentioned your response to Malaria cases. Your preparedness and response, as far as I am concerned, is wanting. It is very slow. That is the reason we are losing many children. That is very sad. As a mother and as a leader, losing children every two days is very sad. To the rural people who are poor, treating malaria is very expensive. 

My appeal to you, as a ministry, is that you step up in malaria cases. We need more bed nets, more drugs and to seriously train and equip the village health teams. 

Otherwise, with your statement, I will get back to my area and tell my people to wait for distribution of more drugs and bed nets. Thank you.

4.09
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

Honourable minister, you talked about mosquito nets for prevention of malaria. It would be better for the Government to consider distributing the long-lasting mosquito nets, which can last around 20 washes. Right now, the mosquito nets that are in my district cannot be washed five times and still have the insecticide. 

Therefore, we should not only look at the coverage but we need to look at the effectiveness and the efficiency of these mosquito nets. We are aware that the long-lasting mosquito nets do not require regular treatment and they are more effective. 

There is also information which you may not have from a one Professor Ogwal that has some herbal medicine. I was in one of the workshops by Ministry of Health and that point came out. You could pick interest and find out. The herbal can be taken as tea and it controls Malaria. 

4.11
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for that elaborate update. It is good that even my district was mentioned because last week when I was visiting Bundibugyo Hospital, there were many cases of malaria, especially among children. The major problem I found there was that we did not have enough drugs and treatment for those severe cases like the injectable Artesunate. I was forced to buy a few for some children who were really badly off. 

My request is that even if the districts did not order enough quantities or they ordered and the drugs got finished quickly, please, make a special consideration to supply injectable Artesunate, especially to the affected districts, which you have mentioned here. It is a general problem that most people in our rural settings cannot afford to buy these drugs because they are also costly.

Another thing that maybe you are not aware of, honourable minister, is that in my district, there is the misuse of the nets. It is very unfortunate that while others are crying – and we are also crying – that you increase on the number of mosquito nets. In my district, some people misuse the nets for construction of houses and fencing small horticultural gardens. 

What mechanisms are you going to put in place to make sure that they are not misused anymore and that when you bring them, we can appreciate and use them properly? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we ask the minister to create strategies, I would like you in your forum to deal with this. If people are using the nets in their gardens, in weddings or using them for catching fish, as leaders, take them on. I think we should also do our part instead of harassing the minister.

4.14
MR HENRY KIBALYA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We heard the minister, in her statement giving us the approaches they are going to use to handle malaria cases. One time, we saw on TV the launch of a given paint that was supposed to kill mosquitos. I did not hear the minister mentioning anything related to that paint – is it Plascon? We thought that was an area that the minister could tell us as part of what they have in plan.

Secondly, another day we attended a workshop in Hotel Africana and an NGO told us that they had a plan of manufacturing plastic mosquitos that were going to eat the anopheles mosquitos, which cause malaria. I expected the minister to tell us that, that is also another plan they have in the offing –(Interruption)

MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give is about the company that came here from Sweden when we had a launch at Parliament. I remember the Minister of Health met this company and the company has the products that kill anopheles mosquitos. 

The company has worked together with the Ministry of Health and in January, February, May and July 2018, they carried out surveys in different locations, schools and in some prisons. As I talk, the report is out and I think it would be very good if we could be able to use these products. 

For some of the products they are talking about, the pilot study has been done and I think the ministry could put some money to procure these products or use these products to prevent mosquitos, especially in big institutions. The survey report is coming out with a success rate of almost 100 per cent. Thank you very much.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. Madam Speaker, the minister talked about importing nets. On several occasions, we have seen Government importing mosquito nets and at times, they are misused. As we are promoting local content, can’t we come up with a formula like having NYTIL in Jinja to manufacture these nets so that we reduce on the amount of money we spend on them? We could have them manufactured locally so that we empower some of these companies. It would be easy and they know the kind of mosquitos that we want to arrest.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we need to empower these village health teams (VHTs) in the local communities. When we were young, some of these VHTs used to have these drugs in their premises but now, these drugs are not there. I wonder whether the minister has any formula of empowering these VHTs so that we handle these cases. 

The minister mentioned the cases of malaria that the ministry has but these are cases from Kampala and they do not come from very far in Bugabula, where I come from.

4.17
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking a clarification from the minister. I stood here one time and talked about urination of blood by children in my constituency and the district – in fact, even Namisindwa District has the same problem. The minister told me that, that disease is called “black water fever”. 

Honourable minister, have you found out the cause of that black water fever? The children are still dying. Yesterday, they buried one. In fact, they have been burying and the first person to be informed is the Member of Parliament. I send home money for “mabugo” every time. Even today, the medical officer in charge of that health centre just told me that another child is being buried today and another has died. 

Madam Speaker, I gave statistics here of the 15 children who had died in four months. However, there are continuous deaths being registered. I have just asked the medical officer and he said they do not have blood. I thank the minister because last time, they rushed there. An NGO in Mbale gave us a fridge for storing blood but there is no blood. These children are dying and we do not know the cause of the disease. They told us it is called black water fever but we do not know the cause. 

It is becoming another nodding syndrome in my constituency, extending to Lwakhakha, which is the border. What are we going to do?

The staffing is a problem in that health centre. At night, there are no health workers in the health centre and the kids who are taken there just die. They end up taking them to these small clinics. The minister told me they should not be given Fansidar but when they get there, they do not even know what the nurses there prescribe. Whether it is Fansidar or not, they are just seeking treatment for their children. We are losing children. 

Maybe what I am going to do now is to write -(Member timed out)

4.20
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Madam Speaker, I thank the minister but the statistics are a bit far away from the truth. Very many people are dying. They go to these health centres but the deaths are not recorded. There are some who die at homes and their numbers not recorded.

Madam Speaker, as my colleagues have said, we could use the VHTs to capture the statistics. At least, every village has the VHTS that can record the number of people who have died and from kind of sickness so that the statistics can go to the sub county, district and finally to the ministry. 
Secondly, the VHTs do better work and so, the biggest percentage of that money for the campaigns should cater for them.

Lastly, the drugs we have for malaria are very expensive yet we have drugs like Panadol, which are pain killers. Why can’t we have the common drugs for Malaria at a cheaper price to help every home keep a few tablets the way they keep Panadol to help in controlling body temperatures. 

I suggest that we should have the common drugs for Malaria in our homes so that every mother can give their child in order to arrest the situation. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.22
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the honourable minister for the statement.

Everyone knows that Malaria is the main killer disease in Africa. The other time I heard that Sierra Leone came up with something to get rid of Malaria.

The problem we have is that Malaria is now resistant to Chloroquine, Quinine, Fansidar and Artenam. What is the ministry doing to find another drug to cure Malaria?

The other problem we have in our villages is that people cannot afford to buy these anti-malarials. You find people sharing drugs meant for one person and malaria becomes resistant. Honourable minister, you have a big task to send your officers to the villages to educate people as well as try and bring in more drugs that can cure Malaria, which should be distributed to all the health centres. Otherwise, there is a problem in the villages.

Honourable minister, when you talk of about 820 deaths upsurge, that is very high and the number is still increasing. I talk to people who work in these hospitals and they said that in a week, the number of patients they receive that suffer from Malaria is always increasing. The ministry should, therefore, put more drugs in these hospitals and health centres and educate people in the villages that when they get a dose of Artenam – the Chinese use Artenam for their soldiers who come to Africa and it has been very useful. I do not know whether you have Artenam in Ugandan hospitals. People must be educated that when they get a dose, they should take it alone. The problem is that the medicine is not in the health centres and people cannot afford it. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
 
4.25
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the minister for presenting a wonderful statement.

The minister is encouraging Ugandans to use mosquito nets but in many health centres, where we take our people who complain of stomach upsets, they come back suffering from Malaria because there are no mosquito nets in those health centres. Why don’t you make it mandatory? Otherwise, in almost all health centres and hospitals, there are no mosquito nets. Why don’t you start the supplies of mosquito nets with those hospitals and health centres? 

Secondly, honourable minister, now that you are aware supplies are likely going to start in February 2020 -  Recently, I was involved in the exercise but we could see many of the workers hiding most of the mosquito nets for either sale or personal use. Honourable minister, please, get involved. I know what I am talking about because I have been working in local governments.

What we need to do is to identify good suppliers. Do not panic when you are starting. Now that you know supplies are staring in 2020 – even when hiring vehicles - by the way, honourable minister, you have ever hired my vehicle although you did not know you were hiring it from me. Anyhow, look for vehicles, which can perform the duty but not hiring vehicles from friends who are going to benefit from this exercise. Once we do this, we shall kick out Malaria.


Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Malaria Forum in this Parliament and we know what you have done in these areas. For example, I know that you have neglected the islands. We do not use beds in the islands. How can a person use a mosquito net when they do not have a bed? I think you must come up with a motivating system. You could train people on how to use mosquito nets when sleeping on the floor. We did this with the Vice President in his constituency when we were sensitising people on how to use sticks to hold the net. 

Otherwise, get set so that you do not panic when the time comes - February 2010. This will help you see the majority benefit not individuals who supply those mosquito nets.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Muyanja, even in those villages, there are beds made of reeds; there are some beds, really.

4.28
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report.

The minister in her report has confirmed the increased rate of infection. This means more people dying, the children and the poor people getting more affected in addition to queuing for a long time to get treatment because the health workers will be overwhelmed. We, therefore, need to purchase more drugs and disengage the communities in socioeconomic activates because if one has a sick child, they cannot go to dig.
	
As we do this, we are spending a lot of money and other resources. If there are other means through which we can avert this, like spraying, why don’t we go for spraying and enjoy the cost benefit analysis from what we are spending as a country? Therefore, I would like to request that Government takes this matter seriously.
Last weekend, I was in Adjumani and noticed that the rate of infection is very high. As the minister has confirmed, Adjumani is one of the districts affected; the situation is bad. Some health workers are committed but they are over worked. Many patients queue for medicine, they get tired and eventually go home without treatment.

Madam Speaker, while I support the usage of mosquito nets, some factors cannot be controlled. For example, mosquitoes sometimes bite people as early as 7.00 p.m. How many people go to bed before 7.00 p.m.?

The minister has also mentioned the continuous rain as one of the factors but how are we going to control it? This is a disaster because some of the factors cannot be controlled. We, therefore, need to review our mechanisms to ensure we avert this situation and have our people healthier. 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as the ministry is advocating for the use of mosquito nets and much as people had trust in this so-called treated mosquito nets, their quality and the manner in which they are treated is questionable. 

The ordinary person will feel that when a mosquito sits on them, it will collapse dead but the mosquitoes relax on them without any side effects. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have eaten into the Prime Minister’s Time and have repeatedly discussed this matter about five times. How long would the minister take to answer because you could circulate -? Five minutes is okay.

4.32
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I appreciate your questions and sentiments about the current Malaria upsurge in the country and as I indicated, we are doing our best to ensure that it is controlled.

We cannot change the definition from an “upsurge” to an “epidemic”; that is scientific. So, we will handle it as an upsurge. We do not have resistant parasites in Uganda; every three years, we carry out resistance studies with support from USAID. 

There are many resistant – I am talking about ACTs, not chloroquine because we got it out long ago. There are many resistant countries to the current anti-malarial treatments but it has not yet reached Uganda.
	
What we are seeing is improper use - people go to clinics, take two or three tablets, move to another clinic and by the time they go to a hospital, they have been exposed. We have a challenge treating them but that does not mean we have resistance.

February being too far for distribution of nets, I have to explain. As I indicated, we expect the first batch of nets in November.

We get nets from the Global Fund against Malaria initiative as a donation and USAID. All these people have to bring in their nets. 
We also need to mobilise money for distribution. Currently, we are only aware about money from the Global Fund and that is why we give that room for planning. We cannot just say, “We are going to distribute now,” when we do not have all the nets and all the money.

The cost of the nets: The $4 includes procurement and oversees transport up to Uganda and then, there is storage at the warehouses. There is transportation and storage in the districts.

It is not the cost of the net; there are many other things factored in and in our assessment, it is quite cheap. As I indicated, we spend $104 million coming from the Global Fund against malaria initiative. DFID and USAID are huge funders.

Why can’t we spray the vector and get rid of malaria? Madam Speaker, you will recall that there was an initiative to use DDT; many studies were done and we could not use it at that time.

Currently, we are not aware of any safe chemicals that we can apply for spraying the vectors outside. We are using larvicides, which are safe - I do not want to call it a chemical because it is made out of chlorophyll of the plants.

We apply it in the water, the mosquito larvae ingest it and then using sunlight, they explode using the free radicals or oxygen. And it is safe.
The only challenge is that we do not have adequate money to bring in the larvicides in huge amounts. What we are bringing in now is for areas that are prone to epidemics like south western Uganda, where we will start from, and then move to northern Uganda in a phased manner.

However, for us to get rid of malaria effectively, all the countries surrounding Uganda and out of Uganda need to undertake the same.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. I would like to insist that you take a visit to Cuba. I have talked about this many times.

DR ACENG: We have done it.

THE SPEAKER: So, why haven’t you developed their solution? They eliminated malaria even in their neighbours. It is a well-known story. I do not know why you people do not want to use it.

The second one is: Members, please, use your positions to talk to people about these things. Get interested in how our people live. Thank you, minister.

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude with the issue of the black water fever and the plastic mosquitoes. There are no plastic mosquitoes. We are doing genetic studies where UVRI with some universities in the UK are looking at introducing sterile male mosquitoes into the population of mosquitoes so that when they mate with the female mosquitoes, they do not produce mosquitoes that are infective.

This is already on-going. It was launched by the Vice President.  Regarding the black water fever —
 
MR OKIN: Point of order.

THE SPEAKER: Point of order; what rule has she offended?

MR OKIN: I am the one who was going to raise the point of order.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, under what rule?

MR OKIN: It is Rule 77.

THE SPEAKER: No, just wait.

MR OKIN: The point of order I would like to raise to the honourable minister is that we have heard the minister not giving concrete action points and yet, we are almost -

THE SPEAKER: You are really trying this House. If you look at the minister’s statement, she has elaborated what she is going to do. Hon. Ojara, what is your problem? Everything is here in writing, including the regions, which are of high incidence. (Members rose_) No, honourable members, let us go to the Prime Minister’s Time.

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week, 23 Members contributed; their names are here and I will not see them today. So, the Floor is open. 

4.40
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, last week on Tuesday, as my colleagues and I were travelling on our way to Kampala from Gulu, a police truck registration number, UP 2525 knocked a boda boda rider, Hakim Ssekamwa in Luweero District and caused him grave injuries. This incident occurred in broad daylight at around five o’clock, in full view of the wanainchi and cameras. In fact, this was reported on NTV that very day in its 7.00 p.m. news. 

The police truck abandoned Hakim at the roadside and continued to chase us recklessly, at a high speed and with impunity, through Bombo and the nearby towns. Hakim was helped by some volunteers, who took him to Mulago, where he later died. He was buried last Friday on 9 August 2019 in Luweero.

To date, Uganda Police Force has never issued a single statement acknowledging their actions, nor taken any action against the driver and occupants of that police patrol that caused Hakim’s death.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what action does Government intend to take in regard to this very incident? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like us to use the Prime Minister’s Time to ask policy issues. The Prime Minister was not there when the accident occurred. I do not know whether you reported to him. This is not fair. Ask policy issues, please. (Applause)

MR ZAAKE: Madam Speaker, the life of every Ugandan matters sincerely. We need justice for this man.

THE SPEAKER: Ask the Minister of Ministry of Internal Affairs, please. Do not abuse the rules of this House. I give a lot of time for people to speak but seek proper issues. Do not use this as “omuzindaalo.” (Laughter)

4.43
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is Government policy that districts have health centres and referral hospitals. However, the state of Bugiri Hospital is devastating.

What are you planning in regard to renovation of this hospital? For a long time, we have submitted and requested but nothing has been done? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we would like to know when that hospital will be renovated. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the policy on renovation or construction of hospitals and health centres at different levels is well known. Secondly, Government does this in a phased manner and details of the phased programme of construction and renovation of health centres and hospitals at different levels is with the Minister of Health. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I hope the minister will come and give an update on what you propose to do on hospitals in Uganda. Members, those who asked last time will not ask questions. I have seen some of them standing; your names are here.

4.45
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime minister, as we speak now, part of Bugoma Forest is being cleared by Hoima Sugar Limited for sugarcane growing. What steps are you taking right now to save this forest? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the case of Bugoma Forest has been in the public domain. It is now before the courts of law. We should let the courts of law determine the way forward.
THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, shouldn’t – the damage continues. I do not know how long the case is going to take. Earlier on, before you came, the issue was raised and we expect the minister to update us on what to do because the destruction is going on. Soon, we will have no Bugoma. (Mr Anthony Okello rose)

Hon. Anthony Okello, please, sit down. You spoke last week. (Laughter) 

4.47
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is about the referral services in the country. While the honourable Minister of Health was talking about the fight against Malaria, I did not hear a comment on when Uganda will come up with a robust ambulance service in this country.

Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister explain to us when the country intends to implement the ambulance services for all Ugandans?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is team work in practice. The latest information I have got from the honourable Minister of Health, Dr Jane Aceng, is that she is waiting for a certificate of financial implications so that she presents the policy to Cabinet for consideration and approval on the question of the ambulance system.
4.48
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as a policy of Government, each parish has been considered for a primary school. I have quite a number of primary schools in my constituency that have been in existence for long and are now dilapidated. On the basis of having been in existence for long, they have not been prioritised for rehabilitation. How do we urgently deal with such schools that are collapsing at the moment?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the point raised by hon. Mutebi is not a question of simply saying there is a health centre or a school in a particular place. It must be a health centre or school that is usable and can meet the needs of the people of the country.

So, the programme to ensure that there are primary schools in parishes and health centres at different levels will refer to those that are functional. Those that are not functional must be made functional, in order for them to be recognised and counted as being present. This is the same with schools in parishes in Buikwe.

4.50
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Sustainable Development Goal no. 13 requires Government to develop action plans to combat climate change and its effects. 
In November 2016, countries adopted the Paris Agreement to strengthen actions that would deal with the threats of climate change. What is Uganda’s adaptation policies and plans to combat climate change and its effects, Rt hon. Prime Minister?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I would like to associate myself with the question. It is an important question because it is a question of survival of not only Ugandans but of human race because there are conflicts and forces of degradation and environmental destruction appear to be moving faster than us who are in charge of it. 

Nevertheless, the Government of Uganda has prioritised environmental issues. It signed the Paris Agreement in New York and it has embarked on a number of measures for mitigation. A number of these measures are very well known. Afforestation is one of them. The matter is so serious, Madam Speaker, that I would ask the Minister of Water and Environment to come and articulate this issue and once again, make a clarion call on the protection or our environment. 

THE SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, we would be happy if the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development undertook to establish the tree fund. In the last two financial years, he removed it. So, please, put your hammer.

Otherwise, join me in welcoming the children of Aloysius and Revocate Memorial Primary School in Kyenjojo. They are very smart children. They are represented by hon. Kajara and hon. Spellanza Baguma. You are welcome. 

4.53
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister - sometime back, about February or March, when we were debating the National Budget Framework Paper, I recall that the Minister of Local Government presented on the Floor of Parliament, stating that the newly elected LC Is would be provided with stamps as well as labelled bicycles. 

I would like to know how soon that programme would be implemented because to me, the LC Is are acting almost illegally because they use stamps that are not official.

I also would like to ask the Prime Minister - sometime back, the Government came up with a policy of paying ex-gratia to councillors. This is being implemented in other districts but in Pakwach District, where I hail, the councillors are not receiving that payment. May I know why? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, councillors throughout the country should be treated equally depending on the levels. I, therefore, expect that if Pakwach is being discriminated against or left out, that correction will be made.

Secondly, the question of bicycles is a commitment; it is a question of resources and we would like this to be implemented as soon as possible so that these people who are doing a lot of work amidst problems can be facilitated to do their work better.

4.55
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, my question is about the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) programme. During the last financial year, we were informed that SAGE would be rolled out to the rest of the districts where it is not being implemented. 

In the greater Mubende, it is only Mityana which is not benefitting. The bakadde are asking me about their money because they feel discriminated. Mr Prime Minister, when are you rolling out SAGE to Mityana District?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the policy of Government is to roll out SAGE throughout the country. As soon as resources are available, this programme will be implemented. 
4.56
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, you are aware that the Operation Wealth Creation programme is encumbered by many challenges. During the President’s regional tours, most regions reported negative results especially to do with poor seedlings, late deliveries and underweight animals. 

Mr Prime Minister, what efforts is Government putting in place to address these challenges? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: It is true that during these regional tours by the President, a number of issues were raised about the Operation Wealth Creation. Many of these issues were answered by the President. Some of them are being followed up especially about the quality of inputs and the time of supply of those inputs. 

Therefore, this is a programme that Government is prioritising especially in correcting the mistakes that may have been done in the past so that the population can get quality input in order to get better production. 

THE SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, I believe last financial year, we passed a supplementary budget where we provided money for the bicycles and stamps for LC Is. I think we need to know what has happened to that money because this House appropriated Shs 29 billion for that purpose.

DR RUGUNDA: I have been reliably informed by the Minister of State for Local Government that stamps are coming. The procurement process is on. Secondly, on the question of bicycles, the resources are not yet enough but they are mobilising resources as well. 

4.58
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Madam Speaker, my question was related to the facilitation of LC Is. I am more concerned about the questions the LC1s keep asking me about when and how their honoraria will be improved. However, with the kind of responses the Prime Minister is giving, it seems he is going to tell me the same thing: “When resources are available.” So, I may not ask the question. (Laughter)

4.59
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, when we get donor funds, it is usually a requirement that Government provides counterpart funding for the projects to proceed. In particular, as an example, for Busoolo Hospital, money came from the Spanish Government. It has been idle in the coffers of Government. They rehabilitated Kawoolo Hospital but for the contractor to move to the other side, Government said they put money. 
Why does Government commit Ugandans when they are not ready to do counterpart funding?

Secondly, Rt hon. Prime Minister, for this case where money was already put - I guess we have even started paying interest; when will Busolwe Hospital and that very grant get the Shs 6 billion promised by Government to start construction?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue of counterpart funding has been a big problem. Cabinet took a decision that no money should be accepted for a loan unless Government has got counterpart funding. The Shs 6 billion is not yet ready but Government is trying to mobilise money so that Busolwe can benefit from this loan.

5.01
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu County North, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, three weeks ago, I reported to this House about the issue of black flies in Pader District. I also mentioned that in 2012, the Ministry of Health said and came out clearly that the cause of the Nodding Disease was the black flies. I reported that black flies had invaded Pader district in large numbers and we were scared that we would get new cases of Nodding Disease.

Secondly, I would like to report to this House that there are no new cases of Nodding Disease in Pader. You took over three weeks without going to the ground to find out why there were black flies or if there were black flies in the district.

My question is: What intervention do you have, as Government, to see that there are no more new cases of Nodding Disease in Uganda? Our colleague has said that there are cases of Nodding Disease in eastern Uganda as we were debating about malaria. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue of the Nodding Disease has been discussed many times here. The Ministry of Health and Government continue to do a lot of work on this. It is true that we got a report of an upsurge of black flies and the information from the Minister of Health is that efforts are being made to ensure that the flies are dealt with because they are associated with the causation of the Nodding Syndrome. She is fully aware and Government and her ministry are going to confront the problem.

5.04
MS JULIET MUKODA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister there is a very big concern in Mayuge District. I am sorry to be very specific but as you are aware, my people have been driven away from the lakes. They are no longer fishing, especially the people around the south Busoga Forest Reserve. When they are driven away from the lake, they went into farming and use those forests to do some small farming to get food.

However, of recent they have been driven away by the army, badly beaten and are wounded. The challenge is that they are asking about the relief food that is being taken to the north; now that they do not have food, do not fish, do I want them to die of hunger?

I promised them that I would come and request you because last year, when I came to your office, you told me that the food relief which is there is for the northern region. Therefore, Rt hon. Prime Minister, I am requesting that you consider the people of Mayuge. Thank you. 

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the case of Mayuge - I would be interested in us getting information so that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Relief can go and address the matter.
 
5.05
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, whenever I go to these Government entities, I find visitors to these entities suffering with where to park when the hosts are very comfortably parked. These visitors suffer with where to park.

THE SPEAKER: Where?

MR WAIRA: Government entities. The visitors to these Government entities like ministries and other entities are not provided for where to park their vehicles and you find then suffering – (Interjections) - including your ministry.

Rt hon. Prime Minister, can you order the ministries and Government entities to ensure that when visitors come, their clients and the public have where to park? A good example is here at the Electoral Commission; when you go there, there is a parking provision for visitors.

Therefore, you should order all the Government entities to ensure that they have a parking provision for visitors.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, question time is now turning into submission time.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the point raised by my friend on the question of parking regards two issues: One is that many of the ministries and agencies have some limited parking space and they are often old structures. Therefore, with this limited parking, it has been overwhelmed by the prosperity of Ugandans and purchase of more vehicles.

Therefore, we are suffering from –(Laughter)– increased prosperity. However, the point is well taken that agencies - even shops by the way - and many other structures that are put up, parking should be part and parcel of the plans.

I am aware that Kampala City authorities and other municipalities are supposed to be enforcing this. We need to be more vigorous to ensure that we are sensitive to parking by the people we handle as our clients. This is a fair comment.

As to ordering, as you know, it is not the practice of the NRM Government to issue orders. The people must be involved and brought on board. Let me, therefore, appeal to all concerned to be sensitive to hon. Majegere’s point of providing parking space for the clients and the people of Uganda. Thank you.

5.09
MR OKIN PP OJARA (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uganda is a signatory to a number of international organisations and by virtue of the fact that we are required to make subscription to some of these organisations, our recent discovery, Mr Prime Minister, is that we are not remitting our subscription to these international organisations.

Many times, we have been embarrassed because sometimes, you go for meetings and workshops and you are stopped from attending because you are not a member due to subscription to these international organisations. I would like to ask: Mr Prime Minister, are you aware of the level of embarrassment that Uganda has suffered because of lack of this subscription? Thank you.
 
DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am aware that there are many organisations that Uganda belongs to. We have prioritised payment to some organisations because we do not have the resources to pay for all of them.

We are even reconsidering our membership for some of them in order to solve this problem that my honourable colleague, hon. Ojara has raised.

5.11
Ms robinah ssentongo (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, I understand that the Criminal Procedure Act requires the police or any other security personnel to present a warrant of arrest before arresting anybody, especially if it is not an emergency like if somebody was caught stealing; but not when somebody is found in his shop or boda boda business, dressed in a particular way or at a wedding or a hotel and is captured. 

I would like to know whether the law has changed. If it has, we need to know because many people have been kidnapped under the guise of arrest and taken to what you call “safe houses”, which are actually torture houses. sometimes these people are taken to non-gazetted areas where nobody knows.

We need to know if that law is no longer in action so that we can tell our people not to complain if such a thing happens.  Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the law will not change without the authority of this august House, in which case, the honourable member would have been party to the change of the law.

However, on the specific point you are raising, if there are some security personnel that have been involved in illegalities, they will be dealt with in accordance with the law of the land.
5.13
Mr jonathan odur (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uganda signed the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Good Governance in 2008. Can the Prime minister inform the country how far you have gone with the process of ratifying the same?

DR RUGUNDA: I was looking for the minister to give me the dates. I am a bit surprised that we have not ratified it. If that is so, we will follow it up because as you know, Uganda is a classic example of a democratic state. We practice and believe in it so we should ratify it.

The Speaker: Honourable Prime Minister, last Friday, we had the young people of Uganda in this House. One of the issues they raised concerned that Charter. They were asking why Government has not ratified it. This has been on and on. Therefore, if you are committed, have it ratified. Since 2008 to 2019 - there is doubt.

5.14
Mr komakech lYandro (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Honourable Prime Minister, you are aware that there was an announcement on the issue of the discovery of Ebola treatment in Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) two days ago. This is where the international research groups are doing a lot of work. May we as Uganda be updated on the success of this treatment since we shall be hosting the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference soon? This has been giving us a lot of challenges in terms of the coming of delegations. 

May you update us as to when you will be bringing this issue here so that the whole of this country becomes aware of what is going on in the Democratic Republic of Congo as far as the discovery of a treatment is concerned?

DR RUGUNDA: The point raised by hon. Komakech of recent advances, improvements and discoveries of more reliable treatment of Ebola is, of course, very welcome.

Secondly, with regard to the Commonwealth Conference in September, obviously Uganda is safe and people should come. People in Uganda and those in the world should know that Uganda has the capacity, experience and capability to deal with Ebola in all its manifestations.

Nevertheless, Uganda will continue to track the developments you are talking about. I request that the Minister of Health comes to this House to give us a progress report on those discoveries and also to once again re-assure the people of Uganda and visitors who are planning to come to Uganda that the country is safe.

In any event, even if there was a case or two, Uganda has the capacity to deal with Ebola in all its manifestations.

5.17
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Honourable Prime Minister, are you aware that Uganda has become a dumping country for old vehicles that have caused a lot of problems for our environment and increased the rate of cancer cases at Mulago? Why doesn’t the Government reduce taxes on new vehicles so that Ugandans buys these instead of the old ones that have caused a problem to our environment? (Applause)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Uganda has not become a dumping country. It is true that we have been bringing in some old vehicles but we have put a limit by setting a maximum number of years. 

Uganda has its well-considered standards. As the economy picks up; in fact, we are working towards focusing on purchase of new vehicles, which are going to be manufactured in Uganda.

5.18
Mr Elijah okupa (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, we did represent this Parliament in the West Nile Investment Forum. His Excellency the President was the guest of honour. He made a declaration that from now onwards, foreign students from the East African Community should pay the same rate as Ugandan students.

Since that time, it has been covered widely; people have been calling from Tanzania, Rwanda and Kenya to ask, “When is this effectively taking place?” They have not got formal communication.

Therefore, in the spirit of the East African Community, that was a good gesture. Of course, Uganda is also asking, “Can it be reciprocated by the other countries?”

When the President was asked about it he said, “I do not mind; let us begin as Uganda so we can lead the way.”

DR RUGUNDA: The hot information from the Minister of State for Education and Sports (Higher Education), hon. Muyingo, is that the Ministry of Education and Sports has already written to institutions of education asking them to implement this declaration by the President. 

Therefore, we will need a few more details from the Ministry of Education and Sports so that both the institutions and the public are aware. Will it be at the beginning of the next academic year? The honourable minister will come and give details but we adhere to that policy. We support it. It is Pan Africanist and Uganda is leading the way.

5.20
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is a Government policy that all subcounties should have a health centre III.  However, with the high malaria prevalence rate, many subcounties still do not have health centres III. When are some of these subcounties getting health centres III because they are highly populated? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the policy of building health centres is well known by everybody. We have actually mobilised resources to accelerate the rate of building health centres III. Therefore, we expect that many of those subcounties that have not been reached, are going to be provided with health centres III. 

5.22
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government created new administrative units, particularly subcounties and town councils; some were created the previous financial year and others last financial year. However, for the last two financial years to date, these new units have not received funding for operations. 

Secondly, election of interim chairpersons and councils were conducted in some of these units. The chairpersons and subcounty chiefs were put in place but they have no financial tools to operate. What is Government up to? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member is right. It is true some of the municipalities, town councils and sub counties were created without adequate facilitation. Government has decided to operationalise these units in a phased manner and ensure that in future, no administrative units will be put in place without specific approval by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in terms of financial resources being available. Therefore, there is going to be better coordination in future because now there is going to be phased implementation. 

5.25
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora North County, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When Dr Ruhakana Rugunda had just been appointed Prime Minister in the 2014/2015 financial year, I registered the plight of hepatitis B in my constituency and Kasese District in general. Throughout this period, from 2016 to date, I have been reminding the Leader of Government Business of the deaths that have happened in Kasese; there are not less than five deaths from hepatitis B registered almost biweekly. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the Leader of Government business why people are dying yet I have registered that plight here. I would also like to know why the Government is simply watching while this is the plight of the people particularly in the subcounties of Bugoye and Maliba. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I was just discussing the same matter with the Minister for Security. Let us have more details. The matter will be rigorously followed up and an answer provided. 

5.25
MR GERSHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that Mbale Town is shadowed by Wanale Mountain, which is a host to two subcounties that are a food basket to the region. However, the last time they ever saw tarmac on the only road that leads to Wanale, called Nkokonjeru, was during Idi Amin’s time. Right now, the road is in a very bad shape. What hope is there that your Government is going to construct the road so that the people of Wanale feel connected to the rest of Uganda? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, our Government will make sure that the road is a motorable road. Whether it is tarmacked or not, the Minister of Works and Transport will be able to assess it using the accepted criteria of upgrading of roads. 

5.27
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Ministry of Education and Sports for the seed secondary schools which it chose to build in various counties. In the constituency where I come from, I think we have two seed secondary schools. However, I have a challenge; is it a Government policy to use specific types of building materials? 

One of the ways that we want to promote employment of the youth in the villages is to help them produce bricks. In Kabweri Constituency, two schools received the World Bank grant and as part of the preparations, we decided to encourage the young people to produce bricks out of the ordinary soil, which we use out there. However, when the construction was started, we were told that they were not going to use the bricks made out of the local soils. This, to me, was really a rejection of the local content policy of this country, where the local people produce some local materials for construction. 

I followed this up and I was shown a WhatsApp message, whose source I do not know, saying that these constructions must be made using baked clay bricks. In that area, where I come from, we do not make baked clay bricks. We were going to get bricks from Walasi and Pallisa and yet very many of these bricks have been produced - 

I do not know whether it is part of the Government policy to now use clay bricks, even when they are not produced locally. The cost of production will certainly go much higher and the benefit to the schools will be lowered because of the increased cost of production. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would just like to know whether that is part of the policy or somebody is pulling someone’s leg to sell materials from outside the region to make a bit of money. If it is not part of the policy, I would like to get that clarified. Can the locally produced materials, which have been used to build churches, schools, homes and all the buildings older than myself, be used to build those schools? We want good quality schools but we should also consider the locally produced materials. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are really abusing this facility. Just ask if it is the Government policy to use baked bricks countrywide. That is all. That takes less than a minute. Prime Minister, please answer. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, before Government signs contracts, bills of quantities and materials are outlined and I would expect these to be the standards that would be adhered to. 

However, I am a beneficiary of further information from my distinguished colleague, the Minister of State for Education and Sports, Dr Chrysostom Muyingo. He says, “There is no policy for specific building materials but we emphasise the use of local materials”.

5.30
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have one question to ask the Prime Minister. We have lost two councillors and at their burials, this question was asked and I will use this opportunity to ask the same question to the Prime Minister. When a Member of Parliament dies, he or she is replaced very fast but when one of the councillors dies, we pay no attention; why? Thank you very much. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I would not expect any discrimination in replacement of elected officials. However, this is a subject matter that we will investigate and ensure that this mistake is corrected.

5.31
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister why the Government is reluctant to promote the tourism industry in eastern Uganda - Bukedi in particular and Tororo specifically? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am actually surprised to hear that Government could even be considered to be reluctant to promote tourism. The reverse is the case! Government is aggressively and vigorously encouraging tourism in all parts of Uganda, taking advantage of whatever opportunity or tourist attraction that exists in each of the areas. 

Madam Speaker, I know you have been very active with our rocks in Busoga. We would also be more than happy to go to Tororo and Bukedi to promote whatever tourist attraction they have. Therefore, there cannot be any discrimination at all but the contrary is the case. We are energetically and uncompromisingly promoting tourism.

5.33
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we appreciate the policy of free power connections that the Government came up with, within the radius of 90 metres. Many people have wired their houses but since January 2019, when they go to Umeme they are told that there are no meters. What might the problem be, because it is countrywide? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the point raised by hon. Muyanja is very important. If there are problems with the implementation of a Government policy - I will ask the minister responsible for energy to come next week and brief this august House on the implementation challenges being faced by this important Government programme of free connections and making sure that as many Ugandans as possible are connected to power.

3.34
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is reported that the Government of Uganda licensed the Globus Pharma to grow the cannabis plant known as marijuana. It is further alleged that most of the greenhouses in floriculture gardens do the same business. The media reported that about 90 farms have applied to grow marijuana. 

The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 2015 prohibits any person or body from growing cannabis plants. Can you tell this august House and inform other Ugandans under what law the Government of Uganda has based to license or invite any application from companies to grow marijuana in this wonderful country? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, no formal decision has been taken. Nevertheless, the various organs of Government are considering this matter and this House will be informed on the progress on the subject matter.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA TO RATIFY THE MALABO PROTOCOL
    
5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Oryem): Madam Speaker, this afternoon I am supposed to make a full statement on this protocol. With your permission, –

THE SPEAKER: We finished with the Prime Minister and we are now on you.

MR ORYEM: Okay. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am making remarks on behalf of my ministry on the matter of the ratification of the Malabo Protocol.

I am pleased to be here as invited to address the House on the status of Uganda’s ratification of the Protocol to the Constitutive Act of the African Union, relating to the Pan-African Parliament, also known as the Malabo Protocol.

Madam Speaker, at the onset, I wish to give a brief background on the Pan-African Parliament (PAP). The Pan-African Parliament, as you know, is one of the nine organs of the African Union provided for in Article 5 of the Constitutive Act of the African Union adopted on 11 July 2000, in Lome, Togo.

The composition, powers, functions and organisation of the PAP are defined in Article 2 of the Protocol to the Treaty Establishing the African Economic Community Related to the Pan-African Parliament, adopted in Sirte, Libya, on 2 March 2001. 

The Pan African Parliament represents all the people of Africa. At present, it is composed of 229 Members of Parliament representing 52 African countries. The membership of the PAP comprises of five Members elected by each Member State, of which at least two are women. They are elected or designated by their respective national parliaments or any other legislative organ of the Member States. Uganda has five Members of Parliament, actively participating in the Parliament that sits in Midrand, South Africa. We commend them for their active participation and for flying the Ugandan flag high.

Madam Speaker, the African Union, in a bid to further strengthen the PAP, adopted the Protocol to the Constitutive Act of the African Union relating to the PAP on 27 June 2014, in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea.

The protocol, among others, expands the powers and functions of the Pan-African Parliament in line with the spirit – (Interruption)
 
MR SSEKIKUBO: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney-General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.”

Madam Speaker, for all these agreements and our membership to these arrangements, there has been a direct input from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Is the honourable minister, therefore, procedurally right to present a situation as if what has been entered into has been done haphazardly and now it requires Government to sit back and take stock of what has been done and find out how the laws of Uganda can comply with those requirements under the Pan-African Parliament and the East African Community? 

Is he procedurally right yet he has been a direct participant in all these arrangements? Is the minister procedurally right to mislead the House that they are now jumping into the moving bus, whereas the process has been done with their direct input?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am really flabbergasted by what the Government is saying. Before a treaty is signed, there are all these technical people who first meet, the ministers meet and finally the presidents sign. You cannot convince us that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was not part of that and that they found out that the President had gone by himself and signed the document and now they are looking at what he did. The President’s signature is on that document.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I really respect your observation and would like to say that yes, it is true I have taken some time. However, I would like to tell you that – and this is the reality – even when states negotiate protocols and treaties, each member state is given an option to ratify it or not. Indeed, there are very many international protocols signed by states where some states have ratified while others have not, yet they fully participated in the formulation of the protocols.

After protocols have been agreed upon and even signed, it is incumbent upon each state to go back home, review their systems, laws and constitutions and find out how the international treaty or protocol impacts on their own laws and their constitutions. This is exactly what we are doing. It is not uncommon for states, after signing treaties or protocols, to come back and say, “Our Parliament could not ratify this protocol.” It happens every day.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, you have guided and indeed the minister has not provided any denial to the fact that in the initial stages, the technical persons meet before it reaches the level of ministers and then the heads of state who come to endorse or sign these agreements. 

Indeed, the minister has not challenged your observations. However, he is now again turning around the debate to present it as if it is noble. It is as if he is turning this Parliament into a lecture room. You told this House how the process is. The question is: Why, since 2017, have we not moved ahead to sign the necessary protocols or ratified them? 

We all know the processes. Is he giving the impression that the technical persons are being called in at the tail end? This is because he said the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has come in at the tail end. Who are at the forefront of these protocols? Who is Government anyway?

Therefore, can the Leader of Government Business in the House, who is the Prime Minister, rein in on the errant Government officials who seem to be pulling in opposite directions? There must be a government and there must be a position in this House. We cannot sweep this matter under the carpet when Government and the Cabinet are fully represented and the minister is trying to mislead this House and act as if it is a noble idea. 

Madam Speaker, is the minister in order to take us back and not give the direction as to when we shall be ratifying these protocols?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are aware that you can ratify with reservations. If Uganda has reservations, we can say that we ratify but in this area, we do not agree and deposit it. It was in 2017 when I came to remind you yet the protocol is older than that.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Foreign Affairs was talking about the role of his ministry and he cited the Ratification of Treaties’ Act, which this Parliament enacted. Reading through that Act, you discover that when it comes to matters to do with treaties, conventions and protocols, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is the lead entity because these treaties touch on our relationships with other states. There could be other technical ministries or officers but the Ministry of Foreign Affairs plays the primary role. So, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs cannot claim to be at the tail end. 

Madam Speaker, you have correctly advised. In treaty law, there are what we call “reservation clauses”. If a state is uncomfortable with a specific clause in a treaty, they express reservation and deposit that reservation with the depository. In effect, that means that the country will not be bound by that provision where you have expressed reservation. By the time you sign a treaty, you are expressing willingness and readiness to be bound by the obligations of that treaty.

By the way, Madam Speaker, the learned Deputy Attorney-General was saying that after signing, you come and try to understand how that treaty will impact the national laws but that is not the case. The concept of supremacy between international law and municipal law has been settled by the International Court of Justice. Once you sign a treaty, you cede part of your authority. That concept has been defined by monism and dualism. 

International law is supreme to domestic law and a state cannot hide under its domestic obligations to circumvent its obligations under international law. Otherwise, you are not forced to sign a treaty. So, I think the argument being given by the Deputy Attorney-General and the Minister of Foreign Affairs – with the greatest respect – falls short of their obligations and expectations. The moment we sign a treaty, we cede our authority to the international arena. If you do not do that, you do not ratify, but that seems not to be the case.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. From the statement of the minister, the Malabo Protocol has many aspects. The minister talked about the powers of the Pan-African Parliament but there is also the concept of expanding the jurisdiction of the African Court of Justice and Human Rights in the Malabo Protocol, which is not being mentioned. I would like to know whether we are actually talking about the same Malabo Protocol. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, with greatest respect to hon. Basalirwa, his first argument was that the mandate to finalise conventions, protocols and international arrangements falls on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Yes, it does. However, I would like to remind hon. Basalirwa, who is a lawyer, of the provisions of Article 119(5) of the Constitution. It says, 

“Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney-General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.”

Madam Speaker, it is true the mandate falls with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs but they cannot move without the express advice from the Attorney-General. That is why the minister was saying they submitted but are waiting for the Attorney-General. Otherwise, it is mandatory that they get that before they move. I had also said that we have taken time to consider the impact and implications of this protocol on our own laws. That is point number one.

Secondly, hon. Basalirwa contradicts himself. He says that ratification is mandatory once you have signed yet he has also said that some protocols have provisions that supersede provisions of the domestic law - which is exactly what I told you. I said, before we cede our sovereignty to subject the laws of this august House to any international protocol or convention, we must be careful. Where need be, those clauses would be avoided.

Madam Speaker, I did not want to go into the specifics but there are many clauses in that protocol that expressly provide that the laws of the Pan-African Parliament would be superior to our own laws. To take that decision, which is tantamount to ceding our sovereignty, is not a situation we take very lightly. We consult at all levels, including the Cabinet, the Head of State and eventually come back to this Parliament. We could perceive it as a delay but it is a delay well called-for because we have to be very cautious.

Thirdly, ratifying a treaty is not a formality, as hon. Basalirwa seems to suggest. States negotiate treaties and conventions; however, there is a provision that after you are involved in the negotiations of a treaty, you go back to your own domestic governance of the country and check the treaty or the protocol that was signed and examine whether it is - 

Madam Speaker, not every convention, treaty or protocol that is signed by partner states is ratified by all the states. We have many examples. I can lay about 120 examples where states signed protocols and treaties but when it came to ratification, some states ratified and others did not, including our own East African Community treaties and protocols. There are treaties and protocols, which we negotiate and sign but when it comes to ratification, partner states say, “We are not in position to ratify this treaty”, and they do it for good reasons. Therefore, the process must be fully consulted.

Madam Speaker, I can acknowledge that we have taken some time but that time was required and it was necessary for the due consultations to take place so that we enter into something that we all know and own.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are wasting time on this issue. There over 20 protocols we have signed but failed to ratify. It seems for us it is a way of life in this country. Let us go to item No.3.

Honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, I am required to report to the Pan-African Parliament at the end of December on this issue. Let us do some work.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE AFRICAN CONTINENTAL FREE TRADE AREA AGREEMENT

6.05
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to explain the African Continental Free Trade Area Agreement.

The African Continental Free Trade Area Agreement was signed on 21 March 2018 during the 10th Extra Ordinary Session in Kigali. Uganda was elected to chair the negotiations and I chaired those negotiations from May 2018 to July 2019. We focused mainly on trade.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that the African continent remains Uganda’s main export destination, accounting for an average of 4.7 per cent of the country’s total exports over the last five years (from 2014 to 2018). Our exports to the African continent have increased from $0.89 billion in 2014 to $1.6 billion in 2018, a trajectory that we intend to boost with the African Continental Free Trade Area Agreement.

We note that Africa’s annual imports for 2014-2018 average US$ 524 billion, implying that measures aimed at boosting intra-African trade, such as the African Continental Free Trade Area, are a good step in the right direction, given the size of the market.

Madam Speaker, as you may recall, the 18th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the African Union held in 2012 recognised the importance of promoting intra-African trade as a fundamental factor for sustainable economic development, employment generation and effective integration of Africa –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have just realised that I do not have your statement. I do not know whether you gave Members a copy of the statement.

MS KYAMBADDE: It was uploaded on the iPads –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, what should I do? Should I come tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: You can come back on Tuesday.

MS KYAMBADDE: But most of you have no iPads. Where are your iPads?

THE SPEAKER: It is not on the iPads.

MS KYAMBADDE: It is there. Madam Speaker, I beg to present tomorrow or some other time.

THE SPEAKER: You will present on Tuesday. Hand over the statement to the Clerk and then present it on Tuesday. 

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I will do it. Thank you. Madam Speaker, can I continue -

THE SPEAKER: No, the Members are supposed to have copies on their iPads. So, we defer the matter to Tuesday. Clerk, ensure that you get the text and circulate it to Members.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

Clause 14

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have a proposal for clause 14 and it says, “The Ministry for Kampala shall coordinate the metropolitan physical planning activities in consultation with Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development together with the Ministry of Local Government.”

We are substituting this with what we had recommended yesterday because we had agreed in principle on the need for coordination of physical planning activities in the metropolitan area.

We have also agreed that we do not need to have a committee in the Ministry for Kampala and that it will be catered for under Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. So, we are agreeable to that and hence the new proposal that the Ministry for Kampala shall coordinate the metropolitan physical planning activities in consultation with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development together with the Ministry of Local Government. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know whether you can rightly say that the district of Mukono will design for Kampala; Kampala is the owner of the plans for Kampala. If we agreed yesterday that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is the key body and must be consulted on the designs, approvals and so on, I think there should not be a problem. I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 1 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there any areas of interpretation?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, clause 1 (a) we are inserting new paragraphs (c) and (d) immediately after paragraph (b) as follows: 

“(c) by substituting with the following definitions:

‘Mayor’ means the mayor of a division urban council; 

‘metropolitan area’ means the area of jurisdiction of the authority together with the neighbouring districts of Mpigi, Mukono and Wakiso for purposes of coordinated physical planning.

(d) by inserting a new definition in the appropriate alphabetical order – 
‘Speaker’ means the speaker of a council.”

Justification

i) For clarity 
ii) It is a consequential amendment arising from the introduction of the speaker of the council and the speaker of the division urban council who are mandated to preside over meetings. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, those are proposals to amend clause 1. I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are deleting the word “Authority” from the short title of the Bill. 

Justification

To harmonise the title of the Bill with the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 which the Bill intends to amend.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and passed clauses 14 and 1 and amended the title. I beg to submit.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE
 OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

6.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2019.”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. Honourable chairperson, do you want to say something?

6.16
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. With honesty, I would like to thank the Government for bringing this amendment because we embraced it with the reasons which were debated here.

Madam Speaker, we also appreciate your office for the guidance, tolerance and patience you had with us. I thank the entire House for the moderate debate we had; there was no storm and as we speak there is calm in Kampala and therefore calm in the country. Thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister, would you like to tell us where to go after here?

6.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, allow me to hand over to my senior. She knows Kampala best because I hail from Mubende; I am a villager. However, I would like to thank honourable colleagues for considering this Bill and giving it the utmost attention. I am sure we have come up with the best law for this country. My senior colleague will pronounce herself on where we are going next.

6.18
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Betty Kamya): Madam Speaker, I would like to add my voice to hers to thank you all for the effort that has been put in to complete the Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill that has been concluded today.

I particularly thank my colleagues on the opposite side who have expressed their views very well. We are very grateful that finally, we are going to have a calm city and work together for the good of Kampala dwellers and not for our respective political orientations. 

You will find the invitations in your pigeonholes for information on where you are going. (Laughter) The invitations will be placed in your pigeonholes. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, let me thank the Members of the House, the committee and the ministers. It has been a very long journey from 2015 to 2019. I think it speaks to the need to consult thoroughly and widely to make sure we capture the views of as many people as possible. Thank you. It is over. I hope that the city will now be calm and divisions and municipalities will be happy. Thank you very much. (Applause)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we were supposed to handle this item but I got a message that hon. Sseggona’s wife is not well and that he has gone to hospital. Can anyone stand in for him? Are you going to stand in? 

MS NAMBOOZE: As I communicated to you, Madam Speaker, hon. Sseggona’s request is that you bear with him and stand over the matter until he comes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I think there was some other business on education but I do not know where my chairpersons are.

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, on hon. Sseggona’s private Member’s Bill, we had agreed with him to meet today at 10 o’clock. Now I understand why he did not make it and I sympathise with him. The emissary, hon. Nambooze, should tell him that since we are not proceeding today, I can fix the appointment same time tomorrow so that it eases our deliberations.

THE SPEAKER: Where are the ministers responsible for defence, finance and works? They are absent. Where is the Minister of Education and Sports?

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, I need your procedural guidance on item No. 7 (iii), which requires the Minister of Works and Transport to respond to a matter that was raised by hon. Betty Nambooze. 

I am wondering whether we should continue having this item on our Order Paper because this is a matter which was reported by the press quoting a Bill which is before this House. This Bill was read for the first time and sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Right now as we speak, the committee is still interfacing with stakeholders and seeking their views. Those opposed to some provisions are supposed to go and put their positions across before the committee. 

This particular issue, which the honourable member raised, is actually one of the proposals that the minister has made in the Bill. Therefore, I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us to continue with a matter, which is already before the House and is at committee stage. It is an issue for which the committee is still seeking opinions from stakeholders. The honourable member is a sitting member of the House, so she is free to go to the committee and express her views or reservations on the Bill. At the same time, the committee is supposed to report to this House, which is expected to debate and take a decision on the same matter, and the question to the minister is already a proposal in the Bill.

Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether it is appropriate or in order for the Member to again ask the minister responsible for that very Bill or proposal to give a response here yet the matter is already in the Bill, which has been read in this House and is now before the committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the matter is contained in the Bill, we cannot debate it because it means we shall be pre-empting the work of the committee. (Applause) So, you can go to the committee and present your views or debate at the end. This is now pre-empting the work of the House. 

Hon. Nambooze, I did not know it was in the Bill. You are pre-empting the work of the House. We are the ones who sent them to look for it. This House told the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to look at this Bill and report to us and that is what they are doing. You can go there and speak; go to the committee. We cannot have a debate on this matter when it is still before the committee. Go to the committee and give your views there. They will be contained in the report, which will come back here and then we debate it; otherwise, we might influence it. Sitting here might influence - Put it in writing so that I study it first.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED IN THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO US $45 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) TO FINANCE THE TECHNICAL AND VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING (TVET) SUPPORT PROJECT

6.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to respond to issues raised during the debate on the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal to borrow up to $45 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) Support Project.

I would like to begin by reminding you that in 2015, the Government of Uganda presented a loan request –

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Minister for Kampala Capital City to remain in this House? You do not simply come for your business and go away. Support the Minister of Education and Sports. (Laughter)

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to remind you, Members, that in 2015, the Government of Uganda presented a loan request, amounting to $45 million through the Islamic Development Bank to support technical and vocational education and training. In 2016, the bank approved this loan. However, in December 2017, the bank cancelled this loan due to the delays by Government to fulfil the requirements for loan effectiveness. The Government appealed again and in response to the appeal from the Government, the bank mounted a high level mission to Uganda in March 2018, which led to the re-appraisal of the project in July 2018.

The loan negotiations were conducted in October 2018. The revised draft loan agreements were then presented to the bank President and the Uganda Parliament in December 2018. The bank President was, however, unable to reapprove the financing before receiving confirmation from Government or the parliamentary approval of this loan. The motion to consider the loan was moved in Parliament on 30 May 2019 by hon. Charles Bakkabulindi, the Minister of State for Sports. Consequently, Parliament’s Committee on National Economy presented its review report, recommending approval. In other words, this loan request was recommended to be approved by Parliament.

However, during the debate, various MPs raised pertinent issues and requested for clarification. Parliament, therefore, decided not to vote on this motion that day to allow the committee and the minister to go through the issues and return for formal responses. This is the reason we are here today.

Madam Speaker, there are quite a number of issues but we have broken them down into seven groups.

1. 	Selected focus area of training;
2. 	Tutor training programmes, student enrolment and gender balance;
3. 	Project activity line budgets vis-à-vis debt situations;
4. 	Accountability for previous loans;
5. 	Distribution of beneficiary institutes and public private partnerships;
6. 	Project procurement arrangement; 
7. 	Synergy between parliamentary committees.

Madam Speaker, many of the Members were concerned about the selection of the training areas. In our response, we are saying the selection of training areas was informed by Vision 2040, the National Development Plan II and the Skilling Uganda plan, which all point to six key drivers of the national economy. Each selected institute was then assigned a key pertinent focus area of training in line with the potential of its geographical location as shown in the table below.

This is not business as usual, Madam Speaker. We are here responding to the demands of the world of work for higher standards of training output through the use of upgraded training curricula and modern equipment with emphasis on international accreditation. For the construction subsector, for example, we shall be looking at the use of advanced construction techniques and equipment, not just the usual wheelbarrow stage as it was mentioned, in order to produce better technicians that will construct excellent and safe structures.

We further note that while electronics and telecommunications have been specifically selected for the focus areas of training for Kitovu Technical Institute in Masaka, relevant Information and Communication Technology (ICT) entrepreneurship and innovation will be a crosscutting aspect of all other focus areas of training. When you look at Lutunku Technical Institute in Ssembabule, for example, the National Development Plan training focus will be on agricultural value addition, particularly animal husbandry, given the institute’s location along the cattle corridor in Uganda.

This will be a new programme. The training facilities will include three classroom blocks; an ICT block; a laboratory block with separate rooms for microbiology, animal food science, artificial insemination; one veterinary clinic with an isolation unit including a cattle dip; six-pen milking shades each for cows, goats and sheep; six-pen feeding shades each for cows, kids and lambs; a milk storage or cooling facility and one twin workshop with separate spaces for animal rearing science, crop science, and improved animal feed production; and a small abattoir for training purposes. In other words, this is not business as usual but something new that is going to be presented in this institution when it is expanded and revamped.

Secondly, many honourable members were concerned and suggested that we should divert this money into innovation funds for ICT innovation centres. As I said, relevant ICT entrepreneurship and innovations have been considered to be critical crosscutting aspects which are required for all other selected focus areas of training. 

Many colleagues wondered why we have to spend money to prepare people for masters and PhD’s when the money comes from loans. Our response is that – I will give you an example of Kitovu Technical Institute, which will specifically focus on electronics and telecommunications including mobile phone applications and technology. So, we are not simply looking at bricks and manual labour as insinuated in the issues raised. 

Further, as we are aware, most of our PhD and masters’ graduates in the country are from theoretical universities. The inclusion of this scope for PhD and masters level training under the TVET support project for all the focus areas of training is intended to help us develop high quality policy development experts and trainers of trainers to adequately support the Skilling Uganda programme in growing the competency-based profile of TVET in the country.

Some Members wanted clarification on why we have to review the curricula using borrowed money. I would like to say that good quality curricula development or reviews require considerable funds too. That is why they are captured under this loan package. The Islamic Solidarity Fund for Development, in particular, focuses its support towards the soft components of quality improvement like curriculum reviews, skills, skills upgrading of the trainers and accreditation of training programme. 

Their money goes into such activities. They will not provide financing for just the hard-core components like training, infrastructural development and equipment alone. So, this project is a comprehensive package including curricula reviews for the new areas of training focus as well.

Madam Speaker, some Members were concerned about masters and PhD programmes that are not gender-sensitive. Statistics show that there are generally fewer female tutors than male tutors in TVET institutions. We agreed that this trend needs to change with time and this can be achieved through affirmative action. This is why the statement in the project’s logo frame uses the word, “at least” to firmly secure a minimum number of places for female tutors. With the opportunities for further participation, we are looking forward to gender parity. 

Another Member of Parliament asked for assurance that the project designs will include facilities for both girls and boys at the beneficiary institutions unlike other development partner financed institutes like Nawanyago Technical Institute and Lwengo. Even with those projects, we had planned for both boys and girls but it took very long to implement this project and by the time we were implementing it, we had money just enough to provide facilities for one gender. I would like to assure you that under this project, adequate budget provisions have been allowed to cater for dormitory facilities for both boys and girls. 

Some colleagues felt that the Minister of Education and Sports discriminates against girls. I have already responded to that. 

The other concern was regional balance. That one has been provided for. There are nine institutes, two per region. The central, west and north got two institutions each; it is only the east that got three technical institutes because of the extra one that will go to Karamoja.

Madam Speaker, the rest is well captured in the document that was presented here. Members wanted clarification on the project financing breakdown. That is well presented in the table I have presented. Skills development headquarters, for example, is going to cost $9.09 million; equipment, furniture and tools will cost $5.7 million; infrastructure equipment services will cost $1.5 million; ICT infrastructure and equipment will cost $0.36 million; curriculum review and development will cost $0.8 million; printing and distribution will cost $0.08 million; textbook reference materials will cost $0.27 million.

Support to student internship, is going to cost $0.04 million and that is going to be provided by the Government of Uganda. Boards of governors - that is capacity building and management training - will cost $0.01 million. International accreditation will cost Maracha County $0.24 million and then project management will cost $2.9 million. The details are there and self-explanatory.

Madam Speaker, I have also included a picture to bring out the terrible state of our technical institutes. I have given an example of Kabale Technical Institute, which has a terrible structure that you can see there in the diagram. Those are some of the concerns of the Members. 

Members also wanted clarification of financing breakdown, which I have taken you through. They also wanted to know about counterpart funding. We have already been assured by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that there is enough money to cater for counterpart funding and we have a certificate of financial implication.

Madam Speaker, there was a concern about accountability for previous loans. I have given details on how we accounted for the loans we got in the past. However, the new facilities established using these loan facilities are being used to the benefit of many Ugandans as shown in the table. When you look at No.7, combined annual enrolment for former students at the 18 beneficiary institutes is on the rise.

Furthermore, considerable interventions at the five Uganda Technical Colleges (UTCs) and National Teachers College (NTC) Unyama, which is using the loan facility from the Islamic Development Bank, has created a much improved learning environment that has had a very positive impact on the student enrolment and the quality of training provided. 

Madam Speaker, I will not take you through detailed accountability. It is as you can see it there. I have tried to give accountability for the different project loans we got –(Interjection)- You have it. It was all about accountability at that stage and the rest is very clear.

Hon. Rwemulikya was concerned about accountability and the debt status. The Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development will be able to provide an answer to that.

Hon. Agnes Ameede was concerned about the chronic management problems in Nagwere Technical Institute, Butebo. Madam Speaker, we took note and the department of Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training (BTVET) is following up the matter. A report will be presented to this House very soon.

I have said a lot about the distribution of beneficiary institutes; the institutes are distributed according to the regions in Uganda. 

Hon. David Abala was concerned about the distribution of technical institutes, particularly in Teso Region. Madam Speaker, this is a region that has greatly benefited from this programme. In Teso Region, there is Ogolai Technical Institute and Madera Technical Institute which are doing a good job for this country.

Finally, Madam Speaker, hon. John Baptist Nambeshe felt that the beneficiary technical institutes are gifts to ministers. However, the sites are well distributed across the main regions in Uganda with Karamoja having –(Interjections)- Ministers were not criteria for determining which institutions benefit. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, as you know, we had debated this matter but we needed clarification -

6.44
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened to the minister and I have also had the opportunity to read through the document that was presented for this loan. I still think the minister has not been able to align this loan request to the needs of the most deserving communities in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I will draw your attention to an incident where you visited Maracha District last year and the youth made a fervent plea to you for skills training. You played your part by notifying the Office of the President. The President wrote a letter to the Ministry of Education and Sports requesting that the youth of Maracha should be helped by setting up a technical training school there under the ministry’s management. 

I have been following this up with the ministry, but the answer was always that there was a loan coming to address this. However, when I internalised the documents of this loan, I noticed that there is completely no provision for Maracha. Therefore, I do not know who is telling lies to Ugandans. I would like to lay a copy of this document on the Table for the record of Parliament. 

I have also looked through their budget and there is money for benchmarking. Are we supposed to go and benchmark how to skill our people? In my view, there could be better use for that money for benchmarking to address issues like this. I would like to hear how the President’s instruction for people who urgently deserve such skills development training will be addressed. This was properly relayed by the Speaker and the President’s Office. Thank you.

6.46
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, this loan request is overdue because the way to go is skilling. Whenever most of our youth go to listen to the President, he is skilling youth around Kololo; our people are now asking, “What about us?”

Now that the minister mentioned the regions that are benefitting, I would like to thank the minister because this time, they have tried to include Karamoja, the eastern and northern regions. My proposal is that since we have very many universities in Kampala, let one of the technical schools here be taken to the north.

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I strongly support the loan request because when you look at the districts where the Ministry of Health said there is high prevalence of malaria, she mentioned Mayuge, Busia and Karamoja. We are moving properly as Government and I request Members to support this loan request.

However, in view of the request by hon. Oguze Lee, since the President was there and gave a directive, the Speaker and other Members were also there, let part of the benchmarking money be used to handle his issue. Tomorrow, the President will go there for campaigns and they will ask him about it. Therefore, honourable minister, you allow the money for benchmarking to be used. Honourable minister, allow however little money it may be that was for benchmarking to be used to handle some Members.

I am near Barinyanga Technical Institute where hon. Ofwono Opondo comes from. You can even buy a simple chair for the head teacher and people will know that Government is working. Therefore, the money for benchmarking can cater for some few schools. I would like to submit and request Members to support the loan request.  Thank you.

The Speaker: It seems many people would like to speak. Use only two minutes but do not repeat what others have said.

6.49
Mr david abala (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity. I raised that matter out of serious concern and with a heavy heart. There is no technical school in Ngora. I am sure that one day I will invite you to come back as you promised and you might be invaded by the people of Ngora demanding for a technical school. 

Remember, in the National Resistance Movement (NRM) manifesto, it is stated that every constituency must have a technical school. I thought that this would be one way of addressing such matters so that by 2021, we are sure of more than 45 technical schools. Unfortunately, from what I have read and meditated - I asked the minister and the technical staff of the ministry to give me details about this – I do not see anything for Ngora.

They are now talking about the need to build the headquarters as a priority –

The Speaker: Which headquarters?

Mr abala: For this skilling thing - BTVET. Moreover, they talk of a lot of money; it is more Shs 20 billion. 

My opinion would be that if they could get part of that money and put it to use by establishing more technical schools, they could put one in Ngora, another in Karamoja and northern Uganda, some in Busoga and Bugisu, I am sure that we would be able to meet the need. There is a big need for technical education and I would be happy if they did that.

As far as this is concerned, I support it but I would like them to remember to include Ngora in their programme.  Thank you.

6.51
Mr Charles ngabirano (Rwampara County, Rwampara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am always very passionate about technical education because I am a product of that and I am happy that I am here.

I would like to thank the minister for the idea of the loan and the efforts we are making in this direction as a country. However, I would like to make a few remarks. 

If you look at the enrolment in our schools and the numbers we start with in primary one to primary seven, and those between primary seven and ordinary level upwards, you realise that we are losing a lot of people who are going into our villages; those should be our target.

One of the obstacles I have seen has been the training institutions and materials, which you are now addressing. The other one has been poverty because there is a tendency in this country for those who have money to just run for degrees. There is some sort of “degreemania”. For those who are able to educate their children, the children are studying well but the poor are still going into the villages and not being catered for, therefore they get low grades.

One of the problems we have is that even in these institutions, you still want people who have passed very well, especially mathematics. This gap should be addressed by skilling Uganda because in technical education, any person can get something as well as they are trained. Therefore, I would like us to see more of that so that we can get all these people out of the villages.

Secondly, we had started a programme called “Pre-OD” whereby we would get students who have not performed well in senior six or senior four and imbed some required programmes of mathematics and English still in the ensuing courses. If it is a certificate course, for example, we put some element of mathematics so that if they failed it at Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) level, we rectify this and take in as many as possible.

The third aspect is that you are sponsoring very few students for technical education. There are students who do not have sponsorship. We would want to see more of them sponsored – (Member timed out.)

6.54
Mr Michael timuzigu (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Technical education should be accepted as a game changer in any economy. The Asian Tigers developed because of technical education, to the extent that Europe was visiting Asia to see why their economies were growing.

In Uganda, we still lack technical education to the extent that when we buy machines from any country, they tell us, “Go to Kenya and get a technician who will install your machine. If you cannot go to Kenya, then we shall send someone with the machine.” Therefore, to develop and maybe to achieve our Vision 2040, we have to make sure our technical education is well supported and is strong. How do we do it? We have to support it financially.

Therefore, I support the loan request but with caution because we visited Dokolo Technical Institute and there were so many machines but they were idle. The buildings were dilapidated but the machines were there idle. We have a technical school in Kibatsi. There are machines but we have not got instructors to teach students how to use them. Therefore, I support the loan request but we need to get instructors for these new machines that are coming to educate our students.  Thank you.

6.55
Ms Margaret baba DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been in this House supporting all the loan requests but I am very reluctant to support this particular one. I know that the loan funds are going to build polytechnics and technical schools in districts, which already have two or three technical schools. There are some districts without technical schools or even a polytechnic. Koboko is one of them. What Koboko needs is just payment for the teachers. The houses are there, land and students and everything else is there. Each time I go to the ministry, they say that there is no money but I quickly hear that other Members of Parliament have got their polytechnics and technical schools. 

I would like to know from the Ministry of Education and Sports what criteria they use to select districts to be supported. Should we also be very aggressive like other people in order to be given schools? I am very angry. Those districts without polytechnics or technical schools should rally behind me not to support this thing until the minister tells me when they will take over that technical school in Koboko, which has everything possible. 

I am very angry and hope that you will consider my case. I am very reluctant to support this loan request.  Thank you.

6.57
Ms agnes ameede (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the response. However, I would like to emphasise the fact that the ministry’s inaction about Nagwere Technical School is causing a lot of financial loss to Government and the community. 

I was in this particular subcounty two weeks ago and the community was threatening mob action. As you know, this is a tricky situation; some of the board members are my voters. So it is not my duty to go and arrest the people who are responsible for mismanaging the technical school. 

To add to that, it appears like you, as a ministry, have a weakness in that area. In March, I wrote a letter to the Permanent Secretary and I made several journeys there because of a block of a primary school that had been blown off by a storm. Whereas in the end, I was told that they had no money for that particular activity and they would have to budget for it, I am dismayed that no one from the ministry went to the ground to actually inspect the school. I only managed to secure iron sheets from the Office of the Prime Minister. Therefore, this makes me wonder, together with the local government, who is there to enforce standards. 

Lastly, I would like to bring it to the attention of the minister that with the way we are going, I think we need to review first things first. You are concentrating at the top but we have a very poor foundation at primary and secondary level. I am standing here because at the time – (Member timed out.)

7.00
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support this loan request because enhancing and skilling Ugandans is very key to this country. We know the challenges of unemployment. Though we have the Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary education (USE), we know that many people have dropped out of it. 

We also have the challenge of poverty, which cannot enable us facilitate everybody to go higher in education. Therefore, I support this loan request. 

However, I propose that the ministry reviews its performance, especially where they have constructed these technical schools. Amelo Technical Institute is a key example. It is good that I am even seeing technical people visiting Amelo because of its name. I am here making seven years in Parliament but the institute has never been finished. The Minister of Education and Sports visited Adjumani while I was there, emphasised the need to complete the construction but now the learners are in district farm institutes. 

Even the quality of education is very poor; it is not attractive. I was in the community one month ago and they wanted to demonstrate. Minister and the team from the ministry, I think that you need to become more serious. I propose that we have a special visit to Adjumani to address that matter, other than promoting demonstration. I am waiting for that appointment. 

Madam Speaker, I support this loan request because of the aspect of the –(Member timed out.) 

7.02
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWDs, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand with reservations to the loan because I think the minister should come here and explain the status of all the technical schools. 

I am aware that there is a school called Mbale School for the Deaf. The ministry, I do not know through which loan, has dumped machines there. We do not have instructors but we have army men instructing deaf children that are supposed to do technical education. You need to inform this House whether you have instructors to handle those technical skills or not. 

I am one person who thinks and says, “How can we get a loan to talk about a curriculum?” Honestly, do we need a loan to think about our own country? Do we need a loan to know the challenges we have in Uganda? I mean, what is happening? We need an answer.

I have reservations because we recently just passed by Lubowa and we were not even allowed to enter the hospital that is being constructed. I do not think we should have another “white elephant”.

Minister, you have talked about an overhaul and the boys and girls but will my learners with disabilities benefit from this loan? Is there a specific amount that you have put in for them? This is because the way you make their tables might not favour their disability. I need to get that clarification before I come in to support this loan request. 

Madam Speaker, every year, we know that there are regions where people are performing badly and my committee has looked at this. Why do we pound those who are doing better and leave those that have dropped out and have nowhere to go? They are not even in senior four or six but have dropped out of school. Why don’t we concentrate and look for those Ugandans who have – (Member timed out.) 

7.04
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have a technical institute in Kaberamaido but the problem is that it is so expensive for the ordinary people that we only have 10 per cent of the Kaberamaido constituents attending the school. Therefore, it is really counterproductive. 

The graduates of that school come out with certificates. These days, we are phasing out certificates for diplomas so these graduates have no jobs. The idea of skilling is very good and probably the percentage of Kaberamaido students will increase. However, I would also like to ask the minister: can we please reduce the fees? This is in order for us to at least accommodate the very local boys, who are causing trouble, who are jobless and are on the streets. I thank you. 

7.05
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the loan request. I would like to thank the minister for his detailed report regarding the borrowing of this money. 

The main cause of unemployment today in Uganda is lack of skilled labour. I have noted here with great concern that this loan was approved in 2016 but up to now, it is not yet utilised. 

We are well aware that Uganda has already stated that it must be industrialised. There is no way it can be industrialised without skilled labour. Therefore, I urge the Government to speed up. On the same note, they should also help the private technical schools and give them donations or assistance to expand so that more Ugandans benefit from this skilling system. I rest my case. 

7.07
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for bringing this loan request and for the detailed information. 

However, honourable minister, to what extent is this loan going to take forward Government’s policy of having a technical school per district? As Members said, there are districts without technical schools. In Mitooma, we have Kabira Technical Institute but the other constituency does not have. As hon. Mbabaali said, this is an opportunity for us to even help the private technical schools. We have Muteesa Royal Institute that has machines but it is not assisted. 

Madam Speaker, to what extent is the loan going to revamp and equip the existing technical schools? This is because where these schools are, they are in poor shape; where the machines are, as colleagues said, there are no instructors. Therefore, can we equip the existing technical schools and make sure that there are instructors so that our children go there? 

We are saying that those students who have money should continue and those who do not have drop out. However, if we had good technical schools - there are students who want technical education; they do not want to go to university or after university, they want to acquire technical skills. We should be able to do this for our children so that they raise their stake on the employment market. To what extent are we – (Member timed out.) 

7.09
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is not bad to talk about this loan and to support it. However, when we talk about accountability, the minister is required to account on this, item by item. When you keep pushing for a lump sum like that, the House will not be able to see whether there is value for all these monies we are approving. 

When it comes to awarding of contracts, whether for supplies or construction, I am made to believe that some of these things are given to either friends or relatives. At the end of the day, supplies made do not meet specifications. At the end of the day, construction is not completed, like my sister said. When you go to Adjumani to that particular technical school, you wonder whether people really take Government money seriously or it is just taken for a ride. 

Before I say yes to this loan, I want to see the truth about what I have talked about. I thank you very much.

7.10
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Every part of the country deserves something good and I will not block this loan. Let those who are going to get the schools, get them. However, that will not stop me from expressing my disappointment. I have a nice eyesore in the name of a technical school. It is very ashaming to refer to it as a Government institution worth somebody entering.

The minister keeps saying that they are not going to do business as usual. He refers to theoretical universities but I thought it is this very ministry, which is supposed to give Ugandans practical and relevant education. The National Council for Higher Education, which accredits all courses, falls under this ministry. I wonder why the ministry cannot ensure that the National Council for Higher Education only accredits courses that are relevant to the current situation in Uganda. Why should you continue accrediting courses that you know very well are very theoretical? The ministry is not helping this country.

Instead of borrowing money for curriculum review, what you should do first is to ensure that the courses, which you accredit, are those that are relevant to the current needs of Ugandans in the current situation, so that we get practical education. What is going to help our children is self-employment and ensuring that the students get the skills that the employees require.

Finally, Madam Speaker, in this loan, I see components –(Member timed out.)

7.12
MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will not block the request for the loan put forward by the minister on the Floor. There is a problem in this country when it comes to vocational and technical schools. I am a product of a technical school and I went to the best technical schools. However, that area in this country is still lacking. 

There is a very big problem with the Ministry of Education and Sports. Honourable minister, if you are not aware, the schools I went to were very good that is why I have been a good professional wherever I have worked. The products of today are because the ministry has completely relaxed; there is laxity in the ministry. The curriculum you are talking about is the same curriculum we went through but you do not have tutors. 

Honourable minister, it would be better for you to advise the President to have more technical schools than secondary schools. I believe technical schools will provide a solution to this country compared to secondary schools, where you are increasing the number of educationists who are going to be useless and a problem to the country.

Madam Speaker, the minister does not know that there is a problem. I am a member of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). I led a subcommittee, which went through tertiary institutions and technical schools. Much as Government is putting in a lot of money in those schools and equipping them, there are the previous loans that the Government acquired for colleges like Oyama Technical College, Lira Technical College and Elgon Technical College; however, when you go there, it is a big problem. Government deceives this country that there are Government sponsors, who sponsor  –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR KASOLO: The Government says that there are Government sponsored students for diplomas but I would like to tell you that those students pay a lot of money. They pay through their nose and there is no Government sponsorship. The ministry is relaxed and does not know that those students are paying. 

In a private college, students pay an equivalent of Shs 1.8 million and a Government sponsored student is paying about Shs 1.3 million. What kind of Government sponsorship is that, yet those technical schools are equipped and Government has put a lot of money? 

In addition, they do not have lecturers. It is the students who teach themselves. If you are good at technology, for example, you go and teach in the lower classes and that is what is happening. You find one technical teacher lecturing in five schools. 

The minister is not telling us the truth and this requires an investigation; BTVET is not doing well in this country. We need an investigation in this area before we approve this loan. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.15
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some of these technical institutes have nice buildings but when you look at the enrolment, it is very low. Recently, we went to Buhimba Technical Institute in Kikuube, Bunyoro region. The buildings are very good but when you look at the enrolment, there are less than 200 students. When we asked the principal, he told us that the problem he is facing is that the ministry does not give them money for operations and does not send them instructors and tutors.

He told us that he begs for assistance from some of the oil companies and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs). He further told us that he is becoming a public nuisance and it is on record, yet when it comes to infrastructure, they are very good.

Madam Speaker, I raised this to the Committee on National Economy. Why can’t we stop and equip those institutions, which are already there? Why can’t we facilitate them other than coming up everywhere with technical institutions without anything?

There are also presidential pledges like the one of the late Wapakhabulo, which is pending. When you go there, people ask –(Member timed out.) 

7.17
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to support the minister on this loan request. I would like to say that we needed this money long time ago. I believe that China and Japan – all the Asian countries and even western countries - because their eyes opened a long time ago and they looked in this area, I believe that is why they are where they are today.

Last year, when our team went to China, we were privileged to visit one of the technical schools there. We were surprised to find out that in the technical schools, students were making phones, vehicles and very many surprising things. We were wondering about their level of understanding. Much as we are going to approve this loan request, I believe we need to look far ahead, more than where we have. We need to look at the curriculum and change it completely to make sure that we match the international standards. 

We have a great challenge with our tutors. They are very poorly paid. When you meet them – I have visited many in my constituency – you do not admire them in any way. They are actually demoralised and so, they do not teach well. 

When you consider the school fees; Government says that they are giving scholarships to students but the student will need to pay about Shs 700,000 yet they are on scholarship. Therefore, the technical – (Member timed out.)

7.20
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the minister for responding to the questions by Members. 

Vocational education is supposed to be a game changer. It is supposed to benefit children from different backgrounds, including the poor children, to get skills so that they access the job market. I would like to remind the honourable minister that there are so many districts without technical schools and I would like to know when these districts are coming on board. It is so unfair for us to sit here and watch some get while others are simply looking on. As much as I stand here to support this loan request and my district is a beneficiary, I would like to hear when some of those other districts will also benefit from such loans. 

There is the issue of affordability. These vocational schools are very expensive. I tried to privately sponsor a student but I ran away, much as I am a Member of Parliament and I went to a private institution. Honourable minister, what is the ministry doing, sincerely?

I am not yet convinced about the issue of gender parity. As I was reading the response of the minister, out of the 1,900 students, we have only 16 per cent being girls; that is 315 girls. Out of the nine technical schools, three of them are below 10 per cent. 

In the response of the minister, he mentioned the tutors, which is covered slightly more covered as far as gender is concerned. However, for the girl student enrolment, when you look at the 16 per cent total enrolment –(Member timed out.)

7.22
MR SSEWUNGU GONZAGA (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember in Ninth Parliament, when hon. Mukitale was the chairman of the Committee on National Economy, for some of these loan requests he would involve other stakeholders like committees. This loan request is actually under the Ministry of Education and Sports and there is an education committee. We are getting it here on the Floor after everything is concluded but our involvement would have solved some of these problems because we go to the field and look at these institutions and find out what the problems are.

Honourable members, let us not mislead ourselves by thinking that everything in the manifesto will solve our problems. If the manifesto was running 100 per cent, this House would not be getting matters of national importance whenever we sit. Look at a district like Kalungu; a journey from the beginning of the district to the end is about 45 kilometres. Now, Masaka, where they are taking these loan funds, is closer to us. So, while you think of creating a new technical institute in every district, and Kalungu is one of them, remember the distance from Kalungu to Masaka is very short. That would be very expensive.

Madam Speaker, what I would like to find out about are the non-performing loans, as hon. Muyanja Mbabaali stated. We pass loans requests here and they take about five years. I do not know how we shall manage that.

I strongly support the issue of improving technical institutes. Honourable members, some of us have visited these institutions and you can cry. Let us improve those we have. 

Our children must cut across. They must leave Kalungu and go to Gulu or Arua and learn those languages. When you think of putting a technical institute in every constituency – Moroto has a population of 3,000 and it is a constituency of 15 polling stations. In Ntungamo, you think of creating a constituency but instead, you put a technical institute there, where are you going to get the children – (Member timed out.)

7.24
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by declaring my support for the loan request. However, as I support the loan request, I also would like to alert the minister and his team that all the issues Members are raising here arise from the problems in the BTVET subsector. I look forward to a day when a comprehensive presentation is made to the House on how you wish to have this addressed.

Madam Speaker, Members are having misgivings because the BTVET subsector is not performing as they would expect. However, I would also like to say that it is true we cannot expect to solve all these problems with this loan because its purpose is specific. I would think we support this loan but task the ministry to come out with a position on what they intend to do to address these challenges.

I also tend to agree with hon. Ssewungu and wish to suggest that maybe clear policy guidelines should be developed. When you say a technical school per constituency yet you are talking of low enrolment, what are we talking about? If we could have at least, in every district, a functional and satisfactory technical institute, we would be able to satisfy the needs of our – 
(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for the chairperson.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hear people talking about those who are not able to progress with higher education. I would like to think this issue of BTVET is not a favour to those people; it is a requirement for this country to develop. Without skills, you cannot develop. So, when you look at those who have dropped out and are not able to proceed with education, it is like you are doing them a favour. How will you develop without the skills that you need from them after training?

I would like to discourage the proposal by hon. Waluswaka about shifting something from central region to another region. When you talk of universities, they are far detached from the skills training that we are talking about. If you are to talk in terms of population distribution, maybe central region will need more technical institutes. However, given the fact that the loan already has each region’s allocation, I would think we go by what the loan request is providing for. 

On that note, I would like to appeal to Members that we support this loan request but urge the responsible ministry to come up with a paper providing the strategy for addressing the BTVET requirements and challenges in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this matter will be back on the Order Paper on Tuesday for the vote. Today, he was only responding to your issues but we will take the vote on Tuesday, under its proper title of a loan request.

However, honourable minister, maybe you could speak to it so that on Tuesday you do not have a lot of trouble. Would you want to answer to some of these issues?

7.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, the Speaker has allowed me to make only two comments. 

First of all, I thank you very much, colleagues, for the support you have given to this loan request. I also thank you for the many wonderful ideas and issues you have raised today.

Secondly, I would like you to listen to this: There is something that seems not to be very clear. This loan focuses on expansion and rehabilitation of existing technical institutes that are in a very poor state. We have 80 technical institutes in the country; 16 are new and well equipped, 28 were rehabilitated in the recent past and 36 are the ones which are in a very bad state. This project is targeting such institutes which are in a bad state, and some of you have them in your constituencies and you have talked about them. 

As a ministry, we are committed to rehabilitating all of them. This financial year, you approved Shs 6 billion for equipping, rehabilitating and giving them new lives and we are committed to continue doing that.

The Ministry of Education and Sports is very aware of that policy of having a technical institute in every constituency. However, the Government is also working towards having at least a technical institute in every district. 

It is now a month because as you said –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just been discussing with the Clerk; instead of waiting until Tuesday, we could amend the Order Paper and create an item called “Adoption of the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal to borrow…” so that we can get it out of the way. Do you agree that we amend the Order Paper and reinstate that item?

Okay, honourable members, I put the question that this item be included in the Order Paper so that we can take a vote.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had the debate last time and also this time. I now put the question that this House do approve the report of the committee and the loan of $45 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the Technical and Vocational Education and Training Support Project.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.31 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 August 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

