

Thursday, 6 August 2020

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. There are three or four issues of national importance. Let me invite hon. Nsereko; use only two minutes. He is not around. Is hon. Muyanja around? He is not around too. Okay, let us hear from hon. Tayebwa.

2.52
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning service providers in the electricity industry that have stopped implementing the electricity connection policy. 

Umeme recently made a press announcement informing Ugandans that they had stopped implementing the electricity connection policy. According to the policy, a Ugandan in a rural area was required to only wire their house, pay Shs 20,000 for inspection and the electricity companies would connect electricity to the house from a pole for free. Before this, it would cost Shs 650,000 to do that connection. 

Madam Speaker, what is so painful is that there are lines that had already been commissioned by the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) and handed over to the electricity companies. People had been told to go and borrow money and wire their houses. People got loans and wired the structures for their small businesses, schools, churches and homes. However, in the end, they were told that they were not going to be connected to power. What this means is that Government is losing money invested in installing these lines. The people who borrowed money to wire their structures for business are also losing out. 

My prayer is that Government explains why the implementation of this policy has stopped and what they are going to do to ensure they revive the implementation of this policy right away. This is because lines were already commissioned and houses are wired; the only problem was lack of money for connection. This is a very big issue in the villages because people are still waiting for power to be connected to their houses. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I ask the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to come to this House in a fortnight and explain to us the fate of the free connections, which our people had embraced. It would have made a difference in their lives. So, come to us in a fortnight. 

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, yesterday, you made an announcement that Parliament would resume today at 2 O’clock. I observe that there are so many matters of national importance that are being raised on the Floor of Parliament today but I see only one or two ministers. I am not so sure whether they have made you aware that they would not attend Parliament today. 

Madam Speaker, this seems to be a persistent and tactical evasion of participation in parliamentary sessions. We cannot continue talking to ourselves when we expect Cabinet to take up our issues and do something about them. 

Therefore, I would like you, Madam Speaker, to find out from the Prime Minister whether Cabinet has been given specific instructions to be away from parliamentary sessions. This will help us to know that we can now conduct our business without the presence of Cabinet. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I must confirm that there has been no indication that Members of the Cabinet will be absent today. It is not even a Cabinet day since they sit on Mondays. I do not have any request for absence from any of them. So, I expect them to attend. I do not know whether there is any information from the single minister present. Today is Thursday when the Members’ business takes precedence.  

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we expect the ministers to come. We are very sorry that they are late but they will be joining us in a few minutes as we continue with the House. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, as you can see, even the Leader of the Opposition is –(Interjections)- Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us proceed. I will take a decision on what to do with the House if I do not see them. 

2.57
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance I would like to raise concerns the money that has been released for teachers in private schools. Right now, there is no clear guidance. Some of the teachers have told us that the money will be released through Uganda National Teachers’ Union (UNATU) and others say it will be through the microfinance centre.

Madam Speaker, as you aware, teachers in private schools have not received any salaries since March and some since February this year. Some have not received even posho or any money for upkeep. So, this is their only hope. However, they are now stuck and do not know where to begin and end. 

I beg that the ministry comes out clearly on this issue so that the teachers’ SACCOs in subcounties and constituencies get prepared. Honourable Members of Parliament should also seriously do follow-ups as far as that money is –(Interruption) 

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Speaker, just this morning, there was a television news piece showing a teacher who set himself on fire because of the situation the teachers in private schools are living in. In my constituency, private school teachers have been calling me, asking how they can access this money because they do not belong to any SACCO or microfinance institution. 

The information I would like to give my colleague is that there are very many teachers who do not belong to SACCOs or microfinance institutions. Two, teachers are desperate to the extent that they have now started committing suicide by setting themselves ablaze. Therefore, we cannot just see it as a normal situation; something must be done immediately. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker and honourable members, we passed money here for Emyooga to offer people affordable finances to support their businesses. We also passed a supplementary budget of Shs 50 billion to be disbursed to the Microfinance Support Centre. However, ever since we passed this budget, it has not been released to the Microfinance Support Centre, yet our people are suffering. Our people want affordable loans because they cannot afford loans from other banks; the interest rate is now between 36 and 43 per cent, which our people cannot afford. It is very expensive.

The Government came up with the Emyooga programme with Shs 100 billion that should be extended to our people and Shs 50 billion to the Microfinance Support Centre so that they can offer our people affordable loans. However, it is very unfortunate that up to now, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not released this money. This is the information I want to provide to Parliament.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, the money we are talking about should not be given in the form of loans. This money was promised to the teachers in private schools by His Excellency the President and it should go directly to the beneficiaries.

Madam Speaker, the concern is that if the money goes through the Microfinance Support Centre or UNATU, not all teachers in private schools will benefit because not all of them are members of UNATU, as we have heard. Therefore, the minister should come out clearly and give us a full statement on how this is going to be done. Many subcounties have started SACCOs; is the money going through subcounties or through constituencies? I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the plight of the teachers is very stressful. I cannot stop counting the number of petitions I have received in this office from all over the country. The news of the money came with excitement but I think we need to hear further and better particulars from the Government. Where is this money? Is it going to be regionally given? How do they access it? Who is entitled? Please, Minister of Finance.

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, let me begin with the issue of Emyooga and the Microfinance Support Centre. It is true that we approved a reasonable amount of money to support our people across the country under the Emyooga programme and this money has been released.

As you are aware, Madam Speaker and colleagues, the Minister of State for Microfinance has been moving across the country to encourage and mobilise the population to form emyooga and SACCOs so that they are ready to receive this money. Therefore, any minute from now, the SACCOs that are ready will be receiving the resources. The Minister of State for Microfinance has been doing fundamental work across the country, preparing people to receive this money.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is not a personal programme of the minister; where is the involvement of the Members? We would have thought if he had a national programme, he would issue it and table it here so that Members know whether to stay in Kampala or to go to their constituencies to wait for the programme. In addition, we would have expected him to inform us in writing about how much money is available and for which place, but we do not know.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, I was in my constituency just a few days ago and teachers are being asked by their colleagues to pay Shs 20,000 to be registered. They now believe that those who do not pay the Shs 20,000 will not benefit from this money. 

Therefore, what is the clear policy? The minister should tell us clearly who is supposed to benefit from this money and what the criteria is, so that people know. This is because some people will end up asking for Shs 100,000 to register them; you register with Shs 20,000 and they give you 30,000, and this is for people who are already stressed. I think the criteria to be followed in giving out this money needs to come out very clearly.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am raising a point of order against the minister. When the supplementary budget was being passed here, we told the House that the timing was such that there was no way the money would be disbursed within the time as specified by the law. The minister said he was going to do it that very day or the following day. Madam Speaker, you were very generous - I do not even know what happened to the House that day, but we all decided that we should support the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

However, today, we have heard from hon. Okot-Ogong that the Microfinance Support Centre has not received the money up to now. In other words, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development conned us to pass the supplementary budget knowing very well that they would not be able to comply with the legal requirement. 

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. We need to investigate Uganda Development Bank (UDB) and find out whether all the other agencies received the supplementary funds as we passed them on that day. 

Therefore, is it in order for the minister to try to evade the issue and pretend as if things are happening normally when he knows he was not able to comply with the instructions of Parliament as required by law? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you send the money where we asked you to send it?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, as we speak now, UDB has over Shs 500 billion. We approved Shs 455 billion here through supplementary funding. As we speak now, UDB has the resources to disperse to those that are ready to receive them.

Madam Speaker, I would expect colleagues to come here and say that they have a company that has been looking for support under UDB but they cannot get money because we have not released money. There is no company that can say that. Therefore, I think we need to be clear about this. We should be coming here to say our SACCOs are ready but they have not received resources.

However, regarding the guidelines of Emyooga, Madam Speaker, I do agree that on Tuesday, we shall come here and inform the House on the guidelines and procedures so that everybody can understand. Now, we have come out of the districts and we are taking the Emyooga Programme to the constituency level. For all Members who have been keen about it, the Minister of State for Microfinance has been informing people and the Members before it goes to their constituencies. However, we shall come here with a statement and the guidelines to inform the House. 

I have informed you about the Microfinance Support Centre. On the issue of the teachers, I do appreciate the speed of the Members but Government has engaged with the private school teachers at the level of the head of state and we have made some commitments. We have been having a number of issues. It is not only about SACCOs but we have also had issues to do with taxes. Engagement has continued and the Minister of Education and Sports will be coming to the House to inform you on how we have agreed to resolve these issues with them. We shall inform this House on all the initiatives we have put in place to attend to the issues of the private school teachers.

Madam Speaker, the problem we have is that when Government meets, we do something and agree with the citizens of the country but the following day, a Member comes on the Floor of the House and says “you have not done this”. We do not get time to conclude what we have started. I will give an example of the SACCOs. It is just two weeks ago when we took a decision but when a Member comes to the Floor of the House, it is as if there is something fundamentally wrong. They do not even first appreciate the Government’s effort to come in and solve these problems. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I wish you could come and lay the programmes on the Floor of the House. However, you sit and finish them there and then you want us to get excited. Why don’t you come and say, “this is what we have done”? That is what government is about.

3.10
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to raise an issue of national importance concerning the foreigners looting our country and we do not know. They are siphoning trillions of US dollars from our country. 

Somebody may ask me how I got to know about this. I happen to be on the trail of foreign people whom I moved with right from Botswana, Zambia, Tanzania, Uganda and up to West Africa. These people were part of a programme of filming Africa. I was an interpreter. On one side, they were filming but on the other side, they were looking for minerals in Africa. 

We have very precious rocks like gemstones, which are more expensive than diamonds. We have diamonds and other stones like yellow stones and green stones in Uganda, especially around Rwenzori, Kasese, Mount Elgon and Moroto. We have been to all those places. In Kisoro, you can find some remains of mining tools. I was with some of these foreigners as an interpreter when they made a tunnel through the rocks and the mountains. However, they forgot to explode one bomb. I was lucky because I was not there when the bomb exploded and hit all of them. The equipment is now in Kisoro.

I watched and witnessed how they would go around the system. The white men came long time ago and they did not have so much, but they had the knowledge. They made some cemented areas like points; in Bugisu, Busoga and Acholi they are many. Recently, people thought that underneath those points there was some diamond and gold and they uprooted them. 

However, those points were marks for their grandchildren.  They have got a language that they used to write and when they went back, they kept this for their grandchildren so that they can come and trace where these points are. Up to now, they are sending their grandchildren to loot. Imagine, a very small stone like an egg costs between US$ 30 million and US$ 50 million. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to give a scenario before I end my submission. I was in Congo with the same people. In 2017, when I fell sick and I was on my death bed, those people whom I was working with called me and said that they had a stone, which was worth US$ 130 million. I could not do anything to help them because I was sick. They came from Congo, speeding because one of their friends was in front with the stone and the rest were following. Their friend tried to dodge them – in Nakaseke in 2017, a car knocked and killed four Chinese and it was even in the newspapers.

Apart from that, in Uganda, people are siphoning a lot of wealth –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Masika, I think you have a lot of information. I wish you could go to the Committee on Natural Resources so that we have a formal meeting and you give them this information.

MR MASIKA: Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask hon. Keefa Kiwanuka to arrange for hon. Masika to come and give information about the natural resources of this country? 

Okay, honourable members, let us go to item No.3.    

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EVALUATION OF COVID-19 GUIDELINES 
AND RESPONSES

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is not here as usual.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON COMPLAINTS BY INDIVIDUALS WHO WERE REPATRIATED FROM VARIOUS COUNTRIES WHERE THEY HAD BEEN STRANDED DUE TO THE COVID-19 LOCKDOWN, AND QUARANTINED AT SHERATON HOTEL FOR THE OBLIGATORY 14 DAYS YET UPON EXPIRY OF THE DAYS, THEY WERE UNJUSTIFIABLY RETAINED FOR AN ADDITIONAL 3 DAYS AND WITHOUT TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE EXPENSES INVOLVED

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Health is not here.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION OF 3RD MAY, 2018 ON PAYMENT OF MONIES OWED TO UGANDA-SOUTH SUDAN TRADERS

THE SPEAKER: We were supposed to have a meeting but the minister did not come today. I am yet to find out why he created other programmes but I am going to follow him up on that issue.

LAYING OF PAPERS 

3.15
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the Auditor-General’s compliance audit report on compensations/acquisition of right of way by Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Ltd for the year ended 30th June 2019.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TO RE-ALLOCATE FUNDS FOR THE OPERATION OF CITIES AND TEREGO DISTRICT

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for the resolution of Parliament authorising the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to reallocate funds for the operation of cities and Terego District. I move under Rule 55 of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS on 28 April 2020, Parliament approved the creation of 15 cities, 10 of which commenced on 1 July 2020;

AND WHEREAS on 5 May 2020, Parliament approved the creation of Terego District curved out of Arua District, which came into effect on 1 July 2020;

NOTING THAT there is urgent need to provide funding to make them functional through budgetary adjustment;

GIVEN THAT the annual budget for Financial Year 2020/2021 was passed before the commencement of these cities and Terego District and therefore, funds for the functioning of the newly created votes and districts were allocated to the original municipalities, in the case of cities, and Arua District in case of Terego District;

ACKNOWLEDGING THAT section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 empowers Parliament to authorise, by resolution, the minister responsible for finance to allocate funds from a vote to another vote where the functions of a vote are transferred to another vote;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that in accordance with section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 the minister responsible for finance is hereby authorised to allocate funds as follows:

1. 	Reallocation from vote 751, Arua Municipal Council, to vote 851, Arua City: 
Recurrent expenditure Shs 11,949,914,265
Development Shs 14,339,321,920
Total of Shs 26,288,706,185

2. 	Reallocate from vote 761, Mbarara Municipal Council, to vote 852, Mbarara City: 
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 25,107,631,359. 
Development expenditure - Shs 18,781,385,167

3. 	Reallocation from vote 754, Gulu Municipal Council, to vote 853, Gulu City: 
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 19,418,177,497. 
Development expenditure - Shs 41,035, 328,388. 

4. 	Reallocate from vote 755, Jinja Municipal Council, to vote 853, Jinja City, a total of Shs 35,028,827,629. 

5. 	Reallocate from vote 753, Fort Portal Municipal Council, to vote 855, Fort Portal City, a total amount of Shs 21,694,250,255.

6. 	Reallocation from vote 760, Mbale Municipal Council, to vote 856, Mbale City, a total amount of Shs 42,688,665,532. 

7. 	Reallocation from vote 759, Masaka Municipal Council, to vote 857, Masaka City…” – (Interruption)

MR OKOT-OGONG: I need to be guided, maybe by the Attorney-General or any Member of this august House. 

We have just created those cities and we have not passed any law operationalising them. We have the Kampala Capital City Authority Act and Kampala Capital City operates under that law. How are we going to work with this money that we have passed, yet it belongs to a different vote – the municipalities? 

You are now allocating money without changing the Act. The Appropriation Act is a law. You cannot now start bringing the money appropriated for Gulu Municipality and transfer it to the city that has not been operationalised. What is the structure of the city? How are they going to operate? Why should we behave in this manner? This is the Parliament of Uganda and we must follow the law –(Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. When the Government came to this House to propose the approval of the first lot of 15 cities, the proposal was accompanied by a statement of financial implications. This means the first batch of the cities were budgeted for 2020. The minister is aware of that. 

I had expected the minister to come to the House to seek for a resolution to cater for the three cities which were moved from 2021 to 2020. I would understand that because they were not captured in the budget. All those others which the minister is talking about were captured in the budget; they were appropriated for. There is no way this Parliament would have passed the 15 cities if we were aware that they were not captured in the budget. It was very clear that they were to start in 2020 and the next lot was to start in 2021.

The information I would like to give hon. Okot-Ogong is that the only resolution the minister should be tabling now is to cater for only the three cities that were moved forward from 2021 to 2020. Thank you. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, we do not need to circumvent the law. The Appropriation Act is a law passed by Parliament. If you want to vary anything in that Appropriation Act, you must amend it to now include the cities. That is the organised way we can do this but not circumvent it and bring a motion that is against a law that has been passed. 

There is even no law operationalising these cities that they have passed. We do not even know the structure –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: The clarification I would like to seek from my colleague is whether, in creating the cities, you did dissolve the existing municipalities that were created under the Local Governments Act. If you did not, what is the fate of those municipalities?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first, I would like to ask the Government to follow the law. Sometime back, I had told the Minister of Local Government that we need to bring an Act to establish Mbale City Authority, Jinja City Authority, and others. That is not yet done. In the Constitution, we only have Kampala City. That is the only one that is recognised. You needed to bring a law to facilitate the creation of the authorities for those cities. 

Secondly, I agree with colleagues that you cannot amend the Appropriation Act by resolution. We appropriated this money for particular functions. If they are going to be altered, you come with an Appropriation (Amendment) Bill which should go to the committee and be discussed. 

Thirdly, do we assume that the cities subsumed the municipalities? If they did, you should let us know that there is no municipality and there are cities. How do they fit in? 

Honourable minister, this is premature. Please, bring an amendment to the Appropriation Bill. First sort out the legal status of these cities. Who are the accounting officers, anyway? You have not given us a list of accounting officers. Who is going to look after this money?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, on the issue of the law, we are moving under the Public Finance Management Act, section 20, which allows Parliament to authorise a minister to reallocate funds from one vote to another when the functions are changing.

THE SPEAKER: Have you created the votes for the cities? 

MR BAHATI: Yes, the votes are there.

THE SPEAKER: Under which law? You need the Appropriation Act to create those votes. You need to amend the existing Appropriation Act.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, because the Public Finance Management Act is really the main document that guides the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and that ministry is aware that you cannot move money from one agency to another without the accounting officers of those agencies agreeing on how that money can be moved and how it would be put back, so that the activities of that agency can be executed as planned.

The way the minister is moving is as if we have wasted our time here doing planning. Our budgeting is based on the National Development Plan (NDP) and the Budget Framework Paper. However, the minister now seems to be telling us to throw all those into the garbage pit and follow the guidelines provided by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam Speaker, you are quite right on your guidance to us. We need to go back to the root to have the matter analysed by the Committee on Budget. Probably, we have to even amend the Appropriation Act. Otherwise, there are lots of loopholes in this law and I think we need lawyers to guide us. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I have provided guidance to the House; what other lawyers do you want? Anyhow, honourable minister, this matter is not properly before this House. Please, go and reorganise yourself. 

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Okot-Ogong for raising that procedural matter and you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance.

Looking at the motion moved by the honourable minister, you can say that there are lots of loopholes. These cities were supposed to be operational on 1 July 2020. We are now in August and there are no interim leadership teams in all the cities that have been created. The cities were approved, each with two division councils and a city council. However, as we talk, there are no interim division councils and no city interim councils and therefore, whatever we are talking about here will not be operational on the ground. 

As you have guided, Madam Speaker, there is need for the concerned ministries - the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Local Government, and Ministry of Justice and Constitutional affairs - to fast-track the issue of the law that will guide the establishment of the political and administrative structures, so that the resources can be well reallocated for service delivery.

Lastly, the motion that the minister has brought here is about reallocating monies that were previously allocated to municipalities. However, some parts of the divisions were curved out of the mother districts. So, what happened to the resources that had been appropriated according to the population in the areas that were curved out of the districts? I am talking out of experience. Arua City Council, for example, consists of Arua Central, which was the former Arua Municipality, and Ayivu County. However, Ayivu County, with a population of around 300,000, is not reflected in this motion. 

Madam Speaker, there is a lot that needs to be put right. I would like to, therefore, urge the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with his colleagues in the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to fast-track the processes to ensure that these cities became operational so that they can deliver services as intended. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, before you ask me to do the obvious, I would like to suggest that you give us more time to go to fine-tune this motion so we can come back in an organised manner.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not expect a motion; I expect an amendment to the Appropriation Act. That is what I am expecting.

MR BAHATI: Yes, we are going to do it better to avoid bothering you to tell us to do the obvious. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us get to item No. 6.  

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO USD 169.2 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE IRRIGATION FOR CLIMATE CHANGE RESILIENCE PROJECT

3.34
MR IGNATIUS MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on National Economy.  I stand in for my leadership, who are not here, to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to US$ 169.2 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group, to finance the Irrigation for Climate Change Resilience Project.

Before I present the report, I would like to lay on the Table the following documents:

    1. The report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to US$ 169.2 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to finance the Irrigation for Climate Change Resilience Project;
    2. A brief to Parliament on the proposal by Government borrow;
    3. A letter from His Excellency the President for approval;
    4. The Certificate of Financial Implication confirming Government’s counterpart funding;
    5. A clearance letter by the National Planning Authority;
    6. The financing agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the International Development Association on financing of the project;
    7. The bidding documents for the project;
    8. The procurement plan for the financial year 2020/2021;
    9. The project implementation setup;
    10. The project appraisal documents for February 2020;
    11. The project implementation manual, 2020; and
    12. Minutes of the committee meetings.

I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, the House received this request on 16 June 2020 and it was accordingly referred to the committee. We held meetings with various sectors.  

Background 

Uganda has well-endowed water resources with precipitation, ranging between 750 millimetres per year in the northeast, concentrated in one rainy season, to 1,500 millimetres per year in the southwest across two rainy seasons. 

Members can read through this information as the report has been uploaded.

The impact on the climate variability on Uganda's economy is striking. Uganda experienced production losses of between 38 and 36 per cent for beans and maize respectively, totalling to Shs 2.8 trillion.

Project Linkage to Country Strategy

The National Development Plan III (NDP III) has identified 18 programmes that have been designed to deliver the required results under this plan. Among the programmes, we have the following:

    1. Climate Change, Natural Resources, Environment and Water Management 

This aims to stop and reverse the degradation of water resources, environment, natural resources as well as the effects of climate change.

    2. Agro-industrialisation Programme 

This aims to increase commercialisation and competitiveness of agricultural production and agro-processing. Key results include: increasing export value of selected agricultural products, increasing the agricultural sector growth rate, increasing labour productivity in the agro-industrial value chain, creating jobs in agro-industry, and increasing the proportion of households that are food secure. 

Alignment of the Project with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

The Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development contains specifically goals 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 that set targets for combating the effect of climate change and sustainable management of water resources, forests and environment. 

The specific objectives of this project are:

    1. To develop irrigation, drainage infrastructure and services;
    2. To strengthen institutional capacity in irrigated agricultural production in the project areas.

Project Impact

The project will contribute to improvement of farm incomes, rural livelihoods, food security and others.

Project Beneficiaries

The project will directly benefit areas in the districts of Isingiro, Kanungu, Lamwo, Lira, Tororo, Mukono, Wakiso, Mpigi and Rukungiri. An estimated total of 63,200 farmers will benefit from support services for agricultural production and value-chain development, including matching grants for facilitated access to inputs and on-farm irrigation equipment. This includes all farmers benefitting from new and improved irrigation services plus about 5,100 farmers in Nyimur. This is an area in Lamwo which has food insecurity. 

Beneficiaries by Target Areas

1. 	Kabuyanda, Isingiro District
    a. Farming households - 10,700	
    b. Farmers - 32,100

2. 	Matanda, Kanungu District	
    a. Farming households - 4,300	
    b. Farmers - 12,900

3. 	Olweny, Lira District	
    a. Farming households – 1,500	
    b. Farmers – 4,500

4. 	Amagoro, Tororo District	
    a. Farming households - 2,600	
    b. Farmers – 7,800

5. 	Nyimur, Lamwo District	
    a. Farming households - 1,700	
    b. Farmers - 5,100

6. 	Farmer-led micro and small-scale irrigation, Mukono, Wakiso, Mpigi, Isingiro, Kanungu, Rukungiri and Tororo districts 	
    a. Farming households/farmers - 800	

Project Components

1. Irrigation and Drainage Service Development 

This will take US$ 129.8 million, of which US$ 127.4 million is from the International Development Association of the World Bank and US$ 2.4 million is from the borrower, that is, Government.

Sub-component 1.1 will take US$ 122.5 million. It is for infrastructure development, which includes:

    i) Dam construction and associated head works; 
    ii) Construction of irrigation networks like pipes, canals and hydro-mechanical equipment.

Sub-component 1.2 will take US$ 2 million and it is to develop small and micro irrigation. The activities will include:

    i) Construction of small water retention facilities and associated head works; 
    ii) Drilling of wells and boreholes; 
    iii) Construction of small irrigation networks like pipes;
    iv) Support for preparation of designs, monitoring and control of works; and 
    v) Matching grants to facilitate access to irrigation equipment.

Sub-component 1.3 will take US$ 2.9 and it is for integrated catchment management. The activities will include:

    i) Technical assistance for the preparation of scheme-specific catchment management plans; and
    ii) Implementation of the interventions identified in the catchment management plans, including reforestation.

2. 	Support Services for Agricultural Production and Value-Chain Development 

This will take US$ 50 million, of which US$ 31.5 million is from the International Development Association and US$ 18.5 million is from beneficiaries' contribution. This component is to create and strengthen farmers’ groups in marketing, finance and organisational management; facilitate access to quality inputs and appropriate technologies and practices with the aim of improving production and productivity; and support value-chain development and many others.

Sub-component 2.1 will take US$ 25.8 million and it is for on-farm production and productivity improvement. The activities include, among others:

    i) Creation and strengthening of farmers' groups, providing extension services, facilitating access to inputs, promoting good agricultural practices, sustainable land management practices and integrated pests and disease management; 
    ii) Matching grants to facilitate access to inputs, that is, seeds and agrochemicals; 
    iii) Monitor and supervision of project activities.

Sub-component 2.2 will take US$ 5.7 million and it is on value addition and market linkages. The activities include:

    i) Creation and strengthening linkages with value-chain actors in improved post-harvest handling, agro-processing, access to financing services, access to markets and market information; 
    ii) Matching grants to facilitate access to equipment; and 
    iii) Purchase of small goods.

3. Institutional Strengthening and Implementation Support (US$ 10.3 million)

This is to provide project implementation support, studies and technical assistance for institutional strengthening of Ministry of Water and Environment and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The activities will include: feasibility and design for Matanda Irrigation Scheme in Kanungu District that are being prepared together with Environmental Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).

Sub-component 3.1 will take US$ 1.9 million and it is on institutional strengthening. The activities will include:

    i) Short-term studies on management models in irrigation, tariff structures, and prerequisites for financial sustainability; and 

    ii) Capacity building and training for irrigation development and management.

Sub-component 3.2 will take US$ 8.4 million, which is on implementation support. The activities will include:

    i) Hiring of specialists for the project support team; 
    ii) Purchase of project implementation goods and services (ICT equipment, software and vehicles); and
    iii) Operational costs.

Financing of this project 

    a) The loan will provide financing of the project. 
    b) The loan amount - $169.2 million (Special Drawing Rights of 122.9 million); 
    c) The maturity period - 38 years; 
    d) The grace period - six years; 
    e) The service charge – 0.7 per cent on withdraw on credit balance
    f) Commitment fee - 0.5 per cent per annum on the un-withdrawn financing balances 

Loan 

It has a grant element of 61 per cent, which is highly concessional.

Budget Implication 

The project is included in the Financial Year 2020/2021 draft budget estimates for Ministry of Water and Environment (Project Code 166l under Vote 019) with a total provision of Shs 8.65 billion under the Government of Uganda Budget of the project. In addition, a total of Shs 53.2 billion is also provided for as external financing for the project. 

Economic Benefit and Return of the Project

    1. Crop production certainty; farmers shall become more certain in their crop planning and hence, they will likely venture out into producing three or more crops annually.
    2. Resilience to climate change; farmers shall be able to venture out into crops, which require ample water or those, which are highly sensitive to moisture stress and these may include horticultural crops, which are often of high value.
    3. Farmers also shall be able to produce and supply markets in traditional seasons of scarcity hence taking advantage of the price premium, which accrue when supply is insufficient.

The Net Present Value of the project over a 30-year period at a discount rate of 5 per cent is estimated at $ 285 million with the Economic internal rate of return of 18.4 per cent, while the benefit cost ratio is 3.1 per cent, which indicates that the project is viable. 

Implementation 

The implementing agency will be the Ministry of Water and Environment. It will be responsible for planning, budgeting, procurement, financial management, safeguard, monitoring & evaluation and reporting for the whole project. 

The Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Water and Environment will be the Accounting Officer for all project funds. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will be the technical implementation partner for activities which fall under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries’ mandate under sub-component 1.2 and Component 2.

The National Forest Authority will be a technical implementation partner for activities, which fall under the National Forest Authority’s mandate, namely the reforestation activities in Rwoho Central Forest Reserve under sub component 1.3.

The loan and the current debt situation of the country

This will certainly increase the total loan stock of the country. The present value of public sector debt to GDP stands at 29.7 per cent in present value terms, as at end of March 2020 relative to 27.29 per cent as of end of June 2019. When you factor in, some loans were acquired recently by Government and approved by this House during the COVID-19 pandemic between January and June, approximately $ 1.4 billion and could possibly push this ratio up due to weaker fundamentals, including slower growth, exchange rate depreciation, weaker exports and a fragile domestic revenue base. The public debt will be manageable, if infrastructure spending raises growth and domestic revenue improvement.

Despite the increase in solvent debt, it is still sustainable. While Uganda is at low debt distress, there is evidence that high debt service, as a share of Government tax revenue, is at 23 per cent for the period ending June 2019. There is also need for Government to stay within the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility budget deficit target of 3 per cent of GDP by the Financial Year 2020/202l.

Recommendations

    (i) Low absorption of funds

We have observed that most of these loans contracted under the Ministry of Water and Environment are not absorbed in time.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Water and Environment ensures that all inefficiencies that affect the sufficient utilisation and absorption of funds for debt financed projects in the Water and Environment Sector are mitigated to guarantee the timely realisation of the project development objective and expected social benefit.

    (ii) Sector strategies and policies

We have looked at the 2018 Joint National Irrigation Policy by the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, which represent a solid base for the development of the irrigation sector in the country. However, the implementation detail of this policy remains to be defined. 

The roles and responsibilities of different actors involved in the irrigation development are often overlapping on many occasions. The on-going preparation of an irrigation Master plan by the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is expected to be in 2020 in order to mitigate risk. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should fast-track the preparation and completion of the National Irrigation Master Plan as irrigation is highlighted as core in the implementation of the National Development Plan.

    (iii) Fulfilment of loan conditions 

We also noted that there is slow fulfilment of loan effective conditions upon signing of loan agreements in order to trigger the disbursement of committed funds for the implementation of debt financed projects.

The committee recommends that Government ensures the speedy fulfilment of effectiveness conditions of the Financing agreements for loans in order for the committed funds to be released by the International Development Association on time to guarantee the timely implementation on this project.   

    (iv) Compensation of affected persons 

The committee observed that a number of infrastructure development projects are faced with challenges of compensation of project affected persons, which are also likely to affect this project, as it is included in permanent land acquisition for construction of infrastructure and temporary access to land that is to be financed by Government of Uganda counterpart funds.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment ensures the acquisition of all the land titles in the areas where construction works for the projects are to be implemented before construction works commence. In addition, all other project–affected persons should be adequately compensated.

On the technical design of the project and inadequate human technological capacity and research on irrigation, we have noted that a country still has a challenge in that area. I think Members can read that text.

We recommend that Government provides adequate funds for building the capacity of the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in the design, supervision and implementation of high-quality irrigation schemes across the country.

Government undertakes deliberate efforts to build the national irrigation capacity by focusing on training of irrigation technicians at certificate and diploma levels at technical institutions to operate and maintain established irrigation systems in the country.

In addition, tailor-made short courses for irrigation practitioners and extension officers should be developed and streamlined in academic institutions. There should be a deliberate effort to increase funding for university programmes to match theoretical fundamentals with practical skills to produce graduates with hands-on experience in design, operation and maintenance of irrigation projects.

On willingness of smallholder farmers to invest in on-farm irrigation, the committee noted that the financial capacity and willingness of smallholder farmers in the project area to invest in on-farm irrigation equipment may be low and requires further assessment. Experience in existing irrigation schemes across the country suggests that charging for irrigation services is a challenge in Uganda, also considering that irrigation is supplementary as rainfall usually allows for at least one cropping season per year.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water, Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries undertake community awareness raising and engagement on the adoption of a value chain and marketing approach during the implementation of this project. This will contribute to the sustainability of the project in achieving the desired development impact in the project areas. 

In addition, support to smallholder farmers in the first seasons following the introduction of irrigation will be fundamental to ensure potential benefits.

On sustainability, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries ensure the provision of adequate support to the establishment of the management arrangements for the two new irrigation schemes of Kabuyanda and Matanda.

The Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries ensure that in order to account for the time required for farmers to start accessing the irrigation services over the first few seasons after project implementation, a start-up fund for operation and maintenance of the irrigation scheme is integrated into the implementation of this project.

On the issues of land use in Uganda, the committee noted that the land tenure systems in Uganda, especially customary tenure, are not clearly defined. This deters farmers from making long-term investments on land. 

In the present land tenure system, women's land ownership is not clearly defined and thus, they are vulnerable to the deprivation of access to land. In addition, land fragmentation induced by the increasing population is also a challenge.

The committee recommends that Government streamlines the land tenure systems to ensure clarity and security of tenure, especially for women farmers who have been recognised to provide a significant amount of labour force in the agriculture sector, to promote investment in irrigated agriculture as the right path.

In addition, pertinent land reforms towards land consolidation for sustainable commercial irrigation development should be supported.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow US$ 169.2 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to finance the Irrigation for Climate Resilience Project be approved, subject to the recommendations herein. I beg to move.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue regarding the admissibility of the certificate of financial implication accompanying this report.

I have not seen the certificate but basing on what the chairperson presented, he has told us that the report is only clarifying that there will be money for counterpart funding.

However, the reason we normally require this certificate to accompany these requests is to enable Parliament make a correct decision as to whether this loan will be sustainable or not.

Madam Speaker, we need to know; the certificate is supposed to guide us on key parameters like debt sustainability, the GDP debt ratio, the debt servicing capacity. 

To confirm that this is not provided, when you look at the report on page 17, it is only referring to situations as at 2019 and March 2020 but they do not know the implication this loan is going to have on the debt sustainability level of the country.

Therefore, in view of that, I do not know whether we shall be proceeding well to consider a report in which we are not even sure of the impact it is going to have on the debt situation in the economy given that even the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not know and has failed to provide – yet, that is what is supposed to be covered in the Certificate of Financial Implication, which they have dodged.

Therefore, in view of that –(Interjections)– they have not provided that information because even in the report, if they had provided this, the report would be covering that. However, from the report, you can see that they are talking about situations of 2019 and March 2020. 

We want to know, if we acquire this loan, how it will impact the debt level of the country – debt sustainability – and the GDP debt ratio. Those are the things we want to know so that it enables us to make a decision when we are very sober, in order to know where we are committing and taking the country.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I beg your guidance on this matter in a situation where the Certificate of Financial Implications is evasive and not addressing the issues it is supposed to address but only saying that there will be counterpart funding. That is not what we want to know. We want to know the debt level and debt servicing capacity so that we make a decision binding the country on a position we are familiar with.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Othieno.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, in addition to the issue raised by my honourable colleague, this particular report raises very many fundamental issues that would need to be addressed by the user ministry. Unfortunately, I do not see any of the ministers in the water and environment sector here, who should be answering these issues. 

Among the issues being raised, is the absence of an irrigation master plan by the ministry. There is the inadequate project preparedness by the ministry in respect of projects of this nature. There are also matters to do with failure by Government to honour conditions of the loans, leading the loans not to be disbursed, yet we continue to pay interest.

Madam Speaker, are we proceeding right on a matter of this nature without the user ministers being present in the House?

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, I remember clearly that we have talked about the law on the environment and climate change. We have been pleading with Government to present this law so that as a country, we will move under the guidelines provided by the laws of this land passed by Parliament. We have a Bill regarding environment and climate change laws that has been pending for a long time. Once we have the law, it will bolster the steps that are being taken by Government. The law will talk about actions that have been taken and adaption, financing and mitigation, including the human resource.

According to the report presented by the chairperson, they are talking about inadequacy and preparedness of the ministry. There are no technical staff in the Ministry of Water and Environment.

If we borrow this loan when the ministry is not prepared, we are not going to get value for money. I would like to propose that we start with the law on the environment and climate change.  That law will guide the country on the actions to be taken on adaptation, mitigation and financing; control, the structure of the ministry and the roles of the various agencies of Government in implementing issues of climate change and the environment.

I would like to appeal that this request be stayed until an appropriate law that will control – because this is a lot of money - US$ 169 million yet we are getting it when we are not prepared. We are getting it when we do not have the relevant and important laws. We have gone to very many international meetings and the issues that come on table are clear that each and every country must come out with a law on the environment and climate change, yet we are borrowing when we are not ready because we do not have the laws in place.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just wanted to clarify that on 14 November 2018, this House enacted the National Environment Act. At the moment, the Climate Change Bill is before the Standing Committee on Climate Change; there is something under consideration. 

Of course, the committee did not refer to the existing law. I do not know why. Honourable Chairperson, what do you have to say? How do you fit in with the National Environment Act?

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, there are areas that we have referred to when you look at the details on the loan. However, what you have rightly said about climate change is still under consideration. I have a letter dated 17 March 2020 on clearance of financial implications for the loan. 

It reads: “In line with section 76 of the Public Finance and Management Act, as amended, this ministry confirmed that the above project will be funded by the proposed loan from the International Development Association, Government of Uganda and contribution by farmers as summarised. The International Development Association of the World Bank will take $ 169.3 million, Government of Uganda will take $ 2.4 million, Farmers’ contribution will take $ 18.5 million, totalling to $ 190.2 million.

Accordingly, this ministry has no objection to the above financial implication and confirms that the proposed financing arrangements are within the Government of Uganda medium-term physical framework and debt strategy. 

However, the Government of Uganda counterpart funding will be prioritised within the financial resources provided for, under the medium-term expenditure framework projection for the ministries of water and finance.

Signed by Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury
Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.”

THE SPEAKER: Did you mention that the counterpart funding is not there?

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, it is provided for in the budget.

THE SPEAKER: I see.

4.15
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of borrowing follows prioritisation. Borrowing just for development of irrigation schemes like we want to do, does not answer the question of the absence of enough water. 

The long-term plan in the structure of this loan would have been to allow for an exit policy and a plan that money would be borrowed to encourage tree planting and the restoration of the forest cover. 

When you look at the policy of Government, you realise that partly, forests like in Budongo and other areas are being given out to investors, which defeats the purpose as to why we are borrowing money to sort out the issues of drought.

Therefore, encouraging tree planters - those that have private large-scale plantations by giving them extra funding to maintain their plant cover - is one of the plans that we should adopt. Very many people and members of the society have undertaken the growth of forest cover on their own. 

Kenya, in our neighbourhood, adopted the policy of 50 cents per three trees that one plants and they undertake to maintain them for at least 20 years. In so doing, they have encouraged people to plant trees that help in the rain cycle. 

To the contrary now, we are cutting down our own trees. Madam Speaker, you and Parliament at large, have been at the forefront of encouraging people to plant trees to maintaining the green in this country. Now, look at the stage we are at; borrowing $ 169 million because we depleted our own forests.

Secondly, when it came to measures that would mitigate even the real cutting down of trees as a source of fuel, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should have given a waiver to the importation of gas. This would help people to look for substitute measures of providing fuel and gas at their homes. The reason majority of people cut down trees other than construction, is that wood is the main source of fuel in homes. 

The only measure that you have to undertake is to sign an agreement with the country - like Tanzania, which is already pumping a lot of gas - and take it at subsidised prices but also remove the taxes. The cost of gas has increased in this country as a result of the tax measures that we impose. 

Therefore, if we want to protect the forest and we want to improve on the plant cover that we have, make it an incentive, through this funding. For example, if organised farmers and tree growers had been given an incentive as part of the funds from this, we would have another 40 million trees being grown. If we spent, may be $20 million, as part of this in long term sustainability and maintaining of the rain cycle, we would have the reduction in taxes on gas. 

I stand up to say that we delay this loan a little. Probably, we might persuade our comrades in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to find a better way to restructure it, looking at not only the short term but also the long-term goals that we want to achieve. 

Shall we be encouraging deforestation in order to go for loans to build irrigation schemes? What should we do better in order to attain the long-term goals of environmental protection that can guarantee us water and rains in this country? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.20
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened to the minister and the conflicting programmes of the ministry and also the capacity for our agencies, as well as the ministry to allocate this money and use it in the time frame. I also paid consideration to the interest that is accruing even before we take over the loans. 

As earlier indicated by your office, Madam Speaker, Ugandans are decrying the issue of loans in this plenary and the debt burden that the grand children of this country will pay without accruing the benefits of why we borrowed in the first place. 

Even people in Kampala, which is the Capital City, continue to use firewood. That is why we see ovens of Eco safe that have provisions of charcoal on one side and firewood on the other side.

If charcoal and firewood are still the main source of fuel in Kampala, do we see any time soon the benefits of borrowing for irrigation in areas that are getting drought? 

Like hon. Nsereko said, we need the National Planning Authority to be given back its mandate to also provide a report on how there is synergy in all these areas; water, drought, desertification and irrigation. 

Deforestation is still another issue and borrowing is not the solution. More debt burden to our grandchildren is not the solution and Government needs to synergise across sectors so that whenever a loan is here, the National Planning Authority has a report of the same. Thank you

THE SPEAKER: You are introducing a new requirement for the loans from the National Planning Authority. 

4.22
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a strong advocate of climate change. I would gladly approve this loan to help us deal with the mitigation and adaptation plans that we have in place.

However, looking at this loan and the observation and recommendation made by the committee, it actually disqualifies this loan from being passed. 

When you look at some of the factors that have been raised, they confirm what we discussed the other day. We said that one of the challenges that we have in debt management is our poor management of absorption capacity. This has been highlighted here. 

We have been told here that we do not even have strategies and policies that are well designed for the implementation of this project. How do we go about it? We have even gone ahead to say that we do not have adequate skills to promote irrigation as a practice. 

Looking at all these factors that have been raised, I think it is a way of advising us, as an institution, that we should not force Government to borrow when we are not ready. Can we put our house in order first so as to deserve this loan? One of the factors that is very important is land utilisation and compensation. It has been sighted here that it is still a big factor. 

I would have loved to approve this loan, which we need. Unfortunately, the implementation agencies are not ready. They are not properly equipped. They do not have adequate skills and they have even said that the farmers are not yet willing to come up and take the risk to engage in irrigation. 

As a country, we are not ready but the Government has high propensity to borrow. I do not know how, Madam Speaker, you can tame that. If we could do that, the ministry would be more careful so that they bring the loan when they are ready. Thank you. 

4.26
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Government for coming up with a plan to mitigate climate change. Climate change is a reality in our country now. 

I would like to seek clarification regarding the issues raised on page 14 of the committee report. It has been reported that Government will provide $ 2.4 million as counterpart funding, to facilitate the resettlement action plan. 

I would like to find out what this project will be like. Are they going to be group farms? If so, that will require a lot of land, which will lead to the displacement of people. This will definitely necessitate compensation. I see a situation where some people may want to misappropriate this money meant for the project.

THE SPEAKER: Where is that in the report?

MS NAUWAT: It is on page 14. I would like to seek clarification on whether it is group farms that we are looking at or any farmer who is ready to embrace the project. 

I would also like to find out whether this project is not targeting only the big farmers, since there is an element of cost sharing in as far as connection fees and volumetric water fees are concerned. 

I would like to look at the Rural Electrification Programme that we have in the country right now. Whereas it has reached some areas, not many people are getting connected because of the connection fee. I do not know whether this programme is going to look at small farmers, considering the cost sharing being talked about. How will the small farmers and women, who do not own large pieces of land benefit from this programme? 

Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is whether it is group farms or individual small-scale farmers who will benefit from this programme. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Nauwat has raised a very important point. Can we know the connection fee the farmers are required to pay? 

4.28
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The report clearly observes that this loan is highly concessional. It is these lenient terms that a concessional loan provides, like extending the grace periods that have caused the debt portfolio of our country to skyrocket.

This comes with attraction of very high commitment fees. This House would have even done a good service, if the line minister came up with a comprehensive report on the country’s loan portfolio, given the devastating effects of COVID-19 now on the economy, before we would go for these loans.

Madam Speaker, this $169.2 million is a huge loan. Well, it could be justified because of mitigation, adaptation and resilience drive but why can’t the line ministries including the Ministry of Water and Environment come up with a smart clean energy measures that would help this country recover from the effects of global warming and climate change rather than going for these huge loans?

I take issue with the beneficiaries of this loan that are mentioned; Isingiro and others. They are already beneficiaries of other huge funds like water for production. Why would you fund these districts that have benefitted from such funds? Use the funds they are getting from water for production to improve on irrigation in their areas.

The other fundamental question I would like to ask is, why are some parts of this country, especially the eastern region marginalised when it comes to issues of water? Are they not irrigable? Even if there are some like Bugisu, which have very complicated terrain, these areas would still be beneficiaries of such funds for irrigation. They are left out. In fact, this loan is lopsided. It is paying more attention to districts, which are already benefiting from funds for water production. I beg to submit.

4.32
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the work done. 

I listened to the objectives of this project, for which this loan is being requested for, and I support the committee for the work done. Amidst the challenges we are facing over management of our loans, this type of request, as I said, based on the objectives, will gradually lead us to our economic independency.  

Two weeks ago, the same committee presented a report about our loan status and one of the recommendations they put before us was that as a country, we should increase our revenue. To me, this project is very key. If farmers are going to be targeted, increased production is going to be realised; industrialisation and commercialisation means we are going to widen the base for collection of revenue for our country. Based on these, I support this request, as we try to find a way of managing the challenges we are going through.  

I have interest on the master plan, which they have reported would be concluded this year. I have moved to many parts of this country but I strongly feel that this country is not well zoned. In most parts of the districts, you find areas extremely divided. Some part of it could be good for growing crops while the other part is suitable for keeping animals. Therefore, I pray that this master plan envisages re-zoning our country so that enterprise selection in the country can benefit our communities.

I am also concerned about the remarks made about the capacity building, which has been incorporated here. As I support this request, I would like to seek clarification on how Government is going to ensure that there will be a trained technical team who will utilise the technologies, knowledge and build experience. How are we going to kick-off with this gap? I would like to request the Government to help us understand this. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of regional balance is key. Yesterday, we debated the same matter. I would like to, therefore, request that Government briefs us about regional balance. Otherwise, all over the country, we have water stressed areas for production. Having looked at the targeted areas, there is a question of regional balance.

Madam Speaker, I still recall that you directed this House to ensure that Government comes up with a position on the actions they will take on each of these challenges we are facing. However, as we receive this request, that report has not been given to the House. I am, therefore, reminding those concerned that we should be given that report so that Government convinces us on their actions to improve the management of our loans.

On the issue of environment, I think the primary role depends on us. The issue of protection of our forest reserves is a primary role of everyone, which does not require us to borrow loans. All over the country, people are crying and this destruction is not done by small people. I think we need assurance and enforcement to ensure that all our forest reserves are protected instead of advocating for de-gazettement.

Madam Speaker, many of the people advocating for de-gazettement are taking advantage because we are very lenient with encroachers. 

I also request, based on yesterday’s discussions, that involvement of members of Parliament should be entrenched in this project if it is to take off and achieve its objectives. Many of our colleagues are often left out. As members of Parliament, we have not been involved in the issues of the establishment of the SACCOS. Adjumani District is benefitting, but I do not think that any of my colleagues were involved in this Emyooga Programme. 

Our involvement will eradicate much of the issues that we are facing in terms of the project taking off and its effectiveness and efficiency. 

Therefore, I propose that the leaders, right from the local level up to national level, are involved in this big project so that we achieve what we need. Thank you. 

4.39
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you. I also thank the committee for the report. The committee raises a critical concern on the low absorption capacity in the water and environment sector and notes that a number of loans within this sector are performing poorly. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should first ensure that the inefficiencies within the sector are mitigated before we approve this loan. This is a recommendation on page 19.

I would like to draw the attention of the House to another loan, which we approved on 17 September 2019. The House approved an irrigation loan under the project called, “The Development of Solar Powered Irrigation and Water Supply System Project”. To date, not even one shilling has been absorbed out of that loan and yet, it is an irrigation loan. 

I remember when Members raised issues about this loan, the Ministry of Water and Environment came up with a list of beneficiary districts and nearly every district was supposed to benefit from this project. However, the Ministry of Water and Environment is asking for another irrigation loan, while they are stuck with an irrigation loan, which has not yet even taken off. 

I wonder whether this House would be just to give this ministry more money when they are sitting on a loan that they have not even started to utilise. 

This is an issue that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development needs to help us on because the committee is saying before we give the ministry money, we need to make sure that we mitigate the challenges in that sector because already, there is a loan that we approved last year to the tune of $112 million, which they have not used. It is at zero absorption rate. 

The other issue that I need to raise is about the project beneficiaries. I am happy that Tororo is one of the beneficiary districts but each time we talk about irrigation projects, for instance in Tororo, they talk about the same project - the Amagoro Irrigation Project. This is an existing project.

The last time they asked for the other irrigation loan, they said they were going to extend work on that irrigation scheme. They are now asking for another loan and the only beneficiary scheme they are talking about is an existing irrigation scheme. The question then is, what exactly is this loan going to fund? They are not telling us any project that they are going to fund. 

It would appear – I am not well conversant with what is in the other areas like Kanungu. It could even be an existing project because the one in Amagoro, Tororo is an already existing project. Even the last funds we approved here were supposed to go to the same project. Therefore, we need a clarification on that. 

If we are to borrow money, must we borrow money to go into funding an already existing project? Are there no other projects that can be funded? If we are talking about irrigation systems in the country; can’t we go to other areas that are not covered, even if in Tororo itself? It is not only Amagoro, which is water stressed or that needs irrigation systems. 

This poses a very serious question. Is this money we are borrowing going to be put to effective use or we are just using existing projects as a cover-up to get a loan, which may actually be diverted to something else? Otherwise, why would a ministry come and ask for a loan and say the beneficiary is an existing irrigation project? This raises a very serious question and we need an answer. Otherwise, I have no problem with –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank hon. Othieno for giving way. Is it a must that we approve every loan which comes here? What hon. Othieno has raised is serious. One time I asked – Kakungulu came to Eastern Uganda; he never borrowed money to plant mvule trees but the trees were planted. 

If Government is serious on climate change, it could have a better method of telling all of us what to do but not to borrow on everything. I would like to seek clarification from hon. Othieno whether it is necessary that we should borrow for the sake or we can reject this loan. 

MR OTHIENO: Thank you. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the point I am raising here is that as far as I am concerned, the ministry is saying they want to borrow money to fund Amagoro Irrigation Project. That project, however, is already being funded because it is an existing one. 

So, if the issue is to borrow money to fund an existing irrigation project, then we do not need to borrow money. That is the plain language I am using. There is exactly no beneficiary project in this loan. If it is there, let them tell us. What they are showing us is an existing irrigation project. This is what we call double accountability. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a pity that the Ministry of Water and Environment is not interested in what is going on in this House. This matter has been on the Order Paper since last week. There is, however, something fundamental. The committee interacted with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Water and Environment only. They did not interact with the other stakeholders; the farmers. 

On page 14, there are serious proposals. For instance, the ministry is saying that farmers’ contribution will be key in ensuring ownership and sustainability of irrigation development and leverage public funds to speed up irrigation. The farmers will have to pay a connection fee. I do not know how much the connection fee is. They will also have to pay a volumetric water fee. They will have to construct piped water networks underground. For on-farm equipment, the farmers will be required to contribute to its purchase. What is this on-farm equipment?

I would have wanted to know the views of the farmers on these proposals. Are they ready to pay? How much are they going to pay? They were not consulted. 

In the circumstance, since the minister is not even here to answer our questions, we defer approval of this loan. It is important that the minister brings the master plan, which is under process, so that we look at it and then we can incorporate this loan. Thank you. (Applause)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS [SDR] 72.7 MILLION (EQUIVALENT TO $99.8 MILLION) ADDITIONAL FUNDING FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION [IDA] OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE COMPETITIVENESS AND ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (CEDP-AF)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Competitiveness is not bad but competing through borrowing is very dangerous. Yesterday, you ruled that before we deal with another loan - because I thought that this one had something – they should update us on what the road sector in this country has done. We all agreed that there will be no more loan requests on the Order Paper until we have got what the Ministry of Works and Transport was supposed to do. 

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that this country also becomes serious? We are borrowing every day for competitiveness. Isn’t that very dangerous? And so, isn’t it procedurally right that the ruling you made yesterday be first honoured before we move ahead? 

THE SPEAKER: I state that there should be no more road loan requests until the plan for the whole country has come. However, this is already on the Order Paper.  

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling to defer the loan on the Ministry of Water and Environment. We are going to work with the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Committee on National Economy to make those clarifications that have been raised by Members. 

It will be better for us to appear on the Order Paper when are ready to make those arguments for Members to appreciate. Some of the issues that Members have raised are amazing; for example, if a Member from a particular area talks about a project that does not exist in that area, then that raises questions on the intentions of that Member’s argument. If I say, this project exists in Kabale and you are borrowing more money for it, when the project is not there, that really – (Laughter) - we do not want to embarrass our colleagues here to know whether they have been to that area or not. Anyhow, we shall make those clarifications. 

However, I rose on a procedural issue because several times, when we bring here a project for approval, Members ask for plans and policies yet in many cases, these policies and plans have been laid here. 

Madam Speaker, we would expect that when a committee report says this project is consistent with the National Development Plan that has been approved by this House, then, that would ease our work.  

Perhaps we need to have a separate sitting or a number of sittings to go through each sector so that we have a plan for every sector appreciated by Members. That will help us so that when we bring a loan request to support that plan, it is straight forward and that will help Members to keep asking the same questions all the time. For example, on the question of our debt sustainability, for every loan that we present here, the report of the committee talks about debt sustainability but Members will still ask the same question. 

I would like to ask that you guide us so that we are really in harmony with the House to process things properly. This is because at the end of the day, this is to support the development and the economy of our country. We would like everybody to be at peace when we are making such decisions. 

Can we have a procedure where you can help us, as Government? For example, should we, every time we come here, carry a plan to every sector or policy so that we are all at peace? We do not want to seem like we are doing something contrary to what the House would like us to do. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the problem is that we did not have time to do justice to the National Development Plan. It was brought here; stampeded and brought in the night to be cleared the following day. I do not think people actually had time to appreciate what is in it. When you also do not do your work, come late yet you have a deadline and must deliver on the deadline, it is a problem for us. 

I think we need to find time to look at the NDP. It could take one or two sittings to look at it but it will help bring everybody on board. Thank you. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, I am also not happy when we borrow money for something that is not very important. This loan on enterprise development and competitiveness is actually the very loan that this Parliament should approve. 

This is because we are saying that we need to increase our export so that we get more foreign exchange and we will not do it if our people are not empowered, especially the private sector, to compete locally and internationally. That is the purpose of this loan, Madam Speaker. 

We can stop borrowing for other things but we cannot stop borrowing to empower the private sector to compete locally and internationally. Our problem of export has been because our –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I always do not want to raise a point of order against hon. Okot-Ogong because he is my big brother. However, we have borrowed a lot of money under competitiveness. I wish you had come here to talk about it. 

If you would like to know how much we borrow, it is $ 72 million and if you ask hon. Bahati, he will agree on that. We borrowed $ 60 million to also deal with the one of building the Crested Crane Hotel in Jinja but up to now, there is nothing much on the ground; it has been many years.
 
Madam Speaker, we even borrowed money to make the charcoal stoves that the people wanted. Hon. Bahati knows about it. The project should have ended in 2016 but it is being extended yet we have borrowed almost 50 million for it. If you asked a Member of Parliament here about the charcoal stoves, he will not tell you anything about it. 

Is hon. Okot-Ogong in order to come and say this loan is for competitiveness yet we have already put money in the competitiveness sector and we have never even received a report about it? He has said that this should have been borrowed yesterday but is he in order to come and tell us that or does he just want us to borrow money for the sake of other people to eat?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know who can give us a report on the other steady programmes. I think we all deserve to know what happened to the others before we start borrowing. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, I think that is a very important point raised by my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi; that Parliament needs information about the money that we borrowed previously. 

I am very informed that that money was put to proper use. We can now task the ministers in trade or finance to come with a report stating how the money was utilised as well as its impact. That would be appropriate for the honourable member to get information so that he is empowered to say that I am not in order. Nonetheless, I do not think you can say that when you do not have proper information from the ministry. 

I propose that we get the proper report on the money that was disbursed for competitiveness and the private sector development so that Parliament can approve this loan on the basis of knowledge. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we owe it to the country to make decisions based on information. 

4.57
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I would like to say that, indeed, you are right to mention that the farmers were not consulted. My colleagues are also right to say that money was borrowed but not utilised. 

However, it is also true that money borrowed is like people going to hospital when they are sick. So, must you wait for people admitted in hospital to be cured before you admit more people? This is not possible. These sick people will continue to get treatment as you admit more sick people because they are suffering from different diseases.

When money is borrowed and not utilised, the specific ministers must be asked why that is so but not the finance ministry. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not going to be responsible for the failure of ministers to implement their duties. 

The money from the International Development Agency is competed for by whole world. In Washington, you find the whole world. When we fail to borrow from them – and the terms are concessional; I do not think we would be doing a good service to the country.

This is not to say that you should not ask what happened. You should ask but ask the right people, consult the right people but do not block the Ministry of Finance from borrowing. If they do not borrow, others will borrow.

Yesterday, I did not have the opportunity but I was a bit disappointed when I realised that people were saying that this road is not in their constituency and yet, Uganda is one. If this road is done today, it will not be done again and then the next will be yours.

Our attitude is not good. Madam Speaker, I appeal that these ministers should bring information and this money should be borrowed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I think it is appropriate for us to get information. We are not refusing but we are just saying that give us information about how the other loans are performing and then, we shall give you more money.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to request for guidance because the Prime Minister has spoken and he spoke very well. However, we are normally comfortable when the Prime Minister is here because he is the one who supervises the work and the operations of the ministers.

When the Prime Minister stands on the Floor of Parliament and directs that we should ensure that the ministers come to us and report, it means that he has abdicated his duties. What is his role? Isn’t it to supervise them?

Secondly, let these people be kind to you and us because before the minister can justify a loan on the Floor of Parliament, he must first get the line minister to come up with all the details that are required by Parliament.

Madam Speaker, in Lango, they say that a sheep does not make so much trouble like a goat when it is being slaughtered but the sheep will die with its eye fixed on the one who has cut the neck and not the one who ordered for the slaughter. Therefore, as Parliament, we look at the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because he is the one who is always coming for loans.

Therefore, when you come, we are looking at you. You must come with all the details and if you do not, you are the one who is slaughtering us; our eyes are on you.

I am really disappointed that the Prime Minister is also lamenting like us, which means he is not effectively supervising the ministers and I request him to play his effective role. That is why he is the Prime Minister; it is a very powerful position –(Interruption)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Indeed, I am the First Deputy Prime Minister; that is a fact and whether I attend Cabinet or not, I am still the Prime Minister. I want to inform the House of something that you know. Before this loan comes here, we approve it in Cabinet –(Interjections)– yes, I have not lamented here. I have informed you that if we do not borrow, it does not matter but we would be helping other people to borrow from Washington.

I also said that if somebody is sick and admitted, then you come here and say, “do not admit more sick people because the others have not recovered, it would be a wrong policy.” (Laughter) I said that and I did not lament.

I said, continue admitting sick people as others recover; that is what I said and now, you are twisting it. I have never lamented. I am still the First Deputy Prime Minister until otherwise.

I also said that this House should ask the minister who has failed to implement but not finance - (Interruption)

MR NSEREKO:  The problem is with the doctor being a cannibal. Therefore, giving our patients to a cannibal who eats his own patients –(Interruption)

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, on page 10 of the report, there is a component where we have captured the progress of the first parent Competitive Enterprise Development Loan. It goes up to page 13 and we have highlighted all the challenges. I do not know whether we could go back again to process another report because it is captured here from page 10 to 13.

THE SPEAKER: But you had not -

MR WAMAKUYU: Yes, we had not presented but Members raised an issue.

THE SPEAKER: Let us receive it and then take a decision.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. Now that we are talking about it, we have Project I and before we go to Project II, we need to evaluate Project I.  

I would want that the chairperson of the committee first tells us why he wants a second one before the first one has been completed.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, he had not yet presented but he says that he has information on that area. Let us listen to him and see how the sector performed on the first one.

5.06
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights 72.2 million equivalent to $99.8 million additional financing from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project. 

Before I proceed, I beg to lay;

    1. The report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal to borrow $ 99.8 million additional financing from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project (CEDP-AF).
    2. A brief to Parliament. 
    3. H.E the President’s approval of the project.
    4. A Certificate of Financial Implication confirming Government counterpart funding.
    5. A clearance letter by the National Planning Authority.
    6. A Certificate of approval of environmental impact assessment by NEMA -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this is a serious issue. I rarely like to raise such procedural issues but I have counted in the House; on that side, there are six Members and on this side, we are about 10 Members, totalling 16 Members. [HON. MEMBER: “COVID-19.”] No, the Speaker is very good; she has even given us chairs up to the parking.

Madam Speaker, is it competitive enough for us to have such a competitive loan when we are uncompetitive in the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sure that even the competitive people, who are here, can listen. Let us hear the report.

MR WAMAKUYU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the ruling. 

    7. The financing agreement between the Republic Uganda and the International Development Association on the financing of the project.
    8. Project proposed additional credit.
    9. Project monitoring proposal for the implementation of the status of CEDP-AF, March 2019.
    10. Summary of proposed construction of the Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute in Jinja, phase one.
    11. Report on the progress of the construction of the Uganda Business Facilitation Centre. 
    12. The minutes of the committee. 

I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, this request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 22 April 2020 and accordingly, referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration.

We held meetings and reviewed the following documents:

    1. A brief on the loan request by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
    2. Draft agreements. 
    3. World Bank project. 
    4. Appraisal document. 
    5. Report on cumulative status of implementation of Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Projects since its inception. I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi should listen to this. (June 2014 to October 20l9) 
    6. The cumulative progress report, from June 2014 to October 2019.
    7.  The NEMA certificate for approval.
    8. The environmental impact assessment report for the proposed development of the tourism circuit on Lake Victoria, capacity building and others – 

THE SPEAKER: May be, they can read those.

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, on page 3, the committee made a field visit. We toured the Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute located in – there is a small correction I would like to make there, it is not Jinja Municipality but Jinja City, Jinja District.

Background 

An economy cannot thrive without a healthy private sector. When local businesses flourish, they create jobs and generate income that can be spent and invested domestically. Tackling the challenges of a weak private sector leads to strong and competitive micro, small and medium enterprises, increased proportion and value of public contracts and sub-contracts that are awarded to local firms, and increased volume of private sector investment in key growth areas. Members, I think you can read the background. 

Alignment of the project development goals with SDG

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development contains land-related targets and indicators under SDGs 1, 2, 5, 11 and 15, which this project is aligned to. Government and stakeholders are committed to fully implementing the SDGs and to monitoring the land related indicators, in order to promote responsible land governance and usage. Land is a significant resource, both cross cutting and critical to achieving the SDGs. 

When we move down to Table 1, disbursement performance under the first project as of 31 December 2019; under the same project - Kampala Institutional and Infrastructural Development Project Phase 2; it was approved on 19 December 2013. The amount committed is $ 100 million. The amount disbursed was $ 85.24 million, amount not utilised is $ 14.76 million and the percentage is 85.24 per cent. The initial completion was 31 March 2019.

The parent Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project (CEDP) was a five-year project that was supporting reforms geared towards improving the competitiveness of Uganda by improving the business environment, lowering the cost of doing business and improving competitiveness of selected high impact sectors. 
 
The total cost of the parent project was $ 102.5 million. The project was financed by $ 100 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group. The Government of Uganda (GOU) financing contribution to the project was $ 2.5 million. The project was approved by the World Bank Board on 9 May 20l3 and was subsequently approved by Parliament on l9 December 2013. The project became effective on 6 June 2014. Operations effectively commenced on 2 July 2014. 

The components are in Table 2.

    1. Land administration reform is $ 54 million.
    2. Business registration and business licencing reforms is $ 10 million.
    3.  Tourism competitiveness development is $ 25 million.
    4. Matching grant facility is $ 8 million.
    5. Project implementation unit is $ 5.5 million of which the IDA group contributed $3 million and the Government of Uganda contributed $ 2.5 million.

The objectives of the first project were implementation of business environment reforms including land administration reforms, development of priority productive and service sectors, and many others. 

According to the World Bank, the parent competitiveness and enterprise development project implementation has progressed well. Overall project development objective and achievement is rated moderately satisfactory - according to the World Bank. They gave examples like the:
 
    1. Construction of the Hotel and Tourism Training Institute, where construction commenced in April 2018 and works are at 70 per cent completion as at February 2020.

    2. Construction of 10 lands ministry zonal offices where physical construction was completed.

    3. Construction of the Uganda Business Facilitation Centre Block, which started in January 2018 to house three government institutions, that is, the Capital Markets Authority, the Uganda Investment Authority and the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. These works are at 60 per cent completion as at February 2020. This block is in Kololo.

    4. The report says that the current competitiveness and development projects have achieved most of their targets on five out of the six project development objective indicators as at February 2020.

    5. The number of days needed to register land has reduced from 52 in 2010, to 25 days in 2019.

    6. Reducing the number of days needed to register a business from 33 days in 2010 to just one day in 2019, and decreasing the cost to register a business as a percentage of income per capita from 76.7 per cent in 2010 to 33.6 per cent in 2019.

    7. Increasing tourism arrivals by almost 60 per cent from 945,000 tourists in 2010 to 1,505,000 in 2019.

    8. There has also been an increase in employment by almost 300 per cent in the tourism sector from 225,300 people in 2010 to 667,500 people in 2019.

    9. Increasing export of non-traditional products by 10.7 per cent compared to a target of 10 per cent.

    10. Madam speaker, the project also registered the following positive results: 

    a) There was a reduction in the time needed to process a mortgage from 28 days to 3 days. 
    b) Reduced the period for title search from 50 days to one day. 
    c) Increased Government land revenue collected from $ 3 million to $ 30 million per year from 2013 to 2019. 
    d) The total non-tax revenue collected by the Land Information System is $ 180 million.
    e) Under business registration, the Government has received non-tax revenue of $ 40 million between the financial years 2013/14 and 2016/17. 
    f) The tourism revenue has also increased up to $ 1.4 billion in 2017 and tourist arrivals in national parks were 267,000 people.

Under the matching grant facility, 248 small and medium enterprises have been supported with about 32 per cent of the enterprises in the tourism sector covering 288,000 beneficiaries out of which 51 per cent are women.

There is an increase in the non-traditional exports among the micro, small and medium-term enterprises covered by the project. The target is 10 per cent. It must be noted that at least 2,000 jobs have been created among the beneficiaries (SMEs).

The challenges 

The first challenge that the project had is the exchange rate fluctuations.

THE SPEAKER: Can I suggest that you just read the headings of the challenges?

MR WAMAKUYU: There was limited capacity at the implementing agencies. They had issues. 
There were challenges with procurement and contract management. Delayed enactment of key legislation.

On page 14, the project will increase agricultural investment and productivity from the land tenure with 80 per cent of the population relying on agriculture for income. 

Reduction in the costs to the poor when it comes to public land acquisition and resettlement processes.

Private investment decisions becoming more long-term and sustainable which has been protected through ownership registration.

Members can read 7.3.

In the space of project beneficiaries (7.5), on page 16; this talks about the additional funding.

Project distribution and component runs from page 16.

Table 5: Land administration will take $ 53.7 million. Items are covered there. Tourism products and competitiveness development shall take 43.1 per cent. The details are there. 

Project implementation will take $ 3 million and the details are there on page 18.

Regarding project financing, the total cost of the Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project (CEDP), additional financing is estimated at $ 100.8 million as shown in the table.

Table 6 on page 20 shows how the money will be divided. 

Now, when we go to the loan terms, the amount is $ 99.8 million, equivalent to SDR 72.7 Million. The maturity period is 38 years, the grace period is six years. Service charge is 0.7 per cent on withdrawn credit balance and there is a commitment fee of 0.5 on unwithdrawn financing balances. Those are the conditions for the loan and Members can read them. 

Financing Conditionality

This loan has a grant element of 62 percent and therefore it is highly concessional. 

Budget implication 

The project is part of the approved Public Investment Plan for Financial Year 2019/2020-FY 2021/2022 (Project Code 1289 under Votes 008 and 012) with an approved estimate provision of Shs 56.11 billion as external financing for the project in the FY 2019/2020. 

The amount is also included in the current budget with the total amount of Shs 56.08 billion also provided and the counterpart funding.

Economic returns of the project

The land administration reforms; that one, definitely once it is streamlined, it will help. 

Project implementation arrangements

The project will be under the Private Sector Foundation Uganda (PSFU) and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MoLHUD). They are the implementing agency. 

Loan and current debt situation of the country

Like I said earlier, certainly, it will increase the debt stock but we are within the threshold. 

Under observations and recommendations, it is almost the same story; low absorption of funds was noted like in the previous project. The absorption of funds improved during the financial year due to improvement in expenditure majorly arising from construction of the dams but we still have challenges.

Our recommendation is that –
    i. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should ensure that inefficiencies are rectified in order to mitigate the utilisation of funds; and

    ii. The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in the Private Sector Foundation Uganda should initiate procurements in time to achieve the planned outputs and improve absorption of the disbursed project funds.

On the delayed construction works at the Uganda business facilitation centre, the committee noted that the contractor asked for more time to complete. The committee noted that the contractor had applied for another extension of time to 31 March 2021, with a cost variation of Shs 708 million due to additional costs to provide safe construction after earth collapse among others. They also encountered some challenges when trying to relocate some of the pipes for the National Water and Sewerage Corporation and other amenities.

The committee recommends that Government ensures there is always adequate project preparation for infrastructure projects to ensure that projects are delivered in a timely manner so as to minimise on cost variations.

Delays in undertaking comprehensive legal and policy reforms to facilitate the restructuring of the land Sector

The committee recommends that:

    i. Government fast-tracks the process of amending the Land Act and also provide concrete guidelines that should be followed by all stakeholders when land evictions are to be undertaken across the country.

    ii. Government strengthens the capacity of land management institutions including dispute resolution, documentation, information storage and retrieval, and valuation, in order to address land security, land related disputes, to prevent chaotic development in the country and ensuring social equity.

High cost of land transactions

Madam Speaker, I would like to read this to Members because some of them have been cheated.

The committee observed that despite the decentralisation of land registration across the country, through the creation of ministry zonal offices, land transactions are often braced with very high transaction costs. 

The committee established from the Jinja Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development Zonal Office that the official fees of registering land after all requirements have been met was Shs 70,000 of which, Shs 50,000 fees is payable to Government and Shs 20,000 to the district. This is exclusive of the 1.5 per cent stamp duty paid to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) that is based on the valuation when transferring land.

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, however, attributed this to processes beyond the scope of the ministry such as land surveying, which is done by private land surveyors and the costs accrued from the local government land management institutions or area land committees, district land boards and physical planning committees. The ministry has no control over these agencies and those are areas, which make the cost high. 

The committee recommends that:

    1. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development scales up efforts to reduce the costs of land registration in the country by ridding the system of unnecessary bureaucracies to ensure timely issuance of titles and mitigate against corruption. In addition, the ministry engages the relevant land structures at district level to harmonise the fee for registration of titles.

    2. Government fast-tracks the presentation of the Real Estate Agents Bill, 2020 to Parliament.

    3. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development together with the Surveyors’ Registration Board explore the review of the Surveyors Registration Act in order to strengthen the regulation of land surveyors especially when it comes to the pricing of professional fees, including a requirement for inspection and calibration of surveying equipment.

    4. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, together with the Surveyors Registration Board, should sensitize the masses about the official fees that should be paid for land registration.

Communication strategy of ongoing reforms in the lands sub-sector

The committee recommends that Government considers the critical importance of strategic communication and adopting policies geared towards Government commitment to protect land rights. Information, education and communication campaigns should be carried out throughout the project life cycle. It is important that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development ensures that communication at all levels is sustained. This will see the land reform component successfully implemented. 

Overlapping and duplication of land titles

We noted that and recommend that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development expedites the process of cleaning up overlapping and duplicated titles.

There is need to shorten the time taken to register land. Under this, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development ensures that during the implementation of the second phase of this project, the time taken to register land is reduced further from 21 working days to about five working days to make the country more competitive as an investment destination.

Promotion and marketing of domestic tourism

The committee noted this and recommends that amidst challenges of COVID-19, the Uganda Tourism Board (UTB) embarks on marketing of domestic tourism and works with sector players to develop local tourism packages and products.

The Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (UHTTI)

The committee visited the Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute in Jinja and noted that work is going on well. 

The committee recommends that:

        a. The Ministry of Wildlife and Antiquities fast-tracks the development of the Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Act, 2015 Regulations.

        b. Government provides the Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute with adequate funds to acquire appropriate modern training equipment.

We also noted the impact of COVID-19 on the tourism sector and the committee recommends that:

    i. Government provides adequate funds to the Uganda Tourism Board for aggressive marketing. The funds should be used in developing good quality materials and stories to encourage Ugandans to visit their heritage and also entice foreigners to visit Uganda. 

    ii. Government considers providing support to tourism firms or business to reorganise their operations, develop marketing and business plans, retrain workers and improve content on their websites. This will put these businesses at an early advantage of revival when the sector re-opens.

Establishment of regional wildlife conservation and education centres

We also noted that and the committee recommends that Government supports this initiative by providing the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre (UWEC) with adequate financial support and also conducts feasibility studies for other regional Wildlife Conservation and Education Centres in order to promote domestic tourism.

Addressing Human-Wildlife Conflict 

The committee recommends that: 

    i) The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities together with the Uganda Wildlife Authority, as a matter of urgency, should ensure the safety of communities neighbouring tourism sites, especially those neighbouring national parks.

    ii) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development ensures that adequate resources are provided under the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, and the Uganda Wildlife Authority to address the human-wildlife conflict. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights (SDR) of 72.7 million (equivalent to $99.8 million) as additional financing from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to finance the Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project (CEDP-AF), be approved, subject to the recommendations herein. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the members of the Committee on National Economy. Honourable members, this matter involves the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and also the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, both of whom I do not see here. So, debate will be deferred until those ministers are present to give us answers.

I want the chairperson of the committee, however, to note something on absorption on page 25. It is clear that the increase in absorption was because of infrastructure. It means it is not going to the people. It went up because of infrastructure. So, there must be something we need to do about how the people can access this fund. For instance, I have been trying to get money from the Private Sector Foundation for my people but I have failed. I called them, we had meetings – There must be a problem.

Anyway, honourable members, I think we leave this –

5.40
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you. There are two important sectors this particular report talks about, which we need the minister to think about. 

The first one is on tourism. Unless we open our international airport, we are wasting time talking about tourism because domestic tourism here is so minimal. Most of the hotels’ occupancy rates are as low as 10 per cent and yet before COVID-19, most of our hotels would have occupancy rates between 60 to 80 per cent. A place like Kisoro would get two daily flights from Masai Mara National Reserve through Entebbe, with tourists. Kihihi Airstrip would get around five flights every day.

Therefore, honourable minister, especially the Government Chief Whip, should think about opening our airport if we are to get back to business. 

Two, on the question of land reforms and land administration, although the report is positive on it, we need to see how the land reform and land administration will help us in productivity. One thing I have learned during COVID-19 is that a big percentage of the beans we consume in Uganda is imported from Rwanda and Malawi. Groundnut is imported from Malawi and 80 per cent of our rice is imported from Tanzania. Peas is imported from Kenya and Canada. The only things we produce here are maize and bananas. So, how are we going to increase productivity vis-à-vis the land reform?

Lastly, on the businesses that are stifling - not only because of COVID-19 but others, Government has decided to stifle the Mining Sector that has been employing over 50,000 people, especially artisanal miners. The Government is only allowing gold mining, which is refined by one person who does not even pay taxes but other minerals are at a halt. Artisanal miners are suffering and yet you have given licenses and rights. So, how are you going to help businesses when you, yourselves, are stifling them?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, last Monday when we were in Cabinet, a committee was formed to discuss the possibility of opening Entebbe International Airport for tourism. The committee was put under my chairmanship. Those who saw that briefing - The Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance actually said it. 

The whole of this morning before I came here, we were in the same meeting. We have had a discussion and our report will be ready tomorrow to be forwarded to the COVID-19 National Taskforce, under the Prime Minister. 

Therefore, this idea is already in the Government’s pipeline. Should our recommendations be accepted – the whole thing is centred on how we open the airport without risking our people. A lot of SOPs are being done from different sections and you will hear very soon that the airport is opened for tourism after meeting all the requirements. That is the information I think I should share. 

5.43
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you. I do not know whether we will be here next week, given that the ground is also going - However, part of this loan, especially on tourism, is going to finance the second phase of the old Crested Crane Hotel and the Uganda Tourism and Hotel Institute’s school of excellence, which is the Kenya Utali College of Uganda. 

The first loan is for finishing the hotel. In fact, the Principal of the institute who we found there when we visited Kagulu Hill and then Bishop Hannington’s place, said she was worried that they are finishing the hotel and yet the loan for the training school has not yet been passed. 

So, we were worried because the first loan delayed. There are so many delays in that construction; ROKO Construction Limited had so many delays. 

They wanted us, this time round, to expedite this loan so that the school is built very fast. So, I do not know the assurance that the minister has that on Tuesday, we will pass this loan to the extent that they start – Also, the building in Kololo; the one-stop centre, has to be operationalised during this second phase of the loan. 

These are the two important things that must be helped by this loan. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: All we want is for the sector ministers to come and be able to answer questions from the Members as they seek clarification. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development only requests for the loan but the real users are the two ministers I have talked about. 

So, House –

5.43
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, you are aware that we are more passionate about the Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute. When they brought the first loan of competitiveness, they gave us a timeline that the construction of the training school would take a very short time. That was the sweetener which made that loan pass very fast.

As we speak, - I am happy the chairperson of the committee has talked but I wish he had gone to Jinja. If you went to the hotel, even the old one is still in bad state. We had thought that the money we were going to get was to first clean up the old hotel and then we continue – First of all, the building of the new hotel is at a slow pace; the old one is in bad state. They are saying the money is going to work on Crested Crane Hotel. This is bad.

I would like to make a proposal to the chairperson of the committee who has brought this report that he comes here on Tuesday with pictures of the Crested Crane Hotel. If possible, come and put them on a project so that we see what you have told us here. 
 
Secondly, you mentioned –(Interruption)

MR WAMUKUYU: We visited that area and it is true that the old hotel is in a sorry state. The information we got is that the building has been condemned and they want to demolish it. Therefore, the purpose of this money is to put a new one. When I bring the pictures, I will show you the old hotel that has been condemned. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is an opportunity. Bring pictures of the condemned building and show us what they have done on the new one. Even the old one has better material for construction. There was a report that said that that building has another 49 years to go; however, you have said that you have condemned it. Why do you want to break a good building for the sake of it? 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you have raised here a very important issue and we are waiting for the ministers on Tuesday. You said that you have tried to get something and failed; - the Speaker. If you consider the hierarchy in Uganda, you start with the President, then the Vice President followed by the Speaker. If the Speaker of Uganda can fail to get information, what of hon. Mudimi here? They are just coming here to sweeten us - what about a villager? 

This law is for a few people. The reason you see us raising all these issues is because we are aware of what happens to these loans. When we say, “Aye”, they say, a deal has been sealed. On this one - because some of us are also in the tourism sector - it is a matter of life and death. Therefore, let us wait for one another on Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Let the ministers come because we need answers. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 5.48 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 11 August 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 
