Tuesday, 9 August 2005

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you but in particular there are a number of faces that have been absent for quite some time. I also welcome you back. I do not have to mention them. (Laughter) You are welcome.  

Honourable members, yesterday we received the sad news of the demise of a former Minister of Internal Affairs, John Luwuliza Kirunda, who died in Zimbabwe. This sad news was passed on to us by hon. Katuntu but I was shocked and maybe most of you were shocked to see today one of the local newspapers saying that hon. Katuntu said hon. Kivejinja of the NRM Secretariat died. This was very shocking. I think we need to correct this. Nobody mentioned this and we have not heard anything about this. So, it was a bit unfortunate that maybe because of the name Kirunda, you know they are related, but nobody said he has been flown from India. It is an error, which should be corrected.

I am adjusting the Order Paper to allow the minister to move a motion because of the good news you heard about Dorcus Inzikuru. The hon. Member of Parliament and minister representing the county from where this great lady comes from wants to officially make a statement. (Applause) So, adjust it so that before we get the ministerial statement we get this particular matter officially communicated to us.

DR EPETAIT: Point of clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Clarification on what I have communicated? Yes, what is it?

DR EPETAIT: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I remember on Wednesday last week we raised a matter regarding remuneration of the auxiliary forces and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The minister is going to make a statement on that.

DR EPETAIT: It was set for Tuesday and we do not see it on the Order Paper so we wonder when that statement would come up.

THE SPEAKER: I have said the minister is going to make a statement.

3.02
MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU (Bukoto County East, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I am extremely impressed by your earlier communication concerning a report, which came up in the Red Pepper, which obviously was not correct. I have this question, which has been disturbing me also being provoked from the statement you have made regarding a report in the Weekly Observer of last week where it was alleged that a Member of Parliament from Bukoto, without saying, South, West or East, was sexually involved with one officer, in his office. I think this is a very important issue and I need to correct this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I want to advise you that you should have shock absorbers.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Objection, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am not talking about you. I am saying sometimes it is better to ignore some of these things. That is the shock absorber I am talking about. Now you are provoked by what you saw but imagine Bukoto was at one time represented by hon. Ssendaula and I took part of his constituency and, therefore, if they say Bukoto, how many of us from Bukoto are going to make a statement to counter that one? I advise you, unless you think the report zeroed on you, you ignore, keep quiet and proceed.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Just one more, excuse me! Mr Speaker, allow me because –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If you had wanted to make a statement you should have come to see me and I would have advised you but if you insist on making a statement, come and see me tomorrow.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your guidance on two procedural matters. One, I note with great concern that we are extremely busy trying to complete the amendments on the Constitution but at the same time we had some outstanding issues, which came before we embarked on this amendment process yet some of us believe they are important. Do we plan in the near future to accommodate some of these concerns, such as questions to the ministers?

THE SPEAKER: You set up a standing committee, the Business Committee. It is this Business Committee that determines which business to deal with. However, of course with one overriding condition that government business is given priority, at one time the Business Committee sat and considered a number of items we had, including the mandatory constitutional programme, such as the State of the Nation Address, the Budget and the Constitution. In its wisdom the committee decided to suspend some of these items so that we complete the constitutional amendment Bills, which I had intended to complete this week but because of the events that you know, the death of our people, this and the other, we may not be able to do that. 

After that the Business Committee will sit and consider even the questions addressed to the ministers so that we see how we handle them. Rest assured, your interests have been catered for.

MR SITENDA SEBALU: Mr Speaker, last week you did direct that the Minister of Health would give a statement.

THE SPEAKER: I am aware of that and the Minister of Health was supposed to make a statement yesterday, Minister of Local Government in collaboration maybe with the Ministry of Health because what you asked was on Kampala City Council, which falls under the jurisdiction or schedule of the Ministry of Local Government. But the Minister of Local Government definitely is aware of this. He came yesterday and told me he was not in position to make the statement yesterday or today but he is conscious of it and he is going to make that statement very soon.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.07
MR ANDRUALE AWUZU (Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard some people saying, “Why does the Minister of Sports not do this?”  But I am a Member of Parliament for Vurra constituency and in my own right I can make a statement on this –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I am aware of the great achievement of our daughter who has brought us a gold medal from Finland, but I am thinking that this is an act of such national importance that the whole Government through a responsible Minister of Sports should come with a proper statement. This is not a village statement. It is not a village activity where a village chief comes and makes a statement. So, I am just wondering. It is not proper.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I entirely disagree with you. Any Member of Parliament is free to bring any motion on any matter and the minister is free to do so as a Member of Parliament. You are free and any other member, including the minister, to do this, but the request came from him. He is free to make it. Proceed.

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that ruling. I would also like to inform the honourable members that I consulted with my colleague, the minister who is here and he has no objection.  

I rise to move a motion requesting this august House to recognise Dorcus Inzikuru a young lady of remarkable talent who made history for Uganda by winning a gold medal at the 10th World Athletics Championship, in the 3,000 metres steeple chase final in Helsinki.  

Inzikuru’s gold medal comes 33 years after John Akii Bua’s gold medal at the 1972 Munich Olympics. It is the second major gold medal for Uganda at a World Athletics Championship. Inzikuru has had a meteorological rise in the world of athletics. She won her first medal in the 5,000 meters final at the World Junior Championship held in Santiago. 

Mr Speaker, you will note that in the highly competitive world of athletics to win a gold medal one must demonstrate exemplary, high standards of discipline, commitment and hard work. I pay tribute and congratulate any exemplary –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, we do not have a motion. If it is a motion, which is being moved, members should at least have the benefit of having the copy.

THE SPEAKER: Listen to him then you will determine whether it is a motion or something else. (Laughter)

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am told that the machines in our offices here are out of order and, therefore, could not produce copies of this.  

I pay tribute and congratulate an exemplary, nationalist and patriotic Ugandan lady whose remarkable achievement provides inspiration to many struggling, young athletes. It motivates many women and young girls and has provided pride and respect to Uganda as a country.  

As we celebrate this gold award, I take this opportunity to thank her parents, fellow athletes and the Government of Uganda for all the support rendered to her thus far.  

I also call upon the House to recognize, congratulate and encourage yet another Ugandan, one Boniface Kiprop, who finished fourth in the 9th 10,000 meter to excel in this athletic career.  

I take this opportunity to request the private sector and the Government to commit more funds to develop young talent and athletics in the country. Congratulations, Dorcus Inzikuru for making us feel truly and proudly Ugandans. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE, SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Honourable members, first of all I want to thank the honourable colleague for showing the spirit of supporting sport and also for joining me and the entire ministry in congratulating Inzikuru on what she achieved for this nation. 

I want to inform the honourable members that since morning I have been in consultation with the Uganda Athletics Federations and the Uganda Olympic Committee and by this evening they have even promised to get the contact for Inzikuru. We want to make such a formal statement whereby we have to appreciate as a nation what Inzikuru has done, not merely praising the space, but if possible, if Inzikuru is going to come in a few days, we want to welcome her crew from the airport as we did to that referee who participated in the world cup.  

We do not want to stop at that. I have been consulting my senior minister on what we can do as a ministry as far as Inzikuru is concerned, such a young girl, and we do not leave her like the past sports people who have died as if they have never brought medals in this country. That is why we want to take this time and I request that maybe by Thursday I will be ready with a formal statement. I thank you.

3.16
MR ABURA PIRIR (Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should know that there are many statements that can be made. There is what they call a personal statement. A member is free to make a statement of a matter of public nature and a member is free to make a motion for appreciation. So, you can determine which one the minister has made. There is no contradiction. The minister has made a statement and you are free to contribute to it.

MR ABURA: Once more I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I rise on a point of acknowledging and appreciating the victory, which the athlete by the name of Inzikuru has given to Uganda. Sports in Uganda has gone down. During the colonial time Uganda was seen as a potential country in sports. When most of our athletes who represented Uganda in the 1950s retired from the field, nobody bothered about them unlike in Kenya where when athletes achieve success in international games like Olympics, which Inzikuru has done, they are kept as coaches. In Uganda many talented athletes who retired from the track are not catered for. 

Sports now is an industry and the raw material is in the villages and schools. We should now be realistic to see that it gives an opportunity to anybody, any champion, anybody who excels – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to proceed with your contribution?

MR ABURA PIRIR: Yes, thank you, Mr Speaker. I was saying the Ministry of Education and Sports should now realise that the future of Ugandan glory in sports, in the grassroots. Our potential athletes are idle in the villages. If you recall the story of the late John Akii Bua, our hero, if it was not for somebody interested to coach him, he would not have excelled. Therefore, I would say that we are now on the world map of sports and we need to sustain this ability of earning more medals and recruiting more sportsmen in various capacities. The problem is now our poor management of sports and inadequate funding, unlike in other countries where sports is taken as an organisation from which the Government looks at as a source of income.

Mr Speaker, I appeal to the Ministry of Education and Sports to come up with a sound sporting policy to reinforce sports in Uganda. I thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of procedure –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me guide you. There is a rule 36(2), which deals with statements: “Any statement other than a personal explanation may be commented upon by other Members for a limited duration of time not exceeding thirty minutes.” 

The honourable minister made a statement on one of his constituents, Dorcus Inzikuru, for the achievement attained. So you are free to comment on this statement for a period not exceeding 30 minutes.

3.20
MR DAN KIDEGA (Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the honourable member who represents Inzikuru in this House. I too represent Inzikuru in this House. I would like to join the rest of the country to acknowledge the achievement and to also congratulate her and all the athletes upon this achievement.

Mr Speaker, while Inzikuru and her colleagues have done us proud, I am happy but also have a bit of pain in my heart. In the third year of this Parliament I hosted 15 top athletes of Uganda for a luncheon in this Parliament with permission from the Sergeant-At-Arms and the athletes communicated to me the problems that they are facing. Today, I am excited that amidst all those problems they are wining medals.  

As the minister prepares to come with a ministerial statement, there are issues that affect athletes that I pray the minister tries to highlight in his statement. One of them told me that for athletes of Uganda to go and practice in Namboole Stadium, including Inzikuru herself, they must pay some money just to enter Namboole and practice! I raised this matter with the minister at the time; I hope the current minister will give us a statement on that.

I am also aware that the Government of the time when the late Akii Bua won a gold medal did him a number of things among which were giving him a house and a precious car that used to motivate a lot of people. I am told that that car would always light with his name “Akii Bua” whenever you touched it and they even went ahead and named a road after him. I think this Movement Government can do better so I am actually waiting to hear the statement – (Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: Thank you honourable member for giving way. In 1997 when I was a Minister in charge of Primary Education with my senior colleague hon. Amanya Mushega we pulled out the late Akii Bua and did a number of things, which I cannot remember but if you check with the Ministry of Education – but I can remember one, we made him a member of the National Council of Sports and he was very happy by the time he passed away. He was no longer a poor person as he had been left to be. So when the NRM Government came to power we rehabilitated the late Akii Bua. Thank you very much.

MR KIDEGA: Thank you so much honourable minister. That is why I am so confident that you are going to do better than that.

Mr Speaker, Inzikuru is really a patriot. While I was hosting them I asked her one simple question, “You lack training facilities in this country, why don’t you relocated to another country where there are better facilities and promote your talent?”  She told me: “I love Uganda and I love my mother. I cannot go to another country.”  So, I think in this little girl there is gold, apart from the gold she has won. So we must invest and motivate her as a way of motivating other young girls and boys who are in this fraternity.  

3.25
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I regret to note with great concern that such a tribute to a gallant daughter of this country has been marred by procedural problems. However, I join my colleague the honourable minister, in paying tribute to this great achievement by this young lady. I am too familiar with the world of sports but I also join my colleagues to express concern that indeed this noble act should be supported and it should not be discouraged.

I can point out a number of achievements by our athletes but somehow in the course of events they have fallen by the side and they have retired in poverty. She is not the first person and I hope she will not be the last person. This young lady I remember her three year ago when she first appeared at the national level at Kyambogo. She was running without shoes and she only had come out of literal poverty; she had actually dropped out of school because her father could not afford school fees for senior two. We inspired her and said, “Look, if you can continue there are possibilities of getting you even the scholarship to the US.” We tried to get her a family in the US where she could go and train and maybe aspire her to higher heights in sports but somehow the parent said, “Let us try locally.” 

However, I am happy to report that there is a benevolent Italian investor who up to now has been supporting this young lady. He pays for all her expenses to tour Europe and those of you who are familiar with sports know that you cannot go to greater heights, especially at international level, unless you are exposed to serious competition. Local competition by itself cannot take you very far. This girl has reached where she is now by international competition and again as I said with the support of this benevolent Italian person.

Mr Speaker, I recall the first girl to make an international mark from Uganda was the late Judith Ayaa. Judith Ayaa died two years ago in utter poverty, cracking stones right here at Kyambogo. It is indeed deplorable, I can name several, and John Mugabi one of the first boxers again to gain international championship is right now wallowing in poverty without even a passport in London slums. We have been trying to get him back but somehow he says because of lack of transport he cannot. I gave him information on how to get to our High Commission to get a passport, he is still scrambling.

Mr Speaker, only two weeks ago another great young person from this mother, Uganda, achieved great heights in fighting - actually defending a boxing title, this is Kassim Ouma. Kassim Ouma, Mr Speaker, you recall I tried to move a motion in this august House that whatever he did, he absconded from UPDF, he should be forgiven. He should not be regarded as “away without permission” and, therefore, subject to court martial. I talked to him the other day when he had just lost; he was very depressed. I said, “Come back see your parents.” He is supporting a number of people from his path in boxing.  He said, “Aggrey, I do not want to risk being arrested and being court martialled for deserting the army.”

Mr Speaker, I am appealing to the Government that indeed you organise young talent. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.30
LT GEN. MOSES ALI (East Moyo County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I equally want to thank this young girl for the honour she brought to us in the country. I also would like to thank those who encouraged her directly or indirectly to achieve this success. Those of us who were involved in sports in this country for some time can say that there is potential in all sectors of sports. We only need to encourage these people where they are in the country to reach excellence as this girl has done. 
 
This is going to be possible if Finance could pay attention by giving a reasonable budget to sports because this is another way of promoting the nation. And another example also is that in 1989 the Cranes were invited to Kuwait and at that time I was Minister of Sports. We went and played four teams internationally in Kuwait and we became runners up. When we came back because of that exposure from Kuwait, the Cranes took the East and Central African Challenge Cup for three consecutive years. (Applause) That shows that we need to spend on sports because in going to Kuwait our tickets were paid for and when we were there, we were given hotels and allowances everyday. It became so encouraging that we were able to do that. So, since we have the potential and this girl should be an example, the Government should encourage and tap talent, but also the Minister of Sports should show interest.  

We have seen in the papers that there is Shs 100 million this girl has won. We probably want to know what is going to happen to the Shs 100 million. The sponsors definitely will benefit from that but how much will be left to us? That should be of interest. I think the minister should find out. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.32
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (Youth Representative, Central): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in congratulating a gallant daughter of Uganda. Inzikuru was a student at Bombo Secondary School, my former district – a neighbouring district but in my constituency. We saw Inzikuru at Bombo Secondary School in Luwero district as an upcoming athlete, she was very young then and like my colleague Dan Kidega has said, the training facilities were not there but she had the talent, which she has kept up to this level.

I want to thank the Government because when the President was opening the Fifth Session of this Parliament he recognised her because she had won another serious race in Milan, together with many other gallant Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, the minister is calling upon the private sector to come up and support but I must say that the private sector will come up and support only if the Government has organised the sports department in this country. We have seen so many young sportsmen and women, recently in the soccer fraternity there is this young man Andrew Fimbo Mukasa, who was just languishing and even taken to Butabika hospital. The Government did not come in to assist this young man; he has just been living on handouts. 
 
In the 2001 manifesto of Y. K. Museveni there was a pledge that the Government was to construct a sports stadium in each district of this country. It is five years down the road and none has been constructed! So, I just want to call upon the Government to ensure that the sports policy is implemented and we create an enabling environment for our athletes and sportsmen in the different fields. I thank you.

3.35
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join the honourable minister and my colleagues in congratulating our little lady who was smaller than the rest of the athletes in the 3,000 metres steeplechase. I had the opportunity to watch a recording of the race this morning and I must say that Dorcus Inzikuru performed brilliantly. She outpaced the other competitors in a range of 35 metres between her and the runner-up. She won at ease. I saw this as the elegance of Ugandans, and I salute Inzikuru and all those who made contributions towards making her what she is today.

Mr Speaker, I would like to register some bit of disappointment. The moment Inzikuru crossed the finish line she of course raised her arms in the air in celebration and jubilation. It took her between seven and ten minutes to be provided with the national flag, and yet this is a person whom we had expected to win the gold medal in that particular event. Where was the Ministry of Sports to provide a flag? Are we going to be treated to a circus where we take advantage of personal success and make it our own success without even providing the facilities that are necessary to uplift our country? The national flag should have been there.

Two, on the track in Helsinki yesterday were two athletes, where Inzikuru won gold and I watched the courage young Boniface Kiprop running in the 10,000 metre race, single-handedly. He ran out his heart and just came short of entering the medal bracket; he was number four. It should have been good for us to sing praises to this young man also. He is still young and we believe that if he continues in the same spirit, he will bring home a medal in the near future. 

I would like the minister to bear the following in mind as he prepares his statement for Thursday: what was the contribution of the Government towards Inzikuru’s success? I would like to know that because I do not want a government that wants to reap where it has not sowed. What programme does the Government have? What is its policy on sports in trying to identify, harness and encourage potential athletes? 

What plans does government have for athletes that retire? Hon. Awori has talked about Judith Ayaa, who died a pauper, and yet one time she was a flag bearer of this country. Many others have gone the same way. We would like to know what will happen to athletes tomorrow who make a name for us and yet we eventually just watch them die of reasons that would have been prevented. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.40
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join hon. Andruale Awuzu in congratulating Inzikuru for the great achievement she has made for this country. I am also happy that the Minister of Education is going to come up with a statement this week.  

I remember that in the quota system of the education policy there is a provision, which gives a special quota in respect to excellence in sports. There are some points, which are given to children who excel in sports. This is an opportunity for us to praise the policy. Most of the talents that we know of are coming from those upcountry schools where children are disadvantaged in many ways. We should do everything possible to encourage children who are in these upcountry schools, to come up and show their talent as Dorcus Inzikuru has done.  

When the minister gives his statement he should tell us exactly what is happening to Dorcus Inzikuru. Is she in school or did she drop out? What are her prospects in school? Excelling in sports does not guarantee that Dorcus will live forever. Therefore, the minister’s statement should tell us exactly what is happening to Dorcus. I think the Government should even consider giving a special scholarship to Dorcus other than leaving her at the mercy of well wishers. We would not let Dorcus to die a pauper, as Judith Ayaa.  

Mr Speaker, I would also like to suggest that as a way of encouraging Dorcus we should treat her to some ceremony here in Parliament, even if she is just to listen to the minister’s statement and members as they pay tribute to her so that it is an encouragement for her to know that she has done us proud as Ugandans. I would also like to suggest that we do a little more for Dorcus, say something similar to what we did for Akii-Bua in this country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Since there will be a statement by the minister let us be very brief so that we can cover as much as possible.

3.45
DR KAPKWOMU NDIWA (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for bringing this motion this afternoon. I wish to add to what he has said by way of thanking Dorcus Inzikuru for her excellent performance.  

Uganda is proud of these athletes but Uganda is like a farmer who is milking a cow without feeding it. Why do I say so? The conditions under which these athletes practice before they go for international events are very appalling. At one time we heard that Kiprop was in the Kenya Highlands on private sponsorship only to hear later that he was coming back to run for Uganda. Three years ago, the National Council of Sports promised to put a high altitude training camp in Bukwa, which is now Bukwa District. Three years down the road nothing has taken place. These athletes simply go and practice along a rough road with no facilities. It is only two weeks ago that they acquired barely one acre of land where they are going to construct a training camp. I do not think that is the system we should use if we are to get more of these medals coming in. I wonder whether the Minister of Sports is aware of this training camp that was supposed to have been constructed three to four years ago.

Mr Speaker, while we have these young athletes going out, I do not know whether the Minister of Sports is aware that their per diem hardly reaches them. It may leave the Government but does not reach the hands of these young men. I remember one time when we went to recognize these athletes at Lugogo after they brought a cross-country bronze medal. They were being thanked but they were lamenting because they had not been paid their allowances yet they were due to fly out of the country. Actually they were planning to lay down their tools but I managed to convince them and they were promised their pay from the Ministry of Sports. The following day they were able to fly out for another athletics meet. When they came back they told me, “You deceived us that we were going to get our money from the ministry but we never got it,” and that was very frustrating. One example is Alex Malinga who has decided to go semi-professional because of such mistreatment of their dues not being paid at all.  

What do I expect the Minister of Sports to come up with? As you come up with a motion, you need to remember that the Kiprops are young men who have barely completed their teenage years and who need a lot of guidance. You need to move a general motion for all these people. We should not say that a Member of Parliament should come in with a motion say today I come up with one for Kiprop, the following day I come up with another for Ekyudet and the other day I come up with another for Kipkemei yet the minister is there to do all that for them so that they are given a lot of courage.  

I am very happy with Mr Nuwagaba who is the manager of these young men at Standard High School. The man is single-handedly educating these athletes and that is how they have managed to do their training and go abroad and yet the Government is proud. Kiprop narrowly missed bringing in a bronze medal. What future do you have for these young men if we are to continue reaping their talents? Kiprop is in senior six and I do not know what will become of his future if he qualifies to go to the university. Is the Government ready to sponsor them? This is because Mr Nuwagaba the manager may not be able to do that. Why can’t the Government come in? I thank you.

3.48
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Mr Speaker, I will just raise one point, which is that if we want to pay tribute to our sportsmen, that is our great men and women, we should start the habit of writing books about them. I have been trying to read about sportsmen and sportswomen in this country and all I have seen is what has been written about footballers. Therefore, I would like to find out from the Ministry of Education whether they have any plans to publish books that can be read in primary schools, secondary schools and other institutions of higher learning. 

This is because it is only when we write something about our people that we shall keep Uganda’s flag flying high. Otherwise we have very many people who have contributed to football, sports and other activities, including the late Sir Edward Mutesa who played football.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  

3.50
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Mr Speaker, what I want to say is that today the honourable minister has opened up our hearts –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not do other business but rather attend to the work of Parliament in this august House.

DR MALLINGA: The honourable minister has opened up our eyes to a very important aspect of what should be going on in this nation. The talent is there in every sphere of sports but we have not taken the trouble to develop it. We are the people who make budgets here. Let us wake up and commit more money to sports. We should have a good field in every sub-county and we should train young LC Is as sports officers. Then we will see that the talent will come up and the image of this nation will be projected in the world. 

I will give you examples of nations that are about the same size as this one. In the Olympics for example, Cuba was winning as many medals as the United States in boxing and long distance running. There is talent in this country and some of it is genetic. We can see what is happening in Kenya where they have names like Arap and some of those people are here in Uganda. We have just not taken the time to develop that talent. Let us commit an area of Uganda as a training area. For example Sebei is a suitable area for building good facilities for sports in this country. It is a high altitude area and the athletes will develop a high red blood count and be able to participate favourably in sports. Thank you very much.

3.51
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add to what my colleague has said that the talent is there but we have not appropriated enough funds. I would like to start with us, Members of Parliament. When we have activities in our own constituencies you find that most of us buy uniforms, footballs and football boots for the footballers but we forget the women yet today when you watch CNN, you find that it is this young girl who has lifted Uganda high on the map of the world. For us the women of Uganda, we have cause to celebrate.  

Mr Speaker, my second point is on the issue of recording sportsmen who have done well for this country. I would like to inform hon. Dr Nabwiso that he could add to his list of athletes someone called Peter Rwamuhanda who is my maternal uncle and who won a silver medal for this country during the time of Akii-Bua. These are people who are languishing in poverty. They could be great coaches but they are not being utilised.

Finally, I would like to propose that we move a motion when Dorcus Inzikuru is here so that she can listen to what we have to say. This is because in these last few months we have heard comments about some women who have done great things for Uganda for example Dr Cecilia Achadu who was the first Ugandan Cardiologist. Therefore, it would be good for us to pay tribute to this great lady, Dorcus Inzikuru when she is present. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I appreciate the fact that many members wanted to make contributions but the rule is that we can only comment on a statement of that nature for 30 minutes. However, as you will appreciate, the minister has said he will come here officially to deal with the same subject when our lady is here. I have noted those who want to contribute and I will give you the first opportunity to make your contribution. Thank you very much. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: There is a ministerial statement. Hon. Minister of Finance are you the one who is going to present it? 

3.55
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have prepared a statement on the provisions in the Budget for the payment of auxiliary forces for the fiscal years 2004/2005 to 2005/2006. My statement will cover only these provisions and payments and the Minister of Defence may want to supplement on the activities of the auxiliary forces. 

The following provisions were made in the Budget for the fiscal year 2004/2005 to cater for auxiliary forces, including local defence forces, home guards and vigilantes:

Vote No.9, paid through the Ministry of Internal Affairs, programme 1, Shs 10 billion. Additionally provided through programme 7, vote 144 to the Uganda Police Forces was Shs 5,599,785,000. Through programme 7, Shs 6,123,450,000 was provided for general supply of goods and services. In programme 8, Vote 144, Shs 960 million was provided for general staff salaries. Finally in programme 8, Vote 144, other grants to the tune of Shs 5,203,968,000 were also provided. The total for the fiscal year 2004/2005 was Shs 27,887,203,000.  

According to our records, all the above budgeted amounts were released as at the end of June 2005 during the budget execution operations. These included front loading of funds where need arose, and payments to cater for shortfalls in the wage bill for home guards and vigilantes. 

Mr Speaker, over and above the above payments to the auxiliary forces, an extra Shs 6 billion was released as supplementary expenditure in Schedule No.1 in the last quarter of fiscal year 2004/2005. 

In letter ref. PO/2 dated 30 May 2005, His Excellency the President directed the Rt hon. Prime Minister to set up a cabinet sub-committee on auxiliary forces. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development duly released Shs 60 million to facilitate the work of that sub-committee. The sub-committee, under the chairmanship of hon. Lt Gen. (Retired) Moses Ali, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is also composed of the Minister of State for Tourism, Trade and Industry, the Ministry of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and Brig. Kale Kaihura who is the Presidential Military Assistant and Political Commissar. 

The terms of reference of the sub-committee are:

a)	To establish the actual number of the respective auxiliary forces in North and Northeastern Uganda.
b)	To determine the outstanding payments due to the auxiliary forces.
c)	To enquire into the aspect of welfare of the members of auxiliary forces and make recommendations.

For the fiscal year 2005/2006, the Budget provisions made for these forces are as follows:

In Vote No.9 of the Ministry of Internal Affairs programme one, there is a provision of Shs 10 billion for other grants (auxiliary forces). 

Also in the same programme 9 we have provided for domestic arrears to the tune of Shs 6 billion. This is missing from the statement and should be added. Therefore, under the same Vote 9 programme 1 include domestic arrears of Shs 6 billion and the item number is 321603.  

Under Vote 144, Uganda Police Force programmes, we have provided the following: under programme 7 we have provided for general staff salaries Shs 5,604,830,000 and for general supplies of goods and services, Shs 6,123,450,000. 

Under the same Vote in programme 8 we have provided for general staff salaries including Anti-Stock and Safety Unit (ASTU), Shs 960 million and for other grants for auxiliary forces Shs 5,203,968,000. The total provision, Mr Speaker, comes to Shs 33,892,248,000.  

As regards the releases for 2005/2006, we have so far released for July and August under Vote 9 programme 1, Shs 1,666,666,667 for auxiliary forces. 

Under Vote 144 we have released for general staff salaries (MPPU and LDUs) Shs 934,138,333, for general supply of goods and services, Shs 1,020,576,000 for general staff salaries (ASTU), Shs 160,000,000 and for other grants (auxiliary forces) Shs 867,328,000. The total amount for July and August is Shs 4,648,709,000.  

May I also mention that domestic arrears of Shs 6 billion is awaiting the report of the committee before it is released? I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to give a statement explaining how we have been handling the payment of auxiliary forces as at 9th August this year. I am expecting copies of the statement to arrive and I beg that I –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members do you want her to read the statement or do you want to wait for copies of it? I suggest she proceeds as we wait for the copies, otherwise we will delay getting the required answers from her.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As members are aware, the Ministry of Defence in conjunction with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Uganda Police manage the auxiliary forces. These forces include ASTU, vigilantes in the region of Karamoja and Teso, the Arrow Group in the region of Teso and Lira, the Amuka in the region of Lango and Kotido, LDUs under the 4th Division of UPDF based in Gulu and LDUs under the 5th Division of UPDF based in Acholi-Pii in Lira.   

Currently the verified strength of auxiliary forces is 37,413 soldiers. Each soldier earns Shs 60,000 per month implying a total requirement on the wage bill for the whole financial year to be Shs 26.9 billion. On top of the salary these soldiers are entitled to feeding at an average rate of Shs 1 billion per month implying a total requirement of Shs 12 billion for the whole year. In addition these soldiers are provided with clothing in terms of uniforms, gum boots, socks, magazine poaches and ponchos estimated at Shs 2.3 billion for the whole financial year. This is to enable these soldiers secure at least two pairs of uniform, which is the requirement. 

Further expenditure of approximately Shs 1.9 billion is required to provide these forces with medical care, transport in terms of fuel and motor vehicle maintenance, operational funds, imprest and research. The capital items required cost about Shs 4 billion. 

From the above background, if we provide all this the total expenditure of the Ministry of Defence to maintain these forces on the ground is Shs 47.1 billion. At the beginning of last financial year 2004/2005, the Ministry of Internal Affairs was provided with Shs 23 billion to manage the affairs of the auxiliary forces for the whole financial year. Therefore, the financial year 2004/2005 commenced with a funding gap of Shs 24.1 billion. 

The action my ministry took on this projected shortfall was to revise the requirements by removing the capital cost, which reduced the funding gap by Shs 4.1 billion. Through the Ministry of Internal Affairs my ministry then requisitioned for a supplementary budget of Shs 20 billion, having reduced it from Shs 4.1 billion.  

However, at the end of the day only Shs 6 billion was approved and released thereby implying a financial short fall of Shs 14 billion for the whole financial year and the Minister has read this in his statement. The above facts explain why by June 30th 2005 the close of the financial year 2005, the auxiliary forces had not been paid their salaries for the period of February to June 2005. In particular the Arrow Group had not been paid from January to June 2005.  

Mr Speaker, with the Shs 27.5 billion received from the Ministry of Internal Affairs under the Budget plus the Shs 6 billion received as supplementary, we have managed to pay the following:

As regards salaries we managed to pay a total amount of Shs 17.3 billion. The ASTU were paid up to February 2005, the Arrow Group were paid up to February 2005, Amuka were paid up to February 2005, LDUs under 4th Division were paid up to February 2005 and LDUs under the 5th Division were paid up to January 2005. 

Therefore, the outstanding unpaid salary bill is Shs 9.6 billion. On July 27th this year, my ministry requested for this money from the Ministry of Finance through the Ministry of Internal Affairs and so far we have paid Shs 10.3 billion, which caters for food up to May 2005. Therefore, the outstanding food bill of Shs 1.2 billion still stands. This is yet to be requisitioned for and this shall be done after receiving an expenditure release on the outstanding salary wages.  

As regards the fuel item, motor vehicle maintenance, operational funds and interests, Shs 6 billion has been paid for this up to December 2004. The outstanding balance of Shs 1.5 billion will also be requisitioned after receiving an expenditure release on salaries and wages.

Mr Speaker and honourable members as regards uniforms, one pair has been catered for from the budget of the Ministry of Defence for clothing the regular troops. The outstanding Shs 1.17 billion is a debt to suppliers and will also be requisitioned after salaries have been paid because salaries are a priority. 

Therefore, the overall current position for the unpaid commitments in the management of auxiliary forces for the last financial year 2004/05 is Shs 14 billion, out of which salaries, which constitute Shs 9.6 billion, have not been paid. However, the money has been requisitioned from the Ministry of Finance.  

Challenges:
The first challenge has been the increased recruitment of auxiliary forces in the Eastern and Northern regions, that is the Teso and Lango sub-regions during financial year 2002/03 to counter the insurgency at that time yet there has not been a relative increase in the budget provision for the auxiliary forces. Instead, every financial year since then we have only been managing by way of supplementary requests, which do not come in time and in the case of last year, did not even come in adequate amounts.

There was a presidential directive in the year 2003 that all LDUs of the Northern region numbering about 19,767 who had previously been paid Shs 40,000 per month would henceforth be paid Shs 60,000 per month. This presidential directive in the year 2003 was to bring them in line with all the other auxiliary forces in the country. Despite that directive and constant reminders from my ministry, both the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Finance have never captured this. Thus there is a continuing deficit of monies released to the tune of Shs 20,000 per LDU that should be paid to these forces in the Northern region monthly. The situation is made worse by the fact that funds are always released for a force of 14,074 soldiers instead of 19,767 soldiers who are on the ground yet the new number was communicated long ago to the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

This financial year 2005/06, only Shs 18.7 billion has been provided in the budget estimate for the management of auxiliary forces and the recruitment of 4,000 special police constables. This is notwithstanding the already acknowledged fact that last financial year still has a debt of Shs 14 billion, which I mentioned earlier.

There has also been a misconception that the auxiliary forces are not actually on the ground. Because of this, every other authority has come up to criticize and say that the money released for the management of these forces is for nothing because there is nobody to pay or maintain anyway. This has led to difficulties in getting approval of the budget for the auxiliary forces. It should be noted that these people are working in their home areas and, therefore, when they are not paid, they leave the camps and only return on the payday. However, Cabinet recently set up a sub-committee as the Minister of Finance has already told this August House and that committee is about to submit their report.

Because of the operations being carried out by the combined efforts of auxiliary forces and regular troops, the Ministry of Defence has found it unworkable to feed only the regular troops while the auxiliaries look on. It, therefore, means that more supplier credit has been taken on for feeding. This however can only go so far before the suppliers stop delivering. The policy, therefore, has been to feed the troops as the payment of wages is sorted out.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to conclude by noting that we are still having a problem of inadequate resources to manage the affairs of the auxiliary forces and this is a fact. The approved budget of Shs 18.7 billion in itself leaves a fund gap of approximately Shs 30 billion. This is without referring to the outstanding bill of Shs 14 billion carried on from last financial year, which is getting first priority on the provided budget for the fiscal year 2005/06. 

However, I would like to assure colleagues that we have been carrying out meetings between the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Internal Affairs to see how we can expedite solving the problem of payment of auxiliary forces. Our first priority is salaries and we hope that we are going to get the money and clear them. We also have an arrangement to retire some of these auxiliary forces while the Police will take some on and others will be dissolved into the UPDF regular forces.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that this House consider the problem of the management of auxiliary forces by providing the funds required to manage them during fiscal year 2005/06 and to pay off the outstanding dues carried on from fiscal year 2004/05. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: When should we expect copies of your statement? Oh! They are coming. Well, this matter was started by hon. Omodi Okot.

4.20
MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the two ministers for the reports they have given to this House. I would also like to thank the Minister of State for Defence for her kind representation on the stress the Government has faced concerning these auxiliary forces. I agree that releases have always been made and I also agree that provisions like clothes and food have always been made. However, I seek some clarification concerning some areas in this report.  

To begin with I want to comment on the issue of the Cabinet sub-committee on auxiliary forces and the Shs 60 billion that is being provided to facilitate the work of this sub-committee. I would like to know what this facilitation actually entails because Shs 60 billion is not a small amount of money.

Also once releases are made, whether they are for salaries or food, stories are abundant about paymasters in the army who have disappeared with money from the time to time. We had a case of a certain Byakutaga who disappeared with Shs 6 billion and up to now nobody knows what has happened to him or where he is. Since then many more disappearances have been happening. Therefore, there is a very strong suspicion that even if this money is released there is no way to ensure that the releases will reach the people for which they are intended. 

I would also want to know what happens once payment is made in the detach and especially the money, which is not paid off. Are balances brought back and if so where are they? I fear cases where a paymaster goes on a day without telling the soldiers that they are going to get their salaries. He gets a few soldiers, pays them and goes away with the rest of the money. That is of course when the money is available. This brings in the issue of corruption and ghost soldiers that has caused us a lot of financial loss in this country.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to know whether the report of this sub-committee is out. This is because if it were out, item No. 6 would have been handled and we would have solutions to some of these problems. The minister is talking of the terms of reference of the sub-committee, which among other things includes establishing the actual number of auxiliary forces in North and North eastern Uganda. I am sure that the problem of how many forces we are running still exists and because we do not know their number how can we plan for them? This means that either we are going to take too much or too little money for their payment, which will create problems. 

The minister is also talking of outstanding payment. I believe that if the report of the sub-committee has worked out the actual number of auxiliary forces, this problem will also be tackled. The minister has also stated that payment for these forces has been made up to February. However, we are in the field, Mr Speaker, and I can give you an example of a time I was with hon. Angiro Gutomoi. We found out that these people had not been paid any money for up to six months. 

The minister has said that these people patrol around their homes, which is true. We have to remember that when they get back to their homes without money, it is not in comfort. As a result they start harassing innocent villagers and looting money and food, among other things. Therefore, I think it is important that this sub-committee works out and gives this House the necessary information. For instance we would like to know how many auxiliary forces there are. If the Government would pay off Shs 60,000 at the end of every month, it would not be so much money but when you have six months arrears, that amounts to Shs 360,000 and it ceases to be little money. 

I want to end by making it known to the ministry concerned that although they are saying that payments have been made and provisions made for clothes and gum boots, people are still walking around naked, going without food, and suffering. Thank you.

4.27
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Minister of Finance who has found it fit to come personally and make this statement rather than delegating it to one of his ministers of state. I believe this means that he places a lot of importance on this subject. I encourage him that as a person in charge of our finances, he should give the necessary priority to this area. This is because I believe we can achieve total and permanent peace by getting the auxiliary and other forces involved in maintaining law and order. This way the costs in the area of defence would be reduced and money would be saved and channelled into other sectors.  

I also want to thank the Minister of State for Defence for her statement and particularly the conclusion of it and I think this is where I am going to begin. Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa is asking Parliament to provide the money to pay these auxiliary forces. I hope this is exactly what she said. This is a very important conclusion coming from a minister who is responsible for these forces. 

Before I dwell on that point let me pay tribute to these auxiliary forces because they are the ones supporting the UPDF and it is because of them that there is a degree of stability and relative peace in this area. If you compare what we went through in Teso, Lango and Acholi from 2000-2003 and you compare it to where we are now, there is a great improvement. In fact yesterday the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs hon. Oryem Okello was saying that now he can drive from Gulu up to Kitgum by himself without an escort. Who are the people who have brought this about? It is the sacrifices of the UPDF supported at this critical time by the auxiliary forces. Therefore, if we were to analyse the level at which we are now, one could say it is a delicate and critical level. The enemy Kony is believed to be in Southern Sudan, a few rebels are in the country but they are greatly out numbered by our regular forces.  

Therefore, we should ensure that the situation does not deteriorate. We should consolidate the level of peace we have reached and ensure that the enemy does not capitalize on any weaknesses we may have within the forces coming through, like failure to pay their salaries or failure to provide them with food and uniforms. It is very important that the level we have reached must be consolidated; it must be maintained and greater level of achieving permanent peace should be made.  

What are the consequences if we failed to pay these auxiliary forces and even maintain the UPDF soldiers properly on the ground? The first one is what the minister has already mentioned, desertion.  Most of these auxiliary forces, the 10,000 we recruited in Lango - which I know very well because I participated - were hurriedly recruited, brought from their homes, they left their families behind, some of them were actually having some form of regular employment in form of farming and so on. They sacrificed themselves instead of being displaced and going to suffer in displaced camps; you would rather participate in peace maintenance by being in the auxiliary forces. These people made a lot of sacrifices and for them to be allowed to desert because of Shs 60,000, which if they received would be used to support their families, is a great mistake and can cause a great disaster.

The second problem is that soldiers being what they are, if they are in one confinement and they have this problem of no payment and so on, you risk mutiny and this is not good for a disciplined force. 

The third one is the soldiers causing lawlessness. These soldiers have no money, possibly they have no food and so what are they going to do? They are going to break into my house, they are going to disturb civilians, they are going to waylay civilians, they are going to help themselves to the cassava and potatoes of the displaced people. Therefore, failure to pay and look after the welfare of these auxiliary forces may increase lawlessness.

In Otuke, for example, another problem of this is the environment degradation. What have these auxiliary forces resorted to? They have resorted to making charcoal. For those of you who have not been in these displaced places, we have a huge area like Otuke where 60,000 people are living in six or seven camps and all the villages are left empty. What these auxiliary forces do, and I am very much acquainted with it because it has been a great problem for us in Otuke, they go and cut trees and burn charcoal out of it. Because there is no government in the area, in other words there are no local chiefs, no LC I, there are no LC III and so on, so one is not able to enforce law regarding environmental protection. Therefore, large numbers of trees including our precious tree from which we get Shea butter called Moyao have been burnt by these auxiliary forces and even by the UPDF. We have a massive environmental degradation because these soldiers are not being paid.

On the consequences of failing to look after these soldiers is the question of insecurity increasing. In other words, the peace we are expecting through these auxiliary forces supporting UPDF in case the rebels attack, they will not be able to have that motivation to respond in case of attack and therefore, delaying the return of peace to this country. Therefore, it is going to be more expensive for the country if this is not achieved.  

What should be the priority therefore - I am not looking at these figures and I have not even bothered to analyse the figure given by the Minister of Finance and the Minister of State because I take them that they are genuine, that that is what is needed and that is what we should support. If the priority of this country is to ensure that there is immediate return of peace and if there is immediate return of peace what are you having? You are having people getting out of camps to go and dig for themselves and therefore you will not be spending on food for people in the camps, you will not be spending on handouts both locally in terms of government and the donor community for people who are staying idle in camps. I am appealing to honourable members that let us take the statement of the two ministers very seriously and that whatever they have asked - which I think is affordable - it is a total of something in the region of Shs 47 billion. This country can afford Shs 47 billion. It is a matter of saying which area is a matter of priority, and we leave others.  

I do not want to go into areas of donations, I do not want to go into areas of other things because I may spoil my –(Interjection)– hon. Mondo Kangonyera is winking at me but I really want to say that there are certain areas, which are not priorities in this country and yet you find that we are giving billions to those areas.  

I think that those billions can be spent for the benefit of realizing permanent peace. I support the statement of the two ministers. I call upon my colleagues in this House, you have been extremely good when it comes to issues of peace and security in the North, you have shown your commitment, I think we have reached a stage where I call upon you to support the request of the Minister of Finance to support the request of the Minister of Defence and pay all these. The request is in the final statement of the Minister of State for Defence that this Parliament must provide support to pay these people totally and the total amount is Shs 47 billion. Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity.

4.37
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS & REFUGEES (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that the committee under my chairmanship referred to by the Minister of Finance has started its work. We have divided up the country, I am in charge of West Nile, Brig. Kaihura is in charge of Gulu with Okello Oryem in charge of Kitgum and Pader and then Ogong Okot is in charge of Lira and hon. Akaki Ayumu – of course they are all honourables but to save time –(Laughter)- it is deemed that I have addressed them not as honourables but as Akaki. That is why I have reserved it to the last one so that it applies to all. He is in fact in charge of Apac and he has also completed his report. 

Hon. Mike Mukula is in charge of Teso, Karamoja and Kapchorwa. I intend to submit our report by the end of this month and it would have been better, if I am not interfering with your ruling - but I am appealing that the House holds on until we submit our report to make reasonable submissions. Otherwise, I think the exercise is going on. Apac is finished and west Nile in two to three days will also finish its exercise and the rest will soon finish. At the end of the month we shall report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.40
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving this opportunity.  When the concern about auxiliary forces came up - I am being helped by His Excellency - thank you very much, I am grateful. I said that when this concern about auxiliary forces came up, it was because it had taken a lot of time and there was overdue payment, something close to six months without the auxiliary forces getting paid. Prior to the commitment that was made by the Minister of State for Defence to come to this House this Tuesday there was a report and the statement was that there was a committee working on it and would soon submit to cabinet. It was our anticipation that the minister would come today bringing to this House a statement – a report to the effect that salaries for the auxiliary forces were going to be paid. I am very disappointed that my honourable sister has come - you know she is always the punching bag even when things are – you know she does her best. But I am very disappointed that she has come to lament again.

I am also very disappointed, actually more disappointed that the Ministry of Finance has decided to come here to express a fact that we already know is in the Budget - a statement of fact. I do not even understand my colleagues when they say “support”. Support what? Support a statement of fact? This is not a request but a statement, a mere statement of fact that this is the amount of money that is required for paying the auxiliary forces. I do not see the two statements allaying the concerns that we have heard basing on the fact that there has been an unnecessary delay in sorting out the salaries for the auxiliary forces and the fact that we think there has been lack of commitment, the goodwill on part of government.  

Whenever we have had rallies in Northern and Eastern Uganda, we clap for the auxiliary forces, we say -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Is the honourable member in order to state an opinion that she thinks there is lack of commitment on the part of government and she misleads this House that that is a fact when it is not? She is merely expressing an opinion and she calls it a fact! For us who once knew what facts were, they were never opinions. They were true whether you belonged to the Government or you did not. Is the honourable member in order to mislead the House that her opinion is a fact?

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have appreciated it is an opinion and I think everybody will categorize it as an opinion not a fact.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I talked about my thinking and this was a statement of fact, I actually referred to the statement by the Ministry of Finance. I expected hon. Prof. Mondo Kagonyera to simply appreciate that this is a fact. It is in the Budget in the estimates we have received. This is a statement of fact and at your level honourable his should be easy for you. (Laughter)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, you made a ruling that the honourable member was stating an opinion. Is she in order to continue calling her opinion facts and challenging your ruling and referring to me, a very well informed man -(Laughter)- as someone who may not understand that she is stating an opinion? 

THE SPEAKER: No, you are a quite well informed man and many members here are quite informed but what she is trying to do is to persuade us to accept her version of assessment and it will take some time. Please, proceed.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had stated that I expected these statements therefore to have come to us telling us, “This is being done, we are going to pay these monies, now we have secured the money”, or something like that, and that is why I am very disappointed. Just to get these statements that have been presented to us, Shs 60 million facilitation to the sub-committee is a contradiction. We are being told that there is no money to pay the Arrow, the Amuka, the frontier guards, the LDUs and at the same time there is Shs 60 million to facilitate some five people to go around even with our Parliamentary mileage? Surely, you do not need Shs 60 million to facilitate five people to go and do this exercise!

Besides, the division commanders we have on the ground are very competent men. There is this data available. Just even on a telephone call - I did call one of them this morning and I have all data about all the people who are in those battalions in Teso. I find it difficult to understand why Shs 60 million is being used like this.

But that aside, the Minister of State for Defence goes ahead to say that part of the money was paid for transport claims, accommodation and such related things. Why would they believe that this expenditure of transport is being incurred on Arrow or Amuka the auxiliary forces whose very existence is being questioned? I would have expected the ministry to put on halt every bit of expenditure in relation – yes, if you are making claims for transport for a group whose very existence you question, whose numbers you question, who is being transported? I am aware that Defence has been paying claims purportedly for expenditures in relation to the auxiliary forces and I find it very inconsistent if you are questioning the numbers that are there, how do you compute the expenditure? You should have waited for verification.

I did last time put it to the Minister of Defence that everywhere we go we clap our hands because of the heroic activities of these auxiliary forces. If it takes six months to recognize that they did that very heroic act of saving the very face of government - because I am aware without their backup, without their commitment the atrocities by the LRA in that region could have been worse off. They saved the face of government because it is government that has a contract with the people to protect them and to protect their property and then these civilians they used to call angry citizens, the angry citizens come up and save the face of government and government cannot make it a priority to give them money, four months, five months, six months and we are still waiting? And this very well facilitated committee - can it not bring us an interim report? It is over four months since we started hearing about this verification committee, could they not have provided an interim report so that these people get some money to keep them going?  

I want to put to this House - first of all maybe let me appreciate the honourable minister although she was very shy about the question of demobilizing the auxiliary forces. I want to put it to the Ministry of Defence that this might be the thing that will save you. You are very shy about it even the way the minister brought it as if it was going to cause unease, unrest so she said, “we will put some of them to defence, some to …” –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member holding the Floor is misleading this House by saying that I was shy about mentioning that we are going to demobilize some of these auxiliary forces, which is not correct. I was never shy. Maybe I was polite because you all saw me and my nature is for a polite person, but never shy. Is she in order to misinform this House?

THE SPEAKER: My assessment was that you are not pompous; you are a very descent minister.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister did say she would demobilize and I want to back her up on that because with the pace at which we are moving, my greatest fear is that the arrears owed to the auxiliary forces will catch up with the Ministry of Defence just like the pension arrears have caught up with Ministry of Public Service to a point where it is almost impractical to sort it out. I am hoping that she will find an easier way to smartly demobilize especially voluntarily - there are some of those boys and those girls who actually feel they could go home. If you could pay them now and ask for voluntary retirement, I am sure some of them will go.

Finally, I want to share with this House what I consider the serious implications of the failure to pay the salaries of the auxiliary forces in time.  I do not want to be hypothetical about this because I have seen it practically happening. Every time I go to the Teso region to our Human Rights Regional Office in Soroti, I find cases and complaints where some of the Arrow, the auxiliary forces have been involved. I get the impression there may be many other cases of indiscipline. I also want to believe one of the implications is when you do not have what to use to facilitate your own needs you are likely to go stealing, you are likely to misuse that gun. The question of human rights violation is increasing in the Teso region. I have also observed the local politicians beginning to misuse the auxiliary forces in the Teso region and I know that if we continue to have de-motivated auxiliary forces this will definitely go up.  

Then there is also –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to wind up?

CAPT. MIKE MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I have been listening with a lot of interest and as a person who participated in this struggle I want to make sure that our people go back home, live in dignity and we defend the Constitution under Article 17 of our Constitution. I feel hurt that some people have taken the opportunity now to politicise the issue of Arrow and the auxiliary forces. Some of us have been here and have never made even a single statement on the kind of activities and the pain we went through in mobilizing, galvanizing and consolidating the security in our country because we believe the struggle is still on.

I want to put it on record that no politician in our region is misusing the Arrow boys, be it local or otherwise. The auxiliary forces are under the strict command of the UPDF, one of the most disciplined armed forces this country has had in record.

I want also to put it on record that the original vision we had when the Lord’s Resistance Army attacked the Teso sub-region, those of us who volunteered and chose not to remain here in Parliament, not to remain in Kampala but we chose to lead our people on the frontline and to give them political direction, said the initial strategic focus we had –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: I want to thank the minister for that information. Mr Speaker, you have asked me to wind up –(Interruption)

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I would like to be protected in my own right as I clarify some of these issues. The information I am trying to put on record for the whole House to understand is that when the Arrow initially took up arms accorded to us by the Commander-in-Chief of the UPDF, our position was that our people in the Teso sub-region believe that we did not want to be paid - our position at that time was not monetary but to give our people dignity and to save our children who were being abducted by the Lord’s Resistance Army, our women who were being raped with impunity the opportunity to live in dignity. 

It was then the Commander-in-Chief who in the middle of the Budget decided that some sort of arrangement will be made to provide an appreciation for the auxiliary forces and he would be able to put them under the Shs 60,000 arrangement in the middle of the Budget. That is why the supplementary budget came in the year 2003/2004 again under the UPDF budget, which had then been provided for. Mr Speaker, it is a delicate situation. Government is committed to paying these boys. We have continued to appease our boys and I want to assure you that we will continue to discuss internally as a government and ensure that these outstanding arrears will be paid. I thought I would inform the House on the progress we are making. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us identify the issue at hand. The issue at hand was payment of these people; it was not an issue of discrediting their activities. I thought the issue came up because we appreciated the role, which they are playing. This time we should not therefore talk about misuse because misuse has nothing to do with their payment. I think what we do now is to find a way of solving that problem of payments to these people rather than now trying to doubt the good role they are playing. I appeal to you –(Interjection)- let her wind up, I will give you an opportunity to make your independent contribution. Please, wind up and then the minister has some information to give.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague for that information and for the big vision they had for the Arrow boys. That is the reason why the Arrow boys must really be paid and be paid as soon as possible.

I have one request, which I want to make. I appreciate your ruling but since we never always come up with an opportunity to discuss matters of the auxiliary forces, I just want to take this opportunity to ask the Ministry of Defence to dispel one thing, which is bothering the community in Teso now. It is argued and I am asking you to dispel it, that a number of Arrow boys, over 90, were killed in Karamoja in the week of those clashes. Would you like to dispel that and assure the community in the Teso region? I thank you.

5.02
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to make a clear statement that the auxiliary forces are going to be paid. As the Minister of Finance indicated and as was in the statement presented by the Minister of State for Defence, there is 18 –(Interjection)- can I be protected from hon. Awori Aggrey? There is Shs 18.7 billion for auxiliary forces in the financial provisions before this House and we plan to utilize that money like this as soon as the Moses Ali Committee –(Interjection)- no, I am speaking English, not Lugweri. As soon as the Moses Ali Committee reports its findings, using that report as a basis, payments will be made.

As I said earlier on another occasion, 4,000 of these auxiliary forces are going to be recruited into the Police Force. Those who have the necessary qualifications will be recruited into the Police Force and trained to join the Police. Then our plan is that if this money, the Shs 18.7 billion, is not enough to cater for the arrears and the payments of the force that remains, we shall do the needful. If necessary we will come back to Parliament with these figures to ask for the money to fill that gap and our plan is to carry out – this is for hon. Alaso’s information – we will carry out demobilization gradually. We are going to demobilize the forces as the war winds down.  

Honourable members, my expectation therefore is that the decision Cabinet took that we pay the arrears of these auxiliary forces and we recruit some of them into the Police Force, at least 4,000 and then see how many remain and determine how to handle them, we will handle the problem we are facing today and what will remain then will be handled when it comes out clearly.

5.06
LT GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA (Army Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will not go to funding or the payment, it has already been made clear, but I would add that the Government has been completely committed to paying the auxiliary forces, which joined their comrades, the regular forces in combating terrorism. But it is an inconvenience to them - delayed payment is an inconvenience to them, but it has not caused serious low morale among the auxiliary forces. We command them, we are with them and they have no serious loss of morale and I will give reasons:

The most important thing even with a meagre budget, we have shared our medical care with auxiliary forces. The drugs the regular forces get are adequately shared with auxiliary forces and that is very important for a combatant.

From the defence budget we have also decided that with the delayed payment we share food and the food we share from myself, a general, to the last private auxiliary forces is the same plus supplementary - it is meat, it is rice, it is cooking oil. All that we get, plus uniforms and footwear, therefore, even with the inconvenience of delayed payment, the morale of the auxiliary forces is not that low like the picture has been painted here. 

One Member of Parliament here has said that there is a possibility of mutiny. There will never ever be a mutiny in the UPDF regular and auxiliary forces even with delayed payment. The UPDF has laws, has discipline and has very effective intelligence. So, with delayed payment any individual wanting to go to that direction of causing such a serious crime will not be tolerated. A gun will be taken away from him and he will be showed the gate. There is no way auxiliary forces can cause lawlessness in some areas where they were even recruited, trained and armed to combat terrorism. Therefore, we cannot allow them to turn against the people they are supposed to be protecting. As we wait for the payments, the UPDF will keep clear command and control of the auxiliary forces as it does to the regular forces to ensure that discipline is maintained and that they continue combating terrorism so that the enemy does not take advantage of a demoralized force and they begin regrouping themselves. We appreciate their role and we will continue sharing with them whatever we have until their payment is obtained. I am sure the hon. Minister of Finance has stated it. We will be eagerly waiting for the payment. In the meantime we keep discipline in the forces of the regular and auxiliary forces. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we going to exhaust this problem? (Interjections)- no, no, we cannot find a solution today. I think they have presented a problem of inadequacy of funds that is the statement of the minister. The Minister of Finance has given us a budgetary allocation. We are soon to start on a budget process itself and I think the relevant committee dealing with Internal Affairs and Defence should take particular interest in this matter and then actually come up with a way forward. Here we are going to have a general debate but I do not think that will be enough to solve that particular problem. 

The minister has responded to the request of making a statement. Let us use it and then see what we can do but I think to be fair we should also hear from another region that is hon. Onek, because I think I have covered the Teso area. Let us hear from Acholi land.  

5.12
DR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, I think everybody has expressed - and I would want to contribute my voice to the commendable job done by our auxiliary forces together with the UPDF to reduce on the insurgency in the North. I would like to take this opportunity also to thank particularly auxiliary forces in Kitgum, the Frontier Guards, for really the endless effort they have made because Kitgum is at the border and the LRA just keep on crossing between Sudan and Uganda and are disturbing our area more than any other area in the North. So, I would like to really thank them for their resilience and sacrifice. 

Coming to this Moses Ali’s committee, I think that committee is totally irrelevant because in the first place someone who has recruited these LDUs when they were being passed out - they could not have been passed out without their names recorded in the UPDF records. Their names are all there. What are we counting now? Where do the ghosts come from when the records were taken at the time of passing out? That one - our people at least our LDUs - I came from home last week - the LDUs believe that exercise is employed to delay their payment. That is the way they think. They think their payment is being delayed tactically by saying there are fresh census exercises and yet they gave their names there. 

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I want to disagree with the honourable member who has dubbed this committee irrelevant yet they are the same people who are complaining that there are no people there anyway. When you say these people are there, which ones are we taking about? Should we stop this committee and then take the statement from hon. Onek, which is true? In fact, I have been in the field for example, some of these people you are talking about are not there, some have deserted, some died so what record are we going to have now? Much as you passed them out, when did this passing out take place? So, it will be unfortunate to dub the Government committee irrelevant and especially from hon. Onek, whom I respected very sincerely, but I do not know -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, maybe we are not ready for this debate. I am almost beginning to feel that we require Moses Ali’s report because the way the chairman of the committee is speaking is causing me worry. We have just been told by the Minister that the auxiliary forces were paid up to February. Which figure did they use for paying these people up to February? I am a bit worried. If you have the statistics for payment up to February, what stops you from having statistics to pay them up to date at least up to June? So, it looks as if the Cabinet is not ready and we are being told things, which do not make sense. 

I am tempted to suggest that maybe we wait for the Moses Ali report within the next week or two so that we are told the exact statistics. Somebody should tell us and come here with the report of the forces that were paid up to February. We want to know who received the money. Were they the physical soldiers who received the money or were they ghosts or whatever? So, we would like all those reports to come to us then we can make accurate assessment of how the force is constituted. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This is exactly what I have said that we do not expect solutions to come out during this debate. However, it should be taken up, including what you have suggested. Maybe the report will assist us really to know how many they are, how many were paid because one could say, “You paid in February but you left others”, so this is the kind of verification that is required and then be handled by the appropriate committee before it comes here for finalization.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me wind up, I will not take more information –(Interruption) 

MR PAUL LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way. I am also a very concerned person, about the formation of the committee. In the formation of the committee they have just smuggled in the name of hon. Mukula for Karamoja and indeed it is not here in the report. What we know in Karamoja is that in the famous motion of disarmament of Karamoja was moved by hon. Mukula and indeed again last month Mr Ecweru had said he would move to disarm Karamoja if government has failed. I am very worried why a Cabinet minister from Karamoja is not in the team so as to bring a fair report as far as Karamoja is concerned?

DR EZRA SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I regret that the name of hon. Mukula was left out in the statement to the committee. It should have been there and secondly on the issue of payment, I mentioned that Shs 6 billion, which is for payment of auxiliary forces arrears, is still being withheld until we have information from the committee. This should be taken also that we want to certify the numbers before we pay the Shs 6 billion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, we are not making any conclusion here. It was part of our rules that a statement was made but it will have to be scrutinized by the appropriate committee. I want to balance up here something from Acholi land because they had not made any contribution.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to apologise to my elder Moses Ali and other members of the Cabinet because I stated that the committee was irrelevant. That is my belief not that I belittle anybody. I stated clearly that the army has got a good intelligence, a thorough system that can always control and regulate the behaviour in the army and, therefore, even their records - how can a ministerial committee go and effectively count 100 soldiers who were there on the ground? There are better ways of doing it. That is my belief. I believe there are better ways of doing it other than using the ministers because they will not have the capability of counting right to the ground. They will have to depend on the information they are told. That is why I said that committee is irrelevant. If it hurt anybody, I am sorry.

Coming to payments, I fully agree with hon. Cecilia Ogwal who says the payment up to February, or up to January in our case in Kitgum has been done against names of people and that payment should be done up to date alongside the verification of the numbers. Because you are not paying air; you pay people who are holding guns, who are there on the spot. Further delay in payment is making some of us have difficulties. I mobilize over 6,000 people in Kitgum and when I go there, they tell me, “You brought us here, you made us hold guns, where is the money, what are we being paid for, for this work?” In the first instance, they are in the field; they do not have time to do anything for their families. They need that Shs 60,000 to keep their families. These are some of the problems we are facing as politicians on the ground. It is not semantics of Parliament here of how best you can speak; it is a problem down on the ground. We need the money, we need these people to be paid and we appreciate the Army is doing a lot to try to assist but the food ratio is not adequate and the World Food Programme is not even helping. They are not giving our LDUs food because they are now categorizing soldiers. So, they are caught in between.  

On the 4 August when His Excellency the President visited Kitgum, we were informed that within three weeks these arrears would be paid and now we are still talking of a committee going to verify first.  Three weeks are ending now, what are we going to tell our people? Hon. Minister of Finance and the Minister of Defence, I agree with your report. However, I would wish that you carry out immediate payment of those who were paid in January or February and then those other extra names can be verified later on. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.22
MR ARAPKISSA YEKKO (Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this motion. I also thank the two ministers for their ministerial statements. However, I would want the Minister of Defence to make two clarifications. In her statement, which I have not yet received, she mentioned LDUs and ASTU that are under the control of 4th and 5th Divisions. She did not at all mention those who are under the 3rd Division. The 3rd Division here includes Bugisu region, Teso region, Karamoja region and Kapchorwa region. She did not mention anything about the LDUs and ASTU that are under the control of the 3rd Division and what I know is that equally they have not also been paid for the last six months. This has led to a lot of perpetual desertion by the ASTU and the LDUs. I do not know, it may be in her written statement but when she was talking she did not mention it. So, I want her to make that clarification. Who controls the LDUs and ASTU that are under 3rd Division command? 

Then two, I want to make an appeal to the Minister of Defence that we have a group of about 100 people who are called home guards or vigilantes who were recruited in Kapchorwa in 2002 following the disarmament of the people in Kapchorwa. But up to now they have never been paid any penny and it is really unfair for some people to work without pay. Indeed we have 100 people who were recruited following the disarmament of the Kapchorwa and up to now they are just working as volunteers. They have not been paid any money up to now.

Thirdly, some of us who come from a cattle rustling zone, these auxiliary forces are very important because it is unreliable to depend on the UPDF because anytime they can be withdrawn and taken to an area of priority, which has been thought of by central government. Like it happened when there was disarmament in Karamoja in the year 2001/2002 when Kony war intensified, all the UPDF who were carrying out disarmament in Karamoja were withdrawn and taken to fight Kony. Up to now they have never come back. So the auxiliary forces are very important because fighting these cattle rustlers is not done the conventional way where you call people for a parade and tell them to move in a defined direction. In fighting cattle rustlers, everybody is his own commander. As soon as you hear an alarm, you run with your gun and chase them. You do not wait for parade. This explains why it cannot be done by the UPDF. It is only local auxiliary forces, which can manage this kind of thing hence the demobilisation, which the minister was planning to do. Where we have cattle rustling, auxiliary forces are the best alternative if they are disciplined.

Lastly, I propose that if the committee is taking a lot of time, they should better involve the area Members of Parliament in the verification. These are more concerned with the security problem in their area than some of the ministers you have appointed. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this ends the debate on this statement. The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs will scrutinise it in detail. They have the freedom to call on the ministers concerned for more details. We shall then receive a report from them on the way forward. There is another statement by the Minister of Public Service.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

5.28
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to officially inform you of the arrival of the bodies of the seven Ugandans who perished on the 30th of July aboard the helicopter that was transporting the late Lt Gen. John Garang, the Vice President of the Republic of Sudan and President of Southern Sudan. The seven Ugandans whose bodies have been received this morning are: Col Peter Nyakairu, presidential pilot; Maj. Patrick Kiggundu, co-pilot; Capt. Kiyimba, flight engineer; Lt John Munanura, OPJV; corporal Hassan Kiiza, signaller; Mr Sam Bakowa, protocol officer of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, assigned to State House; and Ms Lillian Kabaije, air hostess. 

The bodies, which were delivered from New Site in Southern Sudan aboard the UPDF Antonov plane, were received at Entebbe military base this morning by a government delegation, which I was privileged to lead. Also present were the following: hon. Beatrice Wabudeya, Minister in charge of the Presidency; hon. Jim Muhwezi, Minister of Health; hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, Minister of Internal Affairs; hon. Ruth Nankabirwa – Minister of State for Defence; hon. Betty Akech, Minister for Security; hon. Henry Oryem Okello, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs; and the Member of Parliament for Entebbe, hon. Byatike Matovu was also present. 

They were accompanied by the Army Commander, Deputy Chief of Staff, State House controller, the Permanent Secretaries of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Health and Defence, as well as the Managing Director for Civil Aviation Authority, and the Deputy Mayor. The bodies were received in full military honours by the UPDF, after which they were taken to Mbuya Military Hospital for further treatment in preparation for the national funeral service. 

The Government sympathises with the families for the delay since the fateful evening of 30 July 2005 when the plane crash occurred in Southern Sudan. It was largely occasioned by the fact that the tragic event involved an aircraft and so it called for many formalities to be concluded. Two, it took place in a foreign country and more still in a remote area of that country. Therefore, most of the handling of the victims was in the hands of a country where the incident took place. 

The plane was carrying among others, a foreign dignitary, His Excellency the Vice-President of Sudan, Lt Gen. Garang. The incident bore not only national but also regional and international implications, which are to be taken care of, explored in detail by a multiplicity of investigators. The impact of the crash on the bodies could not allow us to identify, treat and repatriate the remains as fast as we would have wanted. In order to establish the cause of the crash, an international investigation had to be instituted and we believe they have concluded their work. 

Before I read out the programme for the funeral service and for the various burial places, I wish to inform you that the Government of Uganda was represented by a strong delegation of 55 dignitaries at the burial of the late SPLA leader on 6 August 2005 in Juba. I led the Uganda delegation, accompanied by the following seven ministers and Members of Parliament: hon. Amama Mbabazi, Defence; hon. Kahinda Otafiire, Water, Lands and Environment; hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, Internal Affairs; hon. Betty Akech, Security; hon. Augustine Nshimye, Foreign Affairs; hon. Okot Ogong, Youth; hon. Agard Didi, Entandikwa; hon. Mike Mukula, Health; our ambassador in Khartoum, Ambassador Katende was also present. 

Also the following Members of Parliament attended the burial of the late John Garang: hon. Aggrey Awori, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, hon. Ogwel Loote, hon. Zachary Olum, hon. Aek Lodou, and hon. Lydia Wanyoto. Some other Ugandans found themselves there. We have limited time and cannot go into details now. The most important thing was to hand over a condolence message on behalf of the Government to the Government of Sudan and the family of Dr Garang. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

As you are aware, the President travelled to Yei on 29 July 2005 and conveyed condolences to Mrs Rebecca Garang and the children as well as the new leadership of the SPLM. Through Garang’s successor, Gen. Salva Kiir, the President sent our condolences to the Government of Southern Sudan. Before then he had expressed our condolences to his Sudanese counterpart President Bashir.

Mr Speaker, I would now like to present the programme line up for the national mourning ceremony to take place tomorrow. Government has declared tomorrow, Wednesday 10 August 2005 a public holiday in honour of our fallen comrades. It also encompasses the fallen great leader of Sudan. We had a public holiday on Saturday specifically for him but we also remember him in this function.  

The national funeral service will be held at Kololo Independence Grounds. His Excellency the President shall preside and all ministers and Members of Parliament are invited to attend.  The programme is as follows: 

7.00 a.m.	-	Military assembles
8.00 a.m.	-	Mourners take their seats
8.15 a.m.	-	Relatives of the deceased arrive
9.15 a.m.	-	VIP’s including diplomats
9.30 a.m.	-	Army commander, Prime Minister 
               	-	Chief Justice and Speaker
9.45 a.m.	-	Vice President arrives
9.50 a.m.	-	Caskets of the deceased
10.00 a.m.	-	His Excellency the President, 
	-	Anthem National 
	-	MC announces the programme
	
The laying of wreaths will be done in this order:
 
1.	His Excellency the President 
2.	One wreath per family 
3.	A representative of State House
4.	A representative of Defence 
5.	Foreign Affairs 
6.	The Government of Sudan
7.	The Army Commander 
8.	The Dean of the Diplomatic Corps

Prayers will then follow the laying of wreaths; then eulogies from representatives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Sudan Government and the President, who will be the last Speaker.

After that will be final prayers, the national anthem, the departures in order of caskets and immediate family members followed by the President and other dignitaries.

We advise that as much possible the burials of our brothers and sister who perished take place on Thursday the 11th of August 2005. 

The following ministers will represent the Government at all the seven burials. We would like to apologise for not finding time to alert all of them and request that as they accept to undertake this task, they know that the decisions were made taking into account various factors of geography, ethnicity, language et cetera.

For Col Peter Nyakairu, hon. Amama Mbabazi; for Maj. Patrick Kiggundu, hon. Kahinda Otafiire; for Capt. Paul Kiyimba, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa; Lt John Munanura, hon. Jim Muhwezi; Corporal Hassan Kiiza, hon. Isaac Musumba; Mr Samuel Bakowa, hon. Janat Mukwaya; and Ms Lilian Kabaije, hon. Mary Mugyenyi.

Arrangements have already been made to transport the bodies and the relatives. Some are not travelling very far but others are, but arrangements are made with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for facilitation to enable those who have been requested to attend on behalf of the Government to do so with some ease.

Mr Speaker, it is really with sadness that this occasion has come to take place. It has caused a lot of grief among the people of Uganda. I would like to complement the people of Sudan who showed us courtesy at all stages. Our brothers and sister have gone, but let us continue to work for this country in order to sustain the good work that they were doing. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think there is need for debate. This is just for information. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, there is no need to debate this but since you represented us, maybe you have something to say.

MRS OGWAL: I am just seeking clarification. Mr Speaker, I heard the list of ministers who are going to represent both the Government and Parliament at those burials. It looks as if each will bury his or her own. I think this is a national loss and it would have been better if we got people from one region representing the Government in another region. It would carry the image and spirit of being Ugandans. These are our own people who have died and we want to be seen mourning the death of these people as a family. 

Secondly, we have seen the elaborate arrangements but my concern is that normally when public servants die we only give them honour at the time of burial. At the end of the day their families are left helpless with many problems and challenges. They are abandoned including some who held very high offices; for instance the veteran pilot who died, Mzee Nyakairu happened to be my relative, because just three weeks ago, his son married from my family. He has many children as some of you must have read. For a man to serve the country for these many years and after the burial it is all over, is quite unfortunate.  

We want to be assured by the Government that this has been an extraordinary event that the Government should do something about to compensate the families of the people we are going to bury on 11 August 2005. That will give comfort to the relatives and us. It has been a sad and national loss but please, let us not leave the burden to the families. Let the Government pick up the burden so that we all stand together in this sad encounter. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: The Cabinet will consider what hon. Cecilia Ogwal has said. There is no debate.  

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2005

5.49
Clause 95

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, clause 95 proposes to insert 10 Articles on transition and the committee examined these 10 Articles and made recommendations. We put them on record but the deferment came because of the many changes that are going to be proposed because of decisions already taken in the Bill.

I would therefore, propose that in dealing with clause 95 we deal with one Article at a time so that we are properly guided on how to proceed.  There are particular Articles that will not have any transitional effect because they have been deleted from the main body of the Bill. These could only be removed from the clause and we proceed to the ones that can generate debate.  

I propose for example, that the transitional Articles relating to the Uganda Police Force proposed in Article 291, there has been no amendment in the Bill on the Constitution since all the clauses were deleted. Therefore, it would have no effect if we deleted this particular proposal in Article 291 from clause 95. The same applies to Article 292, which is on the Prison Service and Article 294, which is on bodies whose membership has changed. We have not changed the membership of any body in the main Bill. Mr Chairman, if you could allow me to propose -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you propose we start with deletion?

MR MWESIGE: I agree with the chairman of the committee but I wish he would also remind the House that the committee has proposed the deletion of 288(2), (3) and (4). After further consultations the Government also agrees that Article 288(2), (3) and (4) of clause 95, be deleted.  

I agree that we deal with deletions first before we present the two additional amendments that I will seek to move on the same clause.  

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I, therefore, propose that we start with the proposed Article 291. As a result of the decision Parliament has taken on clauses 69 and 70, Article 288 might require amendments. I want the ones, which are for mere deletions.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members it is proposed that clause 95 has sections 2, 3 and 4 dealing with different subjects. Therefore, it is proposed that that part on page 67, which is Article 291, be deleted. This is a transitional provision relating to the Police Force. Since this is a deletion, we vote by show of hands. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)
 
THE CHAIRMAN: The result on clause 95 is: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 107. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The next one is clause 95 on Article 291, the transition provision relating to the Prisons Services. They propose to delete the clause.  

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_­)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 116. The ayes have it. 

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: The other provision is clause 95, on Article 294, on page 68. It proposes to delete because nothing has been done to warrant that provision.  

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the result is: no abstentions, none against, and those for are 112. The ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in the first part of the proposed Article 288, which relates to the term of Parliament ending at the same time with that of the President, the committee recommends that what is contained in the proposed clause 1 is sufficient. This would mean that the term of Parliament would expire on the 12 May 2005 the same day as that of the President. However, the committee recommends that the proposed sub-clauses (2), (3) and (4) should be deleted so that the details of the implication of what would have happened in the proposed clause 1 be handled administratively.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I accept the committee’s proposal to retain Article 288(1) so that what would have been done in (2), (3) and (4) be handled administratively.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Can we have firm guarantees that these administrative procedures will be attended to? 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The proposed end of term of Parliament coinciding with the Presidency is about a contract that this Parliament here has made with the people, and I think we are also parties to terminating our own contract. In that case, wouldn’t it amount to a breach of contract on our part?

MR KAGIMU: Mr Chairman, a while ago when we were talking about these sportsmen we said that once they have finished their role, they die in utter poverty, government rejects them and does not care about them. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has talked about the people who died in the helicopter. She suggests that government should take up their families so that they do not suffer.  

When we come to Members of Parliament, these clauses were going to cure that situation where a Member of Parliament might die and his family is abandoned. Article 288(2), (3) and (4) cure this issue. The chairman comes here and says it will be taken care of administratively. How administratively when big people die and their families are not thought about? We want to put safeguards such that we are sure that once something happens to a Member of Parliament, or if the term is shortened, there is no excuse whatsoever. I am surprised that members are leaving it to administration when you know very well that it is a very big risk to leave these things to chance. I ask the members to reject the chairman’s proposal so that we retain these clauses. They are very important. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I would like to join hon. Kagimu Kiwanuka in this matter. In this world you should only trust God. People change circumstantially and you would find yourself in trouble. In light of that if the chairman of the committee would like us to take him seriously, there should be an enabling law to affirm that the administrative considerations will yield fruits. Otherwise, we cannot trust that statement. 

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, this is a rather difficult subject to discuss but the chairman says it should be left to administrative measures. When you read Article 288(1), it as it is, I wonder on what legal basis this administrative action would be based. Will the Government unexpectedly decide to take action? Shouldn’t there be some legal basis on which this action should be taken? I am constrained to say that the record of the Government in fulfilling its promises has not been very good. I would wish to have a very firm assurance that this administrative action they are talking about will actually be carried out. If government agrees for it to be done administratively, we should ensure that there is a legal basis for this action.

THE CHAIRMAN: What will prompt administrative action and on whom? Who will initiate this administrative action and on what basis will the administrative action be taken?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seek clarification from the chairman of the committee.  In the wisdom of natural justice, what is wrong if we specified that a subsidiary law provide for compensation arising out of this transition is catered for? What is the problem? Why don’t we provide a clause so that it caters for every person who is affected by the transition?

THE CHAIRMAN: How will the Auditor-General accept the payment, on what basis?  

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we made this recommendation as a very sensitive response to the people that had appeared before the committee. The people that appeared before the committee, which I had the opportunity to chair, expressed – I do not know what word to use – absolute disgust. So we said, “If there can be a guarantee that the effect of the shortening of the term of Parliament can be dealt with administratively, it would be the best way to go.” That is the opinion of the committee. 

This Parliament can take its own decision but the committee, which sat and listened to the concerns of the citizens who appeared before it on these issues, did that. And that is why some members are saying there is a change of mind yet there is no change of mind. I am reading from a report dated 25 May 2005, and it is on page 15, paragraph 73. That is what is recommended but if this Parliament is no longer shy to those concerns we will be bound by whatever Parliament decides. We were feeling very shy about what had been brought before the committee and their recommendation is based on those considerations, but Parliament can take its own decision.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see the Constituent Assembly decided a definite term of Parliament. It was for a reason so that nobody tampers with it, not even the President dissolving Parliament. Actually in Odoki’s report they had at some time suggested that Parliament itself makes a resolution to dissolve itself and this was rejected.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Notwithstanding the explanation of the chairman and the fact that Article 93 remained non-repealed, which could be done in case the Executive does not oblige to those administrative issues, a member of the backbench would accordingly cause these clauses to be effected. I wish to defer from the committee’s position and considering that it is about shyness, the committee has pushed the argument about shyness. I want to say that what was constitutionally given should be constitutionally guaranteed. I think for that matter we are dealing with a transitional provision and such arrangements are always expected in the transition arrangement. Let these clauses remain as a guarantee to members for the deletion of the remaining part of the contract of this Parliament.

MR RUHINDI: In view of your very strong observation on the term of Parliament there could be another way of looking at this. We will find time at the end of this exercise to recommit clause 18(c) by inserting at the end of the article the following: “The Electoral Commission shall hold Presidential and general Parliamentary and Local Government Council elections within the first 30 days of the last 90 days before the expiration of the term of the President.”  

We could amend this and delete the expression, “first 30 days of the” so that it reads, “within the last 90 days before the expiration of the term of the President.” We should give latitude to the Electoral Commission to bring the joint election to 12th April –(Interjections)- yes, that would be a difference of one month, which means Parliament will be elected two months before taking office – one month actually because the term of the President expires on 12th May. In other words we shall be elected one month before taking office instead of the two months. We should let the term of Parliament run its course because you have made a very strong statement, which we had not yet reflected fully. In other words this other Article we are talking about, all of it goes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is, if the committee shied away because people addressed it, how will a public officer who will be controlling this work? We should not fear the pressure. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, we have carried out internal consultations and reading the mood in the House we are of the view that clause (2), (3) and (4) of 288 remain in the Bill and be considered as they are.  

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, having been guided by the spirit of the House I have no hesitation in accepting the proposal by the minister that those clauses be retained. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is there any other deletion?  

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I have two additional amendments to clause 95 –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Before he goes further, Mr Chairman, the issue of the term of office of Parliament is not a monetary matter. I want members to understand it. It is not a monetary matter; it is a principle, which is enshrined in the independence of Parliament. If we start tampering with our own terms then we are running away from the protection, which the Constitution had given to us to see that we are not tampered with, whether this Parliament or whatever Parliament that will follow. What we have just done, or what I fear we might be doing is that we are setting a dangerous precedent that the term of office of Parliament, the independence of Parliament, can be swayed.

I would rather suggest that we reconsider this matter carefully and go by what has been proposed by hon. Ruhindi. If we leave the term of office of Parliament to run its normal term, it does not matter when the election takes place. But if we say that we are going to buy ourselves out, in effect we would have breached our own contract. How do you breach your own contract and you expect to be compensated for it? I think we better be careful about this matter. 

I would rather run by what hon. Ruhinda has just said. We hold elections in April after all we have also done consultations. I understand the minister’s fear in holding elections in April is that there could be a rerun. We have asked the Electoral Commission and they assured us they could do a rerun within one month. So there should be no fear. I beg my colleagues to appreciate this matter. Do not play around with your own independence otherwise somebody will play around with it fully. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, we can take the example of the United States. Elections for President are in November but they take over in January. You could also have elections in April as the case may be and the other one comes when the term comes –(Applause)- there is no harm. First of all, you would have saved on holding the joint elections but you leave things to run on their own –(Interruption)

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This issue has become serious because a policy decision was taken that the elections should be held on the same day. Once the elections are going to be held on the same day and they are all tied up with the presidential elections, there are implications. Implication one is that the term of local governments will have to be extended and the term of Parliament will have to be shortened, if those are the implications.  

But now if you say that it continues the way it is going to be then it means there is bound to be a term of Parliament that might be shorter than five years and yet the Constitution designates a period of five years for Parliament. We are the transitional Parliament that is going to see this process from the various elections for Parliamentary, Presidential and local council into a consolidated election. How are we going to deal with it? These are the issues we have been brainstorming on and it has taken us a while.  

But what we had now considered was, if you hold the elections for instance as proposed by hon. Ruhindi in April or – you see the term of the President expires on the 12th of May and in order for you to extend it by one day you need a referenda to do that because you will be amending Article 105(1). So, the date of 12th May is fixed by the Constitution and can only be altered by a referendum. That is the difficulty. That is why all the others have to be moved around it.  

If you move it to 12th of April you have a month within which to hold a rerun election and the Electoral Commission has confirmed that it has that capacity to do this within one month –(Interjections)- excuse me, can I finish? The period was initially 60 days was to take care of the situations. The first situation was that if there was a rerun that should be dealt with in one month. If there was a petition, it should be sent to the Supreme Court. That is what was meant to be accommodated within the 60 days. Now the consideration is that it would do no harm at all that the term of Parliament expires on 2nd of July. But if you have a new Parliament that is elected on the 12th of March or the 12th of May and they continue sitting here up to the –(Interjections)- can I explain, so that if you are going to take a decision you also share what you have gone through in the last few months?  

If you are to wait for this period what will be the implications because you have a Parliament that has been elected, some have lost and some have regained their seats? What will be the kind of working relationship that would be from March up to July that you have some people sitting and waiting to come to Parliament? Is the period reasonably too short or too long? How do you bridge these difficulties?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, in answering that one you must consider another scenario. Suppose you have elections on 12th March for President and Parliament. The President’s term expires on 12th May but on 12th March some other person has been elected the President. What happens? –(Interjections)- yes, he waits. Therefore, in the same way if you can wait for the President to take over although he has been elected even Parliament can wait. (Applause)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, what is provided for in clause 1 of 28 is precisely what you have elaborately explained because what we are providing for in here is that, yes, Presidential and Parliamentary elections could take place latest 12th March. Of course the President elect will have to wait to assume office on 12th May when the incumbent President under the Constitution 105(1) is expected to hand over.  

In the same spirit we are saying Parliamentary elections take place around 12th March with presidential election because we have already agreed on that principle and the new Members of Parliament who have been elected wait. The incumbent MPs of the Seventh Parliament continue to do their business for two months until 12th May when there will be a formal hand over of both the Presidency and Parliament on 12th May. In our view this is the neatest way of doing things. The only period Members of Parliament will lose as a result of this adjustment is the period between 12th May and 2nd July. By simple calculation that is about one month and 50 days. So this is the period we are talking about. But having agreed to hold Presidential and Parliamentary elections –[Hon. Rwamirama: “Point of information”]- if you could hold on hon. Rwamirama.  

Having agreed on the principle that Presidential and Parliamentary elections and if practicable - that is what the Bill says in clause 18 - if practicable LC V elections to be held on the same day. Having agreed on that principle as the chairman correctly said, it became necessary, therefore, to come back and make adjustments that will make the realization of that principle possible.  That is why in this Bill we are also proposing that some councils, which should have expired in November this year, their term be extended up to April so that when elections are held around March their term also expires in April and the period between March and April is devoted to Presidential, Parliamentary and Local Government elections. By 12th May all the incumbent President, Parliament and local councils will have ended and we have a new Government in place. Sir, this is the best, orderly transitional arrangement we have made out of –(Interruption) 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, I want the minister to clarify. What is the problem if members are elected on 12th March and are sworn in on 2nd July? When the President is sworn in, he will not find a vacuum; he will find a running Parliament. We will have reduced all these arguments and put everything to level. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, let us vote on the clause 95. No, the committee withdrew its proposed amendment of deletion. The minister said we should consider it as it is in the Bill. Let us vote.  

MS ALASO: Thank you, Chairman. There was a proposal that I thought would take care of the proposal by hon. Ruhindi and hon. Ben Wacha.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ruhindi?

MS ALASO: Yes, that we run a full term of Parliament –(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: That can only come at recommittal. I think he was giving notice that to reduce on this long period from March to July we should perhaps hold elections in April so that that period is only two months or so.  But this can only come when we recommit that particular provision.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, the question of the provisions (2), (3) and (4) in Article 288 would not arise. If we vote on it, it presupposes we are looking at the compensatory element. Why don’t we stand over it and sort it out –(Interjections) 

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. You have guided this House that in certain jurisdictions Members of Parliament are elected, but the new ones are not sworn in immediately. Clause 95 is proposing that if the elections were held in March then our term would in effect end on the 12th of May. If we can extend our term up to the 12th of May, what is wrong with extending it up to the 2nd of July when our term is supposed to end such that during the period, March to 2nd July, whether you have won or lost, you continue being a Member of Parliament because you are elected for a period of five years? I do not see anything wrong with it.  

There are those who are saying that when one loses an election he will be demoralized. I cannot see what will demoralize me. Assuming an incumbent President loses in March, will he not stay in office until May? What is wrong with the Member of Parliament who has lost to stay in Parliament? It happens in many other areas. Otherwise, for us to attempt to provide for compensation when it is us who are going to terminate our own employment, it is wrong, it is immoral and we must not attempt it. So, I propose that the election takes place on the same day, 12th March, but our term continues up to the 2nd of July.

MR KAKOOZA:  Mr Chairman, I entirely agree. You see my problem is, how do you terminate yourself and then compensate yourself? There is a scenario where the President is swearing in in May, should he also wait up to July to form the Cabinet? I would think that in performance of a change of a system there must be a provision of a transition, which can be created and be arranged. As much as Presidential elections take place in March, the swearing in of the President comes in May. He cannot wait to form Cabinet in July and again you cannot terminate yourself and then compensate yourself, it becomes wrong. I propose that after Parliamentary elections have taken place in March and then the President in May, we also end there.

THE CHAIRMAN: We can take the example of Zimbabwe.  In Zimbabwe the elections for Parliament and the President are not on the same day. So you find the President moving with the Parliament with which he was not elected. The term of President in Zimbabwe is six months longer than the term of Parliament.  So, it may not be right for the President to run with the Parliament, which he has found and then the other one takes over.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I just want to remind colleagues that in the present arrangement we do not have a coincidence of terms of Parliament and the President that is why we have May and July. There had been agitations especially by the opposition, which thought that this arrangement was to the advantage of one side that we must have elections at the same time with the President. That is what we have been saying all along. So, the proposition here is to bring the term of Parliament in line with the term of President in order to have elections at the same time. That is point No. 1. 

Point No. 2, the presidential elections by constitutional provision cannot go beyond March 12th. The election cannot go beyond March 12th. Why? Because that is what the Constitution says. It says there must be 60 days between the election and the swearing in. Okay?  

MR RUHINDI: Yes, that is the current constitutional position, but its entrenchment is not as that of extending it beyond 12th May. In other words, the one you are talking about can be amended the way we are doing it here and make it a bit more flexible.

MR MWESIGE: The Article hon. Ruhindi is talking about has already been amended in clause 18 of the Bill. If we are talking about re-committal, this is not the right time because re-committal is not an automatic right. Re-committal is re-committal upon a motion, which must be approved by this House. It would be speculative in my view to start considering clauses that we anticipate, to consider to re-committal even before the motion for re-committal has been moved and adopted. So, clearly we should restrict our amendments, if any, to clause (1) of Article 22(88).

MR MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, on the proposition that Parliament should be elected on 12th March and remain legislating for four months, may I inform members that in the Sixth Parliament about 50 percent of members were defeated? So, 50 percent of you in this Parliament were new at the time we came in. So the proposal that those who were defeated should continue legislating for four months really -(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Losing an election does not in any way suggest that a member is incompetent or can no longer render service to this country. In this House there are people who lost elections, they are seated in these benches and they are members of the Executive.  Yes, so losing an election does not take away my commitment to serving Uganda. (Laughter)

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Minister for giving way. What we are talking about is a contract between the electorate and ourselves. That is very clear. If an election is carried out and you lose it means they have withdrawn their contract from you. Your staying here for another four months is a nuisance. (Laughter) It is a contract. It does not raise your competence -(Interruption)- can I develop my point? Let me develop my point; I am still developing a point. What it means -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us not lose track while dealing with this issue. The question is not that because a half of them have lost, 100 of them may come. So, you do not use the argument that even when you have not been elected - the question is the mandate. Your mandate is your mandate -(Applause)- the mandate that was given to them is five years. So the question of a half of them, how do you know it will be a half of them? That should not be used in the argument. I think the argument may be that it is better to coincide with the present staff.

MR MBABAZI: Well, certainly I would want to be the last person to be seen to be arguing with the Chair. Clearly I would not and I do not intend to do so. My point is that this House, I agree with the Chair, has full mandate to act on behalf of our people. It has one hundred percent mandate except where the Constitution says the people have it, like changing the term of the President, which can only be by referendum after the five years. But the rest can be done by this Parliament because they are mandated to do so and that is precisely what we are doing now. That is what we are attempting to do; it is not that we are acting in breach of the Constitution.  

The point is that if we are to achieve a coincidence of terms and we cannot change the term of the President except by referendum, the only way we can do it now in order to achieve the desired objective of having elections at the same time is to reduce the cost, to reduce fatigue in electioneering. You know all those reasons we have been giving, the only way we could do it was this way and it is within our power as Parliament to do it. So this idea of a contract and compensation - you as the representative are the very voice of your people. When you as a Member of Parliament speak here, it is your people speaking. That is how I take it and that is what Parliament means. Therefore, when you take decisions for instance to amend the Constitution where Parliament is empowered to do so, it is the people who have done it because you are empowered to do it on their behalf.  

Therefore, the idea here was that in order to achieve that coincidence we should have elections around 12th March for both Parliament and the President in order to achieve in future - because if we wait until July it means that every round of elections we will have a Parliament, which is elected but is not legislating or doing its job for four months. So, what we are trying to achieve is to have these five years of Parliament and President together so that this question of compensation is done only now and in future it will not arise.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform hon. Mbabazi that we have people who are employed on contract and time comes when they are conscious that the contract is no longer renewable. These people continue working and they leave office when time is due. I do not see the problem with having elections at the same time with the President. The fear that Members of Parliament who have lost elections should not stay here is actually a loss of confidence in Members of Parliament as statesmen.  

So, it is against this background that actually you either explain to us the fears of staying with us or with a new President because our term ends in July. We are trying to cure a problem of breaching our own contract and compensating ourselves and by taking this line we are curing two things. One, we are reducing on cost, and having elections with the President we are also saving government expenditure to compensate people. We are also saving ourselves from the moral behaviour of having terminated a contract ourselves and again compensating ourselves.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I would like to move a motion without notice that the question be put because I have been seated in this House and I have listened to the arguments and where we have reached really there are no new arguments coming up. You did guide that for those who are interested in recommitting clause 18 they could do so at an appropriate time. But as of now we are dealing with clause 95 and the chairperson did withdraw his amendment. I would, therefore, move the motion that you put the question to this Article, which we are dealing with, that is Article 95, and we vote on it. I would like to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, the argument as it is is that there are others who say it should not be there and there are others who say it should be there. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, before the question is put to clause 95, I had additional amendments, which I want to introduce to Article 297 and these amendments have been circulated to members. As you know the referendum was held on 28 July 2005 and the new Multi-party political system was adopted. As the Movement political system goes in abeyance, it is important and necessary that the people who have dedicated service to the Movement political system are accorded due respect and due retirement benefits. I therefore, move, that the transitional clause 297(1) be amended –(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Chairman, I arise with a lot of pain because we are late and we wish to finish this exercise as quickly as possible. We were in the middle of another clause and we were more or less concluding this particular clause. Is this procedure now correct for us to abandon a clause we are just about to conclude and start a new one? Certainly, is it not causing a lot of confusion really in our minds?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Honourable members, I think the best way to handle this, which seems to be a controversial clause, is that we deal with various parts that we have brought in for purposes of transition rather than looking at it as a package. It will be clear that way rather than dealing with it in a package so that we finish the first part, which we were dealing with, then we move to the other one later.

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In the spirit of that we were now dealing with proposed Article 288, which is one of the ten Articles in clause 95. There is need to resolve our differences on the proposed Article 288. What has been proposed and the committee’s position that has been withdrawn is that it has reinstated the proposed Article 288 as it is in the Bill. We may need to take a decision on whether that Article 288 should stand so that it clears the way for what we will do next.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, then there must be a motion either to delete or to make it otherwise, if there is no motion, we vote on it as it is.

MR WANDERA: I beg to move that the proposed Article 288 under clause 95, be deleted. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, let us vote on the motion.

MR WANDERA: The proposed Article 288 on the term of current Parliament should be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, we can vote but what will be the consequences? Can you explain the deletion?

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, we have a mandate of five years supposed to end on the 2nd July and the import of deleting the proposed Article 288 would mean that our term ends on the 2nd of July 2005 and the elections would be held on the same day with those of the President as already passed in Article 61.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that we delete this provision – the import of his amendment is that if we delete this provision in 288 the position as it is in the current Constitution remains and the term of Parliament ends on 2nd July 2005. That is the import. The elections take place at the same time with that of the President but the expiry of the term of the Parliament ends as provided for in the Constitution and that is on the day that you were sworn in as a Member of Parliament, in July.  

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We need to look into this thing very deeply –(Interjection)– if you could give me your ears, we need to look into this thing extremely deeply because we have talked about too many proposals and my feeling is that at 7.00 O’clock we might have less glucose in ourselves. Let us see what we are voting on and what it means. If we vote first of all that elections are held on the same day for both the President and that is finished but Parliament’s life continues to July, which means the next Parliament will also continue to July, then that will be the standard for all the years to come.   

Mr Chairman, there is a phrase which goes, “It is easier said than done.” We need to look at this thing more seriously. One important work for Parliament between March and July is the Budget, among other things, and let us be realistic. It is not being unpatriotic; it is not being non-stately. I have gone to my constituency, I have lost elections I know there is no more serious business with me in Parliament, I mean I am a human being I must look for what I am going to do next. This is natural. I must start thinking of what I am going to do next on the day I have lost elections. So, much as I might love my country – hon. Wandera, you have been on the Floor so now give me time. Much as I love my country, I also love myself and I must find what to do.  

It is something we must imagine because while somebody was arguing that even if you know your contract is ending you still work it through; there are terms of that contract that if you do not work it through you can be fired. As a Member of Parliament my contract is with the people. As soon as I have lost elections I will have to decide how many hours I spend in Parliament and how many hours I spend looking for a business or a job. To imagine more than half of Parliament or whatever because we cannot predict how many –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a motion, either you support it or oppose it.

LT GEN. TUMWINE: I would rather we go back and work out to see all the worst-case scenarios. We are really trying to go into a very  –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us vote on the motion.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, we have taken a long time considering this matter; I think we have almost made up our minds. I move that the question be put so that we vote on the matter.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question –(Interruption)

HON. MEMBER: Motion –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: How many motions are we going to have? According to our rules we can only dispose of one at a time. Let us dispose of this and see how we can proceed. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now I put the question to the motion by hon. Wandera that we delete the proposed Article 288 under clause 95.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the position is as follows: 14 abstentions, those for are 61, and those against are 62. The noes have it. (Applause) 

(Question negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now we move to Article 288, and vote on it by roll call.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, Articles 288 and 289 and the rest are components of clause 95.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, okay.

MR MWESIGE: Yes, Sir. So following are amendments by way of deletion, and what we have retained we would expect a question to be put on clause 95 by roll call.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us vote on clause 95 as amended, by roll call. 

(Question put)

AYES:
1.	 AACHILLA JOHN REX 
2.	 AADROA ONZIMA ALEX 
3.	 AEL ARK LODOU 
4.	 AGARD DIDI 
5.	 AKAKI AYUMU JOVINO
6.	 AKECH OKULLO BETTY 
7.	 AKELLO DINAH GRACE 
8.	 ALI MOSES 
9.	 ALINTUMA NSAMBU 
10.	ALISEMERA BABIHA 
11.	ALONGA OTHMAN 
12.	AMAJO MARY 
13.	AMAMA MBABAZI 
14.	AMONGIN APORU 
15.	ANGIRO GUTOMOI 
16.	ARAPKISSA YEKKO 
17.	ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA 
18.	BADDA FRED 
19.	BALIKUDEMBE JOSEPH 
20.	BANYENZAKI HENRY 
21.	BASALIZA ARAALI 
22.	BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE 
23.	BIIRA BWAMBALE LOYCE
24.	BINTU ABWOOLI LUKUMU JALIA 
25.	BIRIMUMAASO MULINDWA 
26.	BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE GERALDINE 
27.	BITANGARO SAMUEL 
28.	BUTIME TOM 
29.	BYABAGAMBI JOHN 
30.	BYAMUKAMA DORA 
31.	BYENKYA NYAKAISIKI BEATRICE 
32.	CHEBROT CHEMOIKO STEVEN 
33.	EKANYA GEOFFREY 
34.	ERIYO JESSICA 
35.	ESELE JOHN PETER 
36.	ETONU BENEDICT 
37.	IMUMET ISAIAH 
38.	ISANGA NAKADAMA LUKIA 
39.	KABAKUMBA LABWONI MASIKO 
40.	KABAREEBE AMON-REEVES 
41.	KAFABUSA WERIKHE MICHAEL 
42.	KAGIMU KIWANUKA MAURICE 
43.	KAGONYERA MONDO 
44.	KAJURA MUGANWA HENRY 
45.	KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA VICTORIA 
46.	KAKOOZA JAMES 
47.	KALULE SSENGO EMMANUEL 
48.	KAMANDA BATALINGAYA COS 
49.	KASAMBA MATHIAS 
50.	KASIRIVU ATWOOKI BALTAZAR 
51.	KATONGOLE BADRU 
52.	KAWOYA BANGIRANA ANIFA 
53.	KIGYAGI ARIMPA JOHN 
54.	KINOBE JIMMY WILLIAM  
55.	KIRASO BIRUNGI BEATRICE 
56.	KITHENDE KALIBOGHA APOLINARIS 
57.	KIWAGAMA WILLIAM WILBERFORCE 
58.	KIWALABYE MUSOKE DANIEL 
59.	KIYONGA CHRISPUS WALTER 
60.	KOLUO CHARLES PETER 
61.	KUBEKETERYA JAMES 
62.	KULE MURANGA JOSEPH 
63.	KYAHURWENDA ABWOOLI TOMSON 
64.	KYATUHEIRE JACQUELINE 
65.	LOKERIS APARITE PAUL 
66.	LOKERIS PETER AIMAT 
67.	LOLEM MICAH 
68.	LULE MAWIYA UMAR 
69.	MAATE ROGERS 
70.	MALINGA JOHNSON 
71.	MASIKO KOMUHANGI WINFRED 
72.	MATOVU BYATIKE 
73.	MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA 
74.	MUGAMBE JOSEPH 
75.	MUGERWA NAMAGGWA SAUDA 
76.	MUHWEZI KATUGUGU JIM 
77.	MUKAMA FRANCIS JOSEPH 
78.	MUKASA MURULI WILSON 
79.	MULENGANI BERNARD 
80.	MUTULUUZA PETER CLAVERI 
81.	MWAKA NAKIBONEKA VICTORIA 
82.	MWESIGE ADOLF
83.	MWESIGYE RUHINDI HOPE 
84.	NABETA NASANI 
85.	NANKABIRWA SSENTAMU RUTH 
86.	NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI 
87.	NASASIRA JOHN 
88.	NAYIGA FLORENCE SEKABIRA 
89.	NDAWULA ALI SEKYANZI 
90.	NSABA BUTURO JAMES 
91.	NSHIMYE SEBUTULO AUGUSTINE 
92.	NUWAGABA HERBERT MUNTUYERA 
93.	NYENDWOHA MUTITI JONATHAN 
94.	OBBO HENRY JOSEPH 
95.	OCHIENG PETER PATRICK 
96.	OKURUT KAROORO MARY 
97.	OMWONY OJWOK 
98.	ONEK OBALOKER HILARY 
99.	OPANGE LOUIS 
100.	ORECH DAVID MARTIN 
101.	ORYEM HENRY OKELLO 
102.	PATAKI AMASI 
103.	RUKUNDO SERAPIO 
104.	RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI MARY 
105.	RWAKIMARI BEATRICE 
106.	RWAMIRAMA KANYONTOLE BRIGHT 
107.	SEBALU MIKE KENNEDY 
108.	SSEKIKUBO THEODORE 
109.	SEKITOLEKO JULIET KABONESA 
110.	SENINDE NANSUBUGA ROSEMARY 
111.	SINABULYA NAMABIDDE SYLVIA
112.	SSEMPANGI KEFA FREDERICK 
113.	SSENTONGO NABULYA TEOPISTA 
114.	TIPERU NUSURA 
115.	TUBBO NAKWANG CHRISTINE 
116.	TUMA RUTH 
117.	WABUDEYA MUKAYE BEATRICE 
118.	WAMBUZI GAGAWALA NELSON 
119.	WONEKA OLIVER  
120.	WOPUWA GEORGE WILLIAM
121.	YIGA ANTHONY 
122.	ZZIWA MARGARET NANTONGO 

NOES:
1.	AANIMU ANGUPALE 
2.	ALASO ASIANUT ALICE 
3.	AMONGI BETTY ONGOM 
4.	ARUMADRI JOHN DRAZU
5.	ATENG OTIM MARGARET
6.	ATIM OGWAL CECELIA 
7.	BABA DIRI MARGARET 
8.	BASHAIJA KAZOORA JOHN
9.	KAJEKE WILFRED 
10.	LUKYAMUZI JOHN KEN
11.	NABWISO BULIMA WILBERFORCE 
12.	NANDALA MAFABI NATHAN 
13.	OLUM ZACHARY 
14.	OMODI OKOT  
15.	SABIITI JACK 
16.	WAGONDA MUGULI JOHN WILSON 
17.	WANDERA MARTIN 

ABSTENTIONS:
1.	 ANANG-ODUR TOMSON
2.	 BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT 
3.	 NAMUSOKE KIYINGI SARAH 
4.	 NSUBUGA NSAMBU 
5.	 OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY 
6.	 OULANYAH JACOB 
7.	 RUHINDI FREDDIE
8.	 TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO 

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the position on clause 95 as amended is: eight abstentions, 17 against, and those for are 122. The ayes have it. (Applause).

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 95 as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered clause 95 of the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005 and adopted it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that we adopt the report of the Committee of the Whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We are nearing the end of this particular Bill with a few things remaining but tomorrow as you have heard is a public holiday because of things that happened to us. Therefore, the House will be adjourned to Thursday. 

I hope you will be able to raise the numbers, having been told that some ministers will be away, and some other members. So, we adjourn to Thursday at 10.00 a.m. to continue with this -(Interjections)- 2.00 p.m. Let us start in the morning, honourable members –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I heard a statement from the Prime Minister about burial arrangements of these people and they were attaching several people here. Are we not likely to run into problems of lack of quorum?

THE SPEAKER: I quite appreciate that because I understand the new districts are also setting up leaders –(Interjection)- Kaliro included. 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: And Isingiro.

THE SPEAKER: So, in that case then we adjourn to Friday –(Interjection)- at 10.00 p.m. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 7.46 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 12 August 2005 at 10.00 p.m.)


