Thursday, 13 August 2015

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. It is my prayer that the temperatures in the House have cooled down a little so that we are able to proceed.  (Laughter) That is why we have turned on the air conditioner a little more today.

Honourable members, the East African Community Military Games and Cultural Events is an annual event hosted by member states every year on rotational basis. The 2015 event, the ninth edition in series will be hosted by Uganda from 16 - 30 August 2015.This is therefore, to request you to attend this event as follows;
    1. Official opening ceremony on the 16 August 2015 at 16.00 hours at Mandela National Stadium, Namboole.
    2.  The closing ceremony on the 26 August 2015 at Mandela National Stadium, Namboole.
    3.  The closing banquette on 26 August 2015, at the Common Wealth Resort, Munyonyo at 20:30 hours; that is in the evening.
 
Honourable members, you are requested to mark these dates and honour the regional activity by being present. 

The Office of the Speaker has also received notification from the Democratic Party; “Following our recent National Delegates Conference that was held on 23 to 26 July 2015, the party leadership was renewed with new leaders coming to the National Executive Committee of the party and others retaining their positions.

Consequently, hon. Joseph G Ssewungu, Member of Parliament for Kalungu West, has been appointed the new party whip for the Democratic Party Members in Parliament –(Applause)– replacing hon. Richard Sebuliba Mutumba, Member of Parliament for Kawempe South with effect from 1 August 2015. By copy of this letter, all concerned are here by informed.” 

Honourable members, this is to bring to your attention that the new whip of the Democratic Party in the House is hon. Joseph Ssewungu –(Applause)- Congratulations. We do not put the question to that because he is a Member of Parliament. Thank you. 

2.16
MS GRACE FREEDOM KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Women Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Following yesterday’s information about the sit-down strike in the universities, many students who have been admitted to these universities are stranded. They would like to pick their admission forms in order to access the education loan scheme. We are told that the deadline for applying for the loan scheme is 14 August 2015, which is tomorrow.

I would like to know from the Ministry of Education or any representative here to explain to us what will happen to the students who would have accessed these loan forms but now they are not able to because they cannot pick the forms from the respective universities. I would request that Government thinks about extending this deadline so that our students can access this loan.

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we indicated yesterday, we would have a meeting with the non-teaching staff association. We had this meeting under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister. The discussion was very candid and the Prime Minister will be communicating to this House what the way forward is.

We are aware of the deadline for the students’ loans application forms and Government will adjust the deadline to ensure that no one is affected to that effect.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When will this be done, since it is expiring tomorrow?

MR BAHATI: I am sure, working with the Ministry of Education, we should be able to communicate this evening to the whole country so that everybody knows that the deadline for picking application forms for the students loan scheme has been extended so that we allow students to access it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, yesterday, the honourable minister promised to give us a report about teachers in Masaka District who have spent three months without getting their salaries. Don’t you think it would be procedural right for him to give an answer now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have any response to that?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence that along the way, before the end of today, we had prepared the statement but we could not access your office to have it on the Order Paper because we had submitted the statement. But before the end of this sitting, if allowed on the Order Paper, I will be able to make that statement on what is happening with the payment of salaries, particularly Masaka, and other two districts. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR OMWONYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Yesterday, the woman representative of Buikwe made a very pertinent question to the Prime Minister about payment of pensioners. The Prime Minister said the Minister of Finance would make a statement today. Can we, please, have that statement because the pensioners are suffering? That is the money they have been saving to make them comfortable as they live their retirement life. I thank you.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we promised to make three statements actually. One on the Financial Intelligence Authority, another one for payment of teachers in Masaka District and the third one was in pension arrears. Mr Speaker, if you allow me along the way, I will be able to make written statements but also if you allow me, I can make verbal statements on two of them. I do not know which one Members would prefer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to make a written statement or you want to make oral statements?

MR BAHATI: I would prefer that we make written statements which will come in the next fifteen minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable members, we wait and adjust the Order Paper accordingly to accommodate the statements from the minister.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter, regarding a petition from Kawempe North constituents.
When I look at the Order Paper, it is under business to follow and indeed given the fact that it has been here for almost four years, and given the fact that we are about to go for recess, Mr Speaker, I request your guidance that this petition is uplifted so that it is handled before we go for recess.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ssebagala. As you are already aware, a committee prepared a report which is ready and has been submitted to the Clerk’s office. We have also received copies of this.

It is awaiting inclusion on the Order Paper for discussion. We will work on that before we go on recess. I will be altering the Order Paper to accommodate the statements from the minister. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

2.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Financial Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. I have attached the certificate of financial implications from the Ministry of Finance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for expeditious handling and reporting so that we see how to proceed with the Bill.

STATEMENT BY YOUTH MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT ON INTERNATIONAL YOUTH DAY

2.23
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, Uganda joined the rest of the world to celebrate International Youth day yesterday.

The International Youth day was gazetted by the United Nations, to recognise the importance of the youth and the contribution they make to the society.

As a member country, Uganda joined the rest of the world and commemorated the day in Katakwi District, Eastern Uganda. The theme of the day was “We are the investment choices we make: Youth matter”.

As we commemorate this day, we applaud Government of Uganda on the various achievements and investments for the benefit of the youth and the community. Notably, the Youth Livelihood Programme, the Youth Capital Venture Fund, the Students’ Loan Scheme, Skilling Uganda and Universal Primary and Secondary education. 

Significant progress has also been registered in job creation through attracting investments and industrialisation in Uganda. We request the government of Uganda to continue investing in young people through tailor-made and youth-focussed programme in multi-sectoral way.

The youth being a bigger population, it is vital that we deliberately invest in their development. We call upon Parliament to scrutinise and ensure laws and policies that are passed cognisant to address the youth question.

We also call upon Government to streamline implementation and coordination challenges to ensure programmes that target youth meaningfully for sustainable socio-economic development.

Key among the pending issues for Government include; the passing of the National Youth Policy by Cabinet, approving the National Action Plan for Youth Employment and approving the National Action Plan for   the Youth.

As we move to the elective period, we also call upon all political parties and actors to take concern of the youth issues in their manifestos and agenda; to desist from using the youth as perpetuators of election related violence. 

The youth of Uganda embrace new values and are ready to play their part to contribute, not only to their own development but also to that of their country. We should also join hands and support our youth to develop our country. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you recall that there issues with this kind of statement. Whether it attracts a debate or not but I will allow a small debate on this matter. Each member will be taking three minutes and we will have a limited debate. When I see the numbers increasing I might have to come down to two minutes so that we can accommodate as many.

2.27
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga Count West, Kibaale): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for the brief statement. For our part, as a country, I would have loved an honourable minister to appraise us on such an important day when they would handle issues facing the young people, particularly job creation both in town and in rural areas.

The other area would be the type of retooling our youth who are being planned for such that they can be beneficial to our country.

The other area where I would also like the ministry to direct its mind-we can handle issues like drug abuse, gambling, which are taking on the young generation, so that we can have hope.

Are they preparing the young people to take on leadership for this country? I would like to hear from the submission of my senior the number of people he has prepared to replace him, because since 1980, it is a very long period, inside here. (Laughter)

In addition to that, as we have always demanded, we would like to see a head of state trying to say, “30 years down the road is too much for me; young people, please, prepare to take over.” (Interjections) Which ideology are you building? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.30
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the member for the statement. But the way I know the youth, I think hon. Nakabale was being economical with his statement.

There are quite a lot of issues to be raised. For instance, I would have wanted to know, how far we have moved with the youth entrepreneurial scheme, because that is very critical. It was within the election manifesto of Government but up to now, we do not see its impact on the ground.

Mr Speaker, our people need to be assisted, particularly the youth. It should not always be in politics that we put good and colourful manifestos but its implementation remains a dream yet to be realised.

Mr Speaker, the youth in the rural areas remain completely vulnerable. When hon. Nakabaale was saying the youth should not be used as perpetrators of elections violence; that is the desired position but what is there for the youth? You can only entice them away from violence when they are busy, engaged in income generating activities, when they are sweating and their bodies are strong, when they are enjoying sports and more importantly when there is something to pocket.

However, as it stands now, the idle youth shall always be vulnerable, used in election violence and other vices. Therefore, the only remedy we can have, the panacea for that is to allow them to be engaged in productive activities. We all represent the youth in our constituencies. That is why it is imperative that at the end of the day –(Member timed out.)

2.32
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also join the rest in commending hon. Nakabaale for the statement presented and I am particularly touched with what hon. Ssekikubo was dwelling on - the appeal that the various political parties and actors desist from using the youth as perpetrators of election violence.

The youth should be seen as the foundation for the leadership of this country, both now and the future. Therefore, the way we engage them, the values we inculcate into them should be values that promote peace, tolerance and meaningful co-existence. Unfortunately, we the politicians have deviated from that line and used them for our own selfish interests and thereafter, abandon them.

It is my appeal that we all take what hon. Nakabaale has presented to us and practice it as we are entering the election period. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.34
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, as living testimony of the leadership of the youth of Uganda that was nurtured, groomed and mentored by the youth council, I rise to support the statement made by the youth Members of Parliament on the occasion marking the celebration of the International Youth Day where Uganda joined other member states of the United Nations yesterday.

In the case of Uganda, it is imperative that we take stock of two very important programmes that have been introduced meant to revamp the young people of Uganda hence bringing about socio-economic development. 

First, is the Youth Livelihood Programmes. I would like to say that investing in the youth is no longer a choice but an imperative obligation on any Government like that of the National Resistance Movement. That is why we earmarked a huge sum of money that is currently going to every district of Uganda meant to be accessed by the young people.

Mr Speaker, my point of disappointment is to the effect that even last financial year, some districts of Uganda could not make young people access the small monies that were sent to them. Money had to be sent back to the centre. I think the young people must take a centre stage in accessing the Youth Livelihood Funds being channelled to all districts of Uganda in order for them to get involved in productive ventures other than running after politicians.

Secondly, is the question of funding youth council –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members let me recognise, in the VIP gallery, this afternoon, we have hon. Jovino Akaki, former Member of Parliament for Kwania County and former Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. You are welcome. (Applause)

2.36
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to applaud hon. Nakabaale for presenting the statement in regards to the International Youth Day that was celebrated yesterday in Katakwi District.

As a Parliament of Uganda, as we celebrate most of these days, we have to be counting the milestones where we have made achievements. We are progressing well under this Government because I know very well that I am mentored from the youth leadership, from Uganda National Students Association (UNSA) a strong institution in Uganda to the National Youth Council. Today, when you look at the African countries, Uganda sets an example in terms of having the young people in the whole world. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware, actually the youngest Member of Parliament that we have in the world happens to come from Uganda, hon. Alengot. I think that is something that the world looks at. However, I would like us to look at how we can change the attitude of the young people. As we pass these policies here, we also look at reviewing the different curricula because the world today is going into production and service delivery; and that is the young person.

If we are talking about unemployment today, in Africa, most young people leave universities to looking for white-collar jobs. In Europe and any other countries, the young people grow up knowing they are going to be computer wizards, entrepreneurs of different areas and sectors. In Uganda, we want to look for jobs. I think that is something we must change.

The young people in Uganda are also being destroyed; today I am a young person, I go to a club and you find young people taking –(Member timed out.)

2.38
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the sake of being polite, I would like to thank hon. Nakabaale for this statement. Otherwise, I am not happy with the statement; it is as if you are fulfilling an obligation. It is as if you are carrying out a ritual.

Matters dealing with youth are beyond what you have given and it is on record that the youth Members of Parliament here even promised to undress themselves because of the youth. For example, when you are giving us this statement, you have talked about all these programmes including the loan scheme. What record do you have about the loan scheme? What we passed in the law is not what is taking place and a number of youth are failing to go to school because they took different categories leaving out what the law states.

When you go to our districts, Members you will bear witness with me, most of the youth who went to apply for these funds, the conditions were very harsh to them. 

Secondly, when you talk about the youth, you need to give us the detail of how they have moved, who have succeeded, what are they doing? What have they achieved? And how far have they gone. However, what I am seeing here, you have given us a report in future and present tense though you have reported in past tense and that is very funny of you.

Therefore, next time, we need a detailed report of what is happening with the youth. When you talk of what hon. Hamson Obua has stated here, why have funds been sent back to the centre? The youth are not able to access these funds. However, because there is a youth day and you want to fulfil an obligation, you write something very short and you are very comfortable telling us about politics. Yes, we shall continue using them unless they get a better solution for themselves.

Most of the youth we have in Uganda, basically in my constituency, do not need a lot of money but how can you ask a youth to give a land title, yet, he has no property to access money? These are the things happening – (Member timed out.)

2.41
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the youth Member of Parliament who has made a statement here. However, the statement leaves a lot to be desired. 
First of all, the progress reported as having been attained has never been accompanied by data, by category of people. There are youth in and out of school, in urban centres and rural areas, which of the youth are you referring to as having made progress, as having gained under the NRM Government?

Mr Speaker, the concept of International Youth Day, in my understanding is intended to make people move towards certain international standards where the youth draw attention of people towards them so that the stakeholders can make policies, which can help them. 

Our youth here if you look at the education sector, accessing university education is so discriminatory, performance in rural schools which would - a government sponsorship in the university is a problem. Government came up with a solution, which I think are some of the things you are talking of as a success story, districts quota system. However, you know what is happening? The best student from Moyo who has even failed to get admitted to university on Government sponsorship is admitted on the second lot of quota. This person is not given the course of his choice; he is pushed to do a course, which is not marketable. 

This person cannot also be allowed to change the sponsorship should he go to study diploma instead of a degree. I have a student from Obongi admitted to Mbarara University to do Bachelor of Science with Chemistry and Mathematics but this student wanted to do engineering; he opted to go to Lira Technical Institute to study diploma in Civil Engineering but his sponsorship cannot be transferred from Mbarara University to Lira Technical Institute, yet this is a course chosen by the student.

The policies put by this Government are so discriminatory; they are going to produce two classes of people and therefore, the youth will not benefit. 

In my view, therefore, the youth in Parliament here should lobby instead of praising the government. There are more gaps than progress. You should not be praising the government –(Member timed out.)

2.44
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion and I will dwell my discussions around the curriculum. The mover has talked of Skilling Uganda. Skilling Uganda should be a programme for all the institutions right from primary up to the higher level. The good thing some of us have been youth; we started learning agriculture right from primary where you had a farm class by class and then you would practise and know how to keep it at home.

As far as the Youth Livelihood Programme is concerned, they are youth who are in the rural areas, with disabilities who are not accessing this money because there is an attachment of a loan. How I wish Government could come with an affirmative action of the funds that can support these people to some level and then they are able to come and benefit from the funds. I interacted with some Community Based Organisations (CBOs) and they told me it is not very easy to get 30 disabled people in a village who are young people to form a group and yet when you tell other people to integrate, they are also not accepting these young people with disabilities.

I would like to call upon an affirmative fund, which can bring the levels of the poor youth and youth with disability to some level that they can then get the youth livelihood programme which has got an attachment of a loan. 

Mr Speaker, when we talk about the loan scheme, even the loan scheme terms are not favourable to some people and I would like again to call upon the Ministry of Education to consider taking this all over the country in a more affirmative way because some of our young people have reported to us that they have not been considered for the loan scheme. (Member timed out.)

2.46
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to thank hon. Nakabale for the good statement but there are some issues that we need to address. I will start with the Youth Livelihood Programme, which was a very good initiative. However, we need to train our youth more and to increase the funds because if you select only one youth group in a parish, I wonder how you will cover the whole district when the groups that are in a village are more than one. So, I think it is also becoming a problem, we need to look for a way of covering the whole district.

Secondly, on the issue of the Youth Livelihood Programme, we did not train our youth enough. In my district, they arrested some youth who had used the money wrongly and their parents had to sell a garden to pay back this money. This is not good on the side of the parent. 

On the issue of the curriculum in schools, this should start right away from primary. When we were still in primary they used to teach us to go for farming. When you go to secondary you use the same skills. I have seen girls finishing universities and they are on the streets and they decide to go and study fashion and design so that they can employ themselves. If it had been included in the curriculum it would be easy for students to acquire these skills.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we have very many youth, especially those that have not got chance to go to school who are surviving on riding “boda boda”. We have very many youth who are riding “boda boda” but without permits because to get a permit, for example from Kisoro, you have to travel all the way to Mbarara. I do not know whether Government can look into this so that we can decentralise this programme so that the youth of Kisoro can also access these permits instead of killing our people day and night.

Lastly, on the issue of Skilling Uganda, I have seen these funds moving to particular districts  and it is the same districts that get this money year in and year out -(Member timed out.)

2.49
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by commending Government for the deliberate efforts it has put towards empowering the youth and trying to make sure that the standards of living of the youth in this country are uplifted from the very poor to something that is good in the eyes of the society.

Many of my colleagues have noted that the rural youth are still left behind as you are aware. I represent a rural district and our youth there, for one reason or another, have not been able to catch up with the youth in the developed areas of the country. 

Much as I thank Government for the Youth Livelihood Fund, I still say that we need to put in more effort. It is a good to have a project that empowers the youth to move a step closer to prosperity; however we need to add in more funds and sensitise the youth further such that they target those projects that are really economically beneficial to them.

Mr Speaker, in the rural areas, especially the youth there do not even know how to make project proposals that can attract the eyes of the Government officials to give them at least something that is substantial. The design projects that are not good enough and at the end of it all, the money they receive is little and it fades away; yet, they are supposed to pay. (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Looking at the Youth Venture Fund, most of the groups that are benefiting are the youth staying within the town area. The youth living in the villages find a lot of difficulty in writing proposals. Therefore, we need someone to help them so that they also benefit like the urban youth. Thank you.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, my colleague, for that information. (Member timed out.)

2.52
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether it was a tactic or a coincidence that a statement like this must be delivered by a backbencher. This is because ordinarily, the questions we are raising should be answered by a minister. Apart from telling us where the function took place and the date and the programmes that we are aware of, I would not find the statement enriching, in my own view. 

It is only basic people who celebrate programmes. People who are not basic celebrate outcomes. So you cannot read to Parliament that there is a Youth Livelihood Fund; there is UPE; people celebrate outcomes. Look at UPE; only 30 per cent complete primary seven, more than 70 per cent are unaccounted for. Look at USE; 30,000 students failed senior four completely.

Therefore, when you come to Parliament, give us an option like what my colleague is demanding but do not tell us that we should celebrate the existence of programmes. If you look at the unemployment, 83 per cent of youth in Uganda do not have jobs; we represent them all-over the country. That is why there is more activity in sports betting rooms than in banking institutions – because the youth have nothing to do. So, every day, they have to go and do sports betting. When you go to banking halls, they are empty. 

Therefore, someone representing the youth should give a statement; not an attempt. And actually you should have asked the minister because the questions we are raising – (Member timed out.)

2.54
MRS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the member representing youth for this statement. I know Government has done a lot in order to improve the livelihood of the youth but there is still a lot to be achieved, particularly in the area of unemployment.

Sometimes, I get stressed when everyone who has completed university or any other tertiary institution comes to me seeking for job opportunities because they think I am well-connected. And this is the task that all of us, as Ugandans should work for. (Interjections) Mr Speaker, I will come to the Minister of Planning to give me those jobs – because you are the Minister of Planning.

I believe that this is something Government should work on, how we can create employment opportunities.

I would like to appreciate the Youth Livelihood Fund. However, we should have prepared the youth before they took it over. It is a good programme but the youth are not counselled well. 

It is as if we are co-funding that programme. First, the money they get requires that they open bank accounts where the banks deduct some money; yet, they are supposed to pay back that money. So, in order to cover the money that the banks are deducting –it is becoming a burden to them and every now and then they are conducting fundraising in support of the programmes that the government had actually thought it would uplift the youth livelihood.

Even before we start these programmes, we need to counsel and guide the youth on the specific programmes they are going to undertake. The Youth Livelihood Fund project did not put into consideration the cost of monitoring and evaluation by the district officials that are in charge of the programme to keep on checking what the youth are doing – (Member timed out.)

2.57
MR KENNETH ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nakabale for the statement he presented to the House. The issue of youth is one that is particularly very important to Uganda. Uganda is one of the countries in the world that is predicted as having the highest likelihood of entering a period of civil unrest because we have a population of youth that is now more than half the entire population of the country. Yet, unemployment remains a very big challenge. 

The issue of unemployment has not particularly been helped by politicians who have made the youth think that being a youth is actually a profession rather than teaching the young people that to be a youth is a transitional stage in their lives and preparing them.  We have turned the problem of youth into getting votes for us. We talk about employment in Uganda as if we are still stuck in the era of communism where the government actually can create jobs and give them out even if there is no value for those jobs. Therefore, I appreciate the government very much for the policies that it has put forward of skilling the youth; of teaching them skills that help them to sustain themselves rather than leading the youth into believing that jobs can actually be created. That is taking us back to an era where we believe that we could give to each person his needs. This is not possible anymore and we have to talk to the youth and get them to believe that there is life outside office, that they can actually make a living for themselves. (Member timed out.)

2.58
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is not all about celebrating International Youth Day but as a country and as Members of Parliament, we are greatly indebted to the youth. If I can recall, in as much as we wanted to protect the youth of our country, especially from foreign culture, we have some challenges here and there. 

I believe as members of the Ninth Parliament, we must do all that it takes to ensure that the Anti-Homosexuality Bill is re-tabled so that our youth can be protected. This is because right now, what is going on in schools, in various other institutions, homosexuality has penetrated the youth and they are the ones we are protecting and they are the ones we are basing on. The earlier we do it, the better. I know hon. Bahati is there and I believe that if you have the guts, there are signatures that were collected – the only gift we can give to the youth of this country is to pass the Anti-Homosexuality Bill so that we can go and look for votes when we are sure that the youth have been protected from foreign cultures.Thank you.

3.00
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to give praise where it is due. The government has tried to do a lot for the youth. There are many interventions, which we have talked of. However, hon. Nganda talked of output. Allow me to give you some few statistics as far as the youth are concerned. In 1986, for example, there were about two million youth going to primary school but today it is over 8.5 million. In the same year, there were 28 classrooms but right now, we have over 1500 classrooms. 

In 1986, we had about 123,000 secondary schools but right now we have over one million – (Interjections) – I am giving statistics –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the view that is actually being espoused by honourable colleague from Nyabushozi, Col Mwesigye, by giving us statistics.

However, what is really itching me is to imagine that Uganda started in 1986. Uganda has had youth even before 1986; the 1960’s and even in 1900. 

His Excellency the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Museveni was a youth before 1986 and he was empowered by the Obote government. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to imagine and cluster the youth as if they actually started in 1986? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member was trying to draw statistics from the time he got involved in Government.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise guidance. The Government has implemented many interventions for mentoring and empowering the youth as you have said. However, the numbers are overwhelming.

My humble proposal to Government is as follows: If all these funds that we are putting into the Youth Livelihood Fund and youth empowerment – if we were directing the money to building industries either by Government or private investors, these industries and factories –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have the shadow minister?

3.03
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH (Mr Bernard Atiku): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

I commend my colleagues, the youth representatives and the Minister of State for Youth. I also congratulate Government upon yesterday’s celebration in Katakwi.

I must bring forward the key pending issues that Government must consider as a matter of urgency, which have been highlighted in this statement.

One, the passing of the National Youth Policy, which is at Cabinet and that to me is a challenge for the youth representative for Northern region and I am sure that is why she was appointed to that docket. So, hon. Anite, please, do justice for the youth by ensuring that the National Youth Policy leaves Cabinet and comes to the floor of Parliament

Two, the issue of the National Action Plan for Youth Employment – we have heard Government making proposals here to export the untapped potential of our youth to go for housekeeping duties in the United Arab Emirates. The question has been how Government arrived at that position without an action plan for the youth employment? So, what criteria are you going to use to send our youth out there; monitor whatever they are doing there? 

How did you secure the employment opportunities and identify the skills? Are you going to tell us that you are going to train doctors and engineers and send them abroad as house maids? What is your plan? This is very important, hon. Anite, take note.

The third issue is in regard to the National Action Plan for the Youth - this is the only country that does not have a manpower plan. When we are talking about enrolment in primary schools and its associated challenges of school drop outs – when we talk about early childhood development centres, which has an impact in terms of the formative stages of developing a child because when you look at the dropout rate in primary schools, it is because most of these children join primary when they have actually over-grown from the age of – (Member timed out.)    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member representing the Leader of the Opposition -

3.07
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

Uganda is a member of the UN and when the UN comes up to celebrate a day that has been allotted, it is important that all members of the UN celebrate that day. I would like to congratulate the youth of Uganda for recognising the International Day of the Youth.

The issue of the youth is very serious one and hon. Anite missed this opportunity because this statement would have been made by a minister and not just a Member of Parliament. 

You will recall that recently, the Ministry of Internal Affairs advertised some jobs for immigration officers and there were 44,000 youth who applied for those jobs and yet they only needed 300. This means that there were 146.666 applicants per job.

We have many universities these days and there are graduates coming out every year. All these graduates are on the street. If Government does not take this matter seriously - the youth are sitting on a time bomb and if this issue is not addressed, then it will be very serious. 

I am glad that when the President was making the State of the Nation Address, he touched on the issue of the Uganda Commercial Bank (UCB) and Uganda Cooperative Bank. Some of these bodies used to create employment for our youth. UCB, for example, was everywhere in the country and graduates who had done economics from the universities, which by then were fewer, had a chance of getting jobs – but all these bodies are no more.

I once worked in China where you find an agricultural, engineering or hotel banks set up to create employment for the youth. In this country – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, please, wind up in one minute.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: The programmes that Government has put aside for the youth like the Youth Livelihood Fund have no money if you look at the amount of money put in. The Government should come up with a plan of vocational training so that when students finish the university or higher institutions of learning, for example, they can go for vocational training instead of rushing to Kyankwanzi because when they go for vocational training, they acquire some education to be able to do something.

However, if the issue of the youth is not addressed, it is a very serious one because wherever you go in the country, the youth are walking in and out every day and the shoes are torn because they cannot get employment.  It is a very serious and Government must take steps to address this issue. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I call the honourable minister, in the gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers from Kagarama Children’s Care School and Kitunga Day and Boarding Primary School from Kajara County, Ntungamo District represented by hon. Stephen Tashobya and hon. Naome Kabasharira. They are here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you.

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH (Ms Evelyn Anite): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all thank hon. Nakabale, the Youth Member of Parliament for Central Region, and all the honourable Members of Parliament who have been in position to at least make a contribution and wonderful statements in relation to the challenges that the young people in this country face.

Mr Speaker, indeed, the young people face immense challenges; they are 78 per cent of the population. I would like to put it very clear that a lot has been done but yet a lot is desired to be done so as to sort out the challenges that the young people face in this country.

I just want to make reference to some of the programmes that Government has introduced and give statistics particularly on the Youth Livelihood Programme. Since Government introduced this programme, we have so far 71, 000 young people who have been able to access this money and that means employment opportunity have been created for these people. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, I would like to make it very clear that this programme has got challenges. As the line minister, I have toured districts starting with central region. I want to make it very clear. The major challenge in relation to this programme is lack of information and as Government we want to give information to the youth and try to help them so as to address the problems that they face.

The major problem is the lack of the national youth policy on employment. We can only effectively address the issue of unemployment among young people if we have this policy in place. I would like to report to this House that we are in advanced stages of securing this policy and we will be able to address the challenges that the young people face. Unemployment at the moment - (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, these are very important issues. Towards the end of the regime of the late Idi Amin, I was the National Chairman of Uganda Youth Council. Therefore, I am sufficiently informed about the fate of young people.

Madam Minister, your Government has been in power for 29 years. If you have not been able to generate a policy in terms of planning for the young people, are you going to do so within the remaining year? Please, be serious. (Laughter)

MS ANITE: Thank you very much, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. I would like to tell you that I am very serious and what I do, I do with passion. I can comfortably report to this House that we are going to get the national policy on employment before this year ends. With that, I can go on record.

Mr Speaker, another issue is that I am a different minister. I am passionate about issues of young people and I follow them keenly. 

On the issue of the budget  - and I really like  to call upon Members of Parliament that we are going to come to you on the issue of funding of national youth councils. My colleague hon. Denis Obua raised it. When we had 53 districts, we were given Shs 1 billion but now, we have 112. That means, the Shs 1 billion, which is the funding towards the supporting the projects of the work of young people in this country is insufficient.

We are working very hard and I would like to call upon you members and ministers that when I come to this floor to advocate for more funding towards the support of these young people, we should get it. Mr Speaker, the money we allocate for young people in this country is insufficient.

I would like to talk about the tenure of the young people. As we celebrated the International Youth Day yesterday, the most critical challenge that they face is that their tenure expires before five years and that makes them not to effectively deliver their services in the positions they are elected in. With your support, we would like to come with the amendments of their statute next week, if you allow - and I would also like to call upon my honourable colleagues to support the young people because they are not for Government alone. We all have young people in our homes and constituencies. We have to work together to support them.

I would like to say something about employment opportunities. From the time I got to the ministry, we have been working on green jobs. We intend to employ five million young people in the next four years. We already have externalisation of labour. We started this programme and so far, we have taken 2,000 young people to go and work in the Middle East. Just to make reference to what the shadow minister of youth said. We have various jobs not only domestic workers but we also have white-collar jobs as well. We are doing this in bid to create employment for young people in this country and even abroad because the jobs we have in this country alone cannot absorb the number of young people we have.

Another challenge that we face is to know the number of young people that we have in this country. Since I got into the ministry, together with my colleague the minister, we have introduced a national youth survey. We are going to do a survey to know how many young people are first of all employed, how many are educated and how many are uneducated. We want to know this so as to effectively support the young people of this country.

The concern of supporting young people of this country is really in the interest of the NRM Government. Just to say something about the International Youth Day; if you see the the theme that we selected to celebrate the day, “We are the investment choices we make: Youth matter.” To us as Government, young people matter and we have come up with deliberate programmes to invest in the young people. We are going to invest in them because we believe that they are the leaders of today and tomorrow and they constitute 78 per cent of the population. Therefore, as a Government, we must deliberately invest in them.

Finally, as we celebrated the International Youth Day, we introduced a new programme - (Interjections) - Can I finish this statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please wind up.

MS ANITE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday we had 120 young people who have talent in music, film making and ICT and we were able to award 20 of them yesterday.

I want to conclude by saying, that it is a deliberate effort that Government wants to invest in our youth and transform their livelihood. Together with you, we can transform the lives of the young people. We still have many challenges, but we cannot do it alone. We need your support. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

3.21
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nakabale and all colleagues who have spoken to the very important statement he made on behalf of our colleagues representing the youth in this House.

I also would like to take this opportunity, Mr Speaker, on behalf of the government, to congratulate the youth of Uganda on the observance of the International Youth Day. In Uganda, we can say we celebrate this occasion with pride. There are difficulties, but also we can mark out comprehensive and strategic arrangement that the people and the Government of Uganda have put in place to ensure that our youth are guided and are participating in the running of this country.

Early this week, we heard a very positive statement issued here by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development that at the African Union Summit, Uganda was one of the three countries that got an award in recognition of the positive step we had taken in regard to affirmative action for women. (Applause) I think it is an opportunity we are debating and articulating the gains that the youth of this country have achieved.

Mr Speaker, we must acknowledge that it was part of the NRM revolution that the youth have been given opportunity to participate in leadership right from the village committees through the other structures of local government up to Parliament. In the East African region, Uganda is the only country that has provided opportunities for youth to participate not only from the lowest level of our governance, but up to the highest level in Parliament.

However, I heard some colleagues saying the youth representatives in this House are the only ones who should account for what has happened to the youth. The youth, as it has been stated, are the biggest proportion of our population. Therefore, each of us in this House has been voted for by the youth. Perhaps, the biggest voters of each one of us are actually the youth.

Therefore, in addition to special representatives for the youth, each one of us in this House represents them. It is therefore, our responsibility, as Members of Parliament, to pursue programmes of the youth and guide them so that their welfare and participation in governance is upheld. It would give a wrong impression to say the accountability for the programme of the youth is purely in the hands of the youth representatives in this House.

Some members indicated that the youth are vulnerable and hon. Wamai took it a step further to say the youth without jobs are a time bomb. We should all acknowledge that there are high rates of unemployment in our country. It is also true that it is not only Uganda where you have high rates of unemployment; this also exists worldwide. It is of course our responsibility that we work hard to solve this problem.

I would like us to avoid acting as agents that would allow that bomb to explode. In other words, we should avoid any attempt to incite the youth. It is true there are many who are unemployed. If you want to ignite them into violence, indeed, they can become violent; but, this would not be good for the country.

Therefore, it is our responsibility, Mr Speaker, to be able to show the youth that unemployment is a structural issue and a fiscal problem that will need specific programmes and time to resolve. It is not just about going out there to promise the youth jobs. You must articulate and show programmes that you are going to put in place in order, over time, to resolve this issue. NRM is investing in programmes which are going to ensure that industrialisation in this country is driven at a faster pace.

The issues of generating power and investing in infrastructure are known to all of us. Indeed, Vision 2040 is about creating opportunities including generating employment for as many people as possible.

Therefore, we must give the youth hope rather than incite them. We must guide them so that they avoid negative behaviours. Many people have lost their lives and opportunities to alcohol and drugs abuse. Mr Speaker, let me take this opportunity to remember my own son that I lost to drug abuse. It is a real problem and more children are dying because of drugs. It is our responsibility as elders and Members of Parliament to ensure that we guide these young people so that they are not taken over by alcohol and drugs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you winding up? (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA: Pardon me, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you winding up now?

DR KIYONGA: Yes, Mr Speaker. In concluding my intervention, let me underscore the importance of the programmes in education. I agree with hon. Fungaroo that at the moment, it may appear as if we are creating a two class society. You have people going to UPE and USE schools and those who are in town appear to be getting better opportunities.

However, we should look at where we have come from. We had a very high rate of illiteracy, but now that is reduced. For example, my district because of UPE and USE, we are able to talk about hundreds of children in different universities in the country. Definitely, without these programmes, we would never have made those achievements. 

Therefore, we have moved, Mr Speaker, and we are still moving on. We should give our children hope and avoid inciting them into violence because this would compromise the very future we are trying to build for them. 
I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members for this debate. We extended the time to allow us capture issues involving the youth of this country. As it is an important component of our population, the matter that affects them actually affects the rest of the country and that is why I extended the time beyond the time prescribed by the rules.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Last week, the State Minister for Internal Affairs made a commitment that today the Minister of Internal Affairs would come up with a comprehensive report as regards to the murders of Muslim sheiks and prominent Muslims in this country. 
To make matters worse, since the last time they made a commitment, more prominent Muslim leaders have been threatened with death. We have further disturbing information that I will hesitate to state. Today is Thursday the day upon which they made a commitment. The entire Muslim fraternity eagerly awaits this report. Over 25 prominent Muslims have been killed and no single report has been given out by Government. They have always made promises but I do not see it on the Order Paper. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is it true this undertaking was made? 

3.32
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are ready, but procedurally we first discuss such reports in Cabinet. Yesterday we were ready for presentation in Cabinet, but in the end the Cabinet agenda was quite packed. So, I discussed with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that next Wednesday, we shall discuss it and then subsequently we will come here and make the statement. We are ready.

In spite of that, measures are being taken. Without commenting on matters that are already before court, we have a number of suspects before court. Trials are going on. Investigations are continuing and more deployments are taking place to ensure that such killers are apprehended and face the long arm of the law. 

I commit that as soon as Cabinet is ready with it, I will be here to present the outcome of what we have been doing to ensure that such killers are apprehended and dealt with according to the law. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the hon. Gen. Aronda is my friend. We would have agreed to listen to him if he had just said that he had promised to bring a statement, but he could not do it due to such and such reasons. But it was until he was provoked that he finally got up to speak. He was too busy. 

Mr Speaker, we have had problems with our ministers. They always promise us things and think that Members of Parliament are fond of forgetting. I want to thank my brother for remembering this issue. I have been reading the directory and many of you even do not measure to be in this House. (Laughter) This is a procedural matter. You can see they even do not know the debating rules.

Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you are raising a procedural matter, in order to be protected, you stick to it.
  
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am going to stick to it. If you have been reading the newspapers, last week they were about to kill a sheik in Mbale. This weekend they were about to get one, but he had to jump through - this matter is serious! 

Is it procedurally right for a whole minister to keep quiet when in Mbale, for example, we were about to lose our sheik yet the minister promised to bring a statement and he is delaying with it yet we are losing people? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there might have been a lapse on the part of the minister to come and seek further extension from the House. But the matter has come up and you have heard the statement he has made. Therefore, we cannot proceed as if it has not happened; it has already been done and he has made that statement. There might have been a lapse of contradictions on his part but he has done it now and that is the request he has made.  

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I would like to move on a procedural point. We are all elected members of this House by our voters in the various constituencies in this country with various qualifications. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear. The language to be used in this House is very clear. I need your guidance, Mr Speaker. Are we proceeding well when one of our colleagues rises up and says majority of us do not measure to be in this House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Budadiri West might have been referring to himself. (Laughter)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural point. From the statement of the Minister of Internal Affairs, it seems a new method has been adopted. I raised two matters where there was a commitment that the statements would be made: one was on Jacobson and another on blood in the regional referral hospital. When I was there, they told me those statements were going to be discussed in Cabinet. I see a trend, Mr Speaker, as if – I wonder if Parliament will not sit at the convenient of Cabinet if we take that trend.

Ever since I raised those two matters, they are even about to be overtaken by events and with the trend that Cabinet seems to be taking, I wonder if that will not be bogging down Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we expected a statement from the minister. That statement is not here. He has said that it has not been cleared by Cabinet. He would like it cleared by Cabinet before he comes back next week. That statement is not here.

Are we proceeding correctly? Yes, we are because that statement is not here. The others we will handle administratively with the ministers to see how these matters can be sorted out properly. 

But on the issue you have raised, certainly there was a statement. The minister made a statement that there would be some instant measures taken to deal with those issues of depletion of the stock of blood in the blood bank and so on. I do not know what has happened so far with those matters. The minister who made the commitment, Chief Whip, could you please follow up this statement so that ministers can come in time to make these statements?
  
GEN NYAKAIRIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have agreed to handle it on Wednesday. On Wednesday afternoon, we will be able to bring the statement here. We are ready and we have agreed with the Prime Minister that we will be presenting it at your convenience. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, last week, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs promised to bring a report in seven days’ time – and the seventh day is today - regarding Ugandans who are being tortured in the Diaspora. I have not seen that item on the Order Paper. Procedurally, are we moving in the right direction? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If today is the last day, then it is not counted because today has not ended yet. We will count from tomorrow. Let us proceed. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one is it? 

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): This is the Statement on the Status of Payment of Pension. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to bring it at this time? 

MR BAHATI: It is a short one, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Let us get the statement.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, the Minister of Finance promised to make this statement today. I would like to thank you for giving us space on the Order Paper to fulfil our commitment.

Government took a decision to decentralise the payment of pension and gratuity to respective institutions, where pensioners retire from.

The objective of this policy was to improve the management and accountability for pension payment. Under the decentralisation policy, the Ministry of Public Service would remain responsible for providing policy and oversight roles.

This policy commenced in the Financial Year 2014/15. Accordingly, in the year 2014/15, Shs 131 billion was provided under different Votes for this purpose. Since then, we have been able to engage different stakeholders through workshops, to sensitise them and to train the accounting officers to implement this policy.
 
Mr Speaker, in both the first and second budget call circular, we communicated this. Accordingly, Shs 319.75 billion was allocated in the budget for the Financial Year 2015/16. Shs 79.93 billion was authorised in expenditure limits on the 1 July 2015, to the respective Votes to enable payments of pension gratuity in the first quarter and released to all the accounting officers on 8 July 2015.

The status as per today
Following consultations with a number of accounting officers, it came to our attention that the pensioners were not paid in July despite the fact that the different Votes had the funds to do that. We therefore convened a meeting on 6 August 2015, with the Ministry of Public Service to establish the reasons for the delayed payment.

The Ministry of Public Service attributed the delay to the on-going process of verification and scanning of all pension records, previously paid under the Ministry of Public Service. But that the process had taken longer than earlier planned due to the magnitude of records.

As a way forward, it was agreed that the Ministry of Public Service should urgently issue a circular authorising the accounting officers to pay the verified pensioners on account of the list submitted by the Ministry of Public Service. This circular was issued by the permanent secretary of the Ministry of Public Service immediately after the meeting.

Mr Speaker, as of now, some Votes have already commenced payment of the pension for July and August and the rest are in the final stages of starting to pay. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, this morning Minister of Finance and Public Service met and agreed on the strategy to ensure that the pension payment is done. The Permanent Secretary and Secretary to Treasury has instructed all accounting officers to immediately pay pension for the months of July and August, on account of the circular by the Minister of Public Service. We do expect that by 28 August, the pension for July and August will have been paid.
 
Based on the information we have received, the following Votes have already started paying pension for July which was not paid and also for August and these include: the Ministry of Public Service, State House, Police, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Lands, Ministry of Gender, Judiciary, Prisons, Defence and Mubende Regional Referral Hospital.

The Ministry of Public Service will quicken the verification process and scanning of all pension files, under their custody and submit them to the accounting officers.

The Ministry of Public Service will also issue a press statement tomorrow, Friday, on the status of payment of pension and gratuity to make it clear to the pensioners on how Government is handling this. 

The purpose of this statement is therefore, to brief you on the status of payment of pension, for the months of July and August. It is also to really apologise to our senior citizens for this delayed payment, especially for the month of July.

Mr Speaker, I would like to also make one comment on salaries for Masaka. We did not pay the teachers for the month of June on accounts of a shortfall, which we are sorting out this month. For July, according to our records, it was released to Masaka. They have the money to pay. In fact, some have been paid. The information reaching us is that there are those who had loans with banks and when they were paid, the money was captured. Therefore, they could be confusing it with none payment. Otherwise, according to our records, the accountant general has verified in the last 30 minutes that the money was paid on time.

Finally, the statement on the Financial Intelligence Authority and the state of the economy, we need one or two days to put them together. We seek the indulgence of the House that we submit these statements next week. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, is it not clear on pensions? Do we want to debate it? Can we just have brief clarifications on this? We will have only clarifications and no debate.

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have been following these pension issues very much. The minister talked about July and August. There are some pensioners who have been telling us that for over four months, they have not been able to receive their pension. Can you clarify on that because if it is July and August, it would not be four months?
 
Besides, now that you have decentralised these payments, is it by omission that you send the money without some details on how the money should be paid to the pensioners? Is it by omission or what? For example, in Gulu District, they said that money reached but they did not have some details in order to pay the pensioners. Is it by omission? Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister - you are very good on answering the issues that concern our people. However, on the issue of Masaka, I think we have to liaise. The information we are getting is different from yours. In case we give you the appropriate information from the truth got from the teachers, you need to take an action against the person who has given you that kind of information. Mr Minister, the issue dealing with teachers - that is their source of income! There is nothing else.

The clarification I am seeking, Mr Speaker, as I was informing him, is that we sincerely need to dig deeper because there is still another problem –(Interruption). 

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the government for decentralising the pension payment. We hope that will improve. 

But I know that there is a verification exercise going on to establish the number of pensioners in the district but as I talk, the list of pensioners which appeared for Zombo District states only two pensioners. So, my question is: where have you put other pensioners for Zombo District? How will they get their money for the July or the months you are talking about? Where will they get it from?

MR MAWANDA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, you will recall that I raised the issue of the former Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation (UPPC) workers who fall under the Privatization Unit but have not been paid for the last five months. I am wondering, in these categories which the Minister has considered, where do these former workers fall.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify on two things: First, there are pensioners who were supposed to get their pay in January. But they have not been paid up to date. When they came to the Public Service, they were told that the money had been sent to the regional headquarters in Arua. In Arua, they said the money was in Public Service. Where is this money? These people need their money. 
Second, there are pensioners especially the soldiers. After one has been given an account number, their name will come back with a different account number. When they follow it up, nobody will be willing to change their account number. Does it mean they are doing it purposely? Why don’t they give the correct account numbers so that people can get their money? Thank you.

MR BBOSA KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine regards pensioners who operated in the defunct East African Railways and Horbours. Where do they to go, honourable minister, well knowing they no longer report to the Public Service? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we deal with this now, honourable members? We have more business, please. We have a lot of business pending.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, we have heard from some pensioners that the delay was caused by payment being taken over by parent ministries instead of Public Service. Is it true or not?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we now have the Leader of the Opposition, so that we can move? We have a lot of other business please. This statement is not conclusive because these matters will keep coming up. Let me have the Leader of the Opposition now.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much and I beg you to protect me from hon. John Byabagambi who is harassing me.

Mr Speaker, we notice that since hon. David Bahati joined the Ministry of Finance, there has been improved efficiency in response to our queries. (Applause) It is possible because he is a new broom, but still we have noticed the difference. 

This question of the pension and payment of salaries to people who have served and are still serving Uganda is perennial and it is always here. We are always lamenting. I would like to know from the minister, is there a system that is established of paying people their salaries and pensions because if there was a system, how would it have been possible for a bunch of thugs to have stolen Shs 300 billion meant for retired people? How? 

Now we have approved money and it has been allocated. First disbursement but the minister is saying it has already been paid. But when we go to villages and our homes, the pensioners are extremely wretched people yet they have served this country so honorably. When they come to your home, you look at them and you may want to cry because they have not paid their pension. Government does not seem to have a system of paying these people. Why can’t there be a system? Is there a system, honourable minister? Thank you very much.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I will not respond to each and every clarification sought from me but let me do this. On the one of Masaka, I think that is the information we have. If he has any contrary information, he can come to the office and we sort it out. 

The second is on the issue of the system. The Leader of the Opposition, we need to appreciate where we are coming from. We are coming from a situation where there were ghosts. That is why actually we are decentralizing. What was interesting about ghosts – they were very timely at paying Pay-As-You-Earn than even those who are actual workers. That is very interesting.

Therefore, this mess is what is bringing us to this. But we have now instituted a bi-metric system done by the Auditor-General and Ministry of Public Service is doing verification. We hope that by the end of the year, they should have finished this because there are over 9,000 people that they are verifying. We think that in the middle of early next year, we should have sorted this issue and start paying people who are actual and pay them on time. So, there is a system but it has been clogged by the past which was a bad past and we are correcting by instituting these reforms.

As for the former workers of East Africa, there is a mother ministry. Every department of Government has a mother ministry and they will be sorted out by the mother ministry. I think those were the – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, honourable minister. Concerning verification, I would like to find out how many centres are being created for this exercise because in Amuru District, some of the pensioners are being referred to Kampala for verification and take the documents to Amuru. So, do you have two centres for verification whereby pensioners get verified in Kampala or under decentralization, you have created one centre within the district? Thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out from the minister - there are people who used to work in railways. When are they going to get their pension? 

Also last week, I asked the Minister of Public Service – all the people who used to work in Mbale Municipal Council, the Ministry of Finance released the money but that money disappeared somewhere. When are these people going to be paid their money?

MR BAHATI: Let me finish because we have other important items on the agenda. One, what was the cause of all this delay? Actually the Minister of Public Service sent a verified list to all accounting officers. When it reached the accounting officers, they said they needed files from the Ministry of Public Service and that delayed. That is why we had to sit down and say, “Pay, stop this and you pay as we get these files.” After all, the files at the Ministry of Public Service are got from these different ministries.

On the question of hon. Gilbert Olanya where we have different verification centres, I think the most important thing is that the verification exercise is moving on and I do not have details of where the centres are. I will be able to call you tomorrow morning to inform you whether we have that. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker, for receiving this statement. We apologize to our senior citizens for the delay that they have had in July.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for the statement, and honourable members, thank you for your issues of clarification that I hope the minister has been able to respond to. But that does not mean the matter is closed. Each time these issues come up, we should still bring them back to the House.

Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon we have students and teachers from Bumadu Secondary School, from Bundibugyo Town Council, represented by hon. Bataringaya and hon. Ntabazi. They are here to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

MOTION FOR THE CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 179 OF THE CONSTITUTION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you realise that in the copies of the Order Paper the wording is different. What we are debating is not the committee report, because the committee report is part of the debate on the motion for creation of districts. Just like when we bring Bills and they are taken to committee, when they come back we do not debate the report of the committee; we debate the motion for second reading, which the report from the committee now helps to explain to guide the debate.

So, the motion that is substantially before the House was moved by the minister way back in 2012, for the creation of new districts under Article 179 (a) of the Constitution of Uganda.

This motion was proposed for your debate, a report was presented from the committee on Public Service and Local Government, and a minority report was also raised. So, the substantive motion that is before the House is for the creation of new districts under Article 179 (a). 

There has been a delay. In the course of the committee’s interaction with the ministers, there was a ban issued by Cabinet on the creation of districts.

The committee recommended that that ban be reviewed. It was because of that request that the minister asked for time to go back to Cabinet and then come back to advise us on how to proceed with this matter.

The minister yesterday informed us that Cabinet maintains the ban on the creation of new districts. But that does not prohibit us from handling the debate the best way we think we should. So, debate opens now. Let us have each member speaking for three minutes on this subject.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I recall we debated the report of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service in view of the motion, which the honourable minister had presented in 2012.

The matter that this House had reached on was as to whether Government was still holding to its motion or not. In the circumstances that we already debated the report of the committee and Government, which brought the motion, has indicated that they are no longer interested and that the creation of the new districts is not necessary, would it be procedurally right for us to debate a report which at the end of the day will not yield any results because for anything to be done, Government must have a commitment? If Government is not interested, why therefore take the time of Parliament to debate something that will not yield results?

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter came to Parliament because of the motion that was brought here by the minister. When the minister appeared before the committee, he told us about the ban that Cabinet had put on creation of districts. At that stage, I had asked him at the committee level that wouldn’t it have been procedurally okay for him to then withdraw the motion because we were having that hearing because of that motion.  And it is because of that motion that we have this matter on the Order Paper. 

Mr Speaker, the point of procedure I would like to raise is: in a situation where Government is no longer interested in its own motion, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay, for the minister to move and withdraw the motion brought before us instead of leaving a motion with us and making people believe that it is Parliament, which is holding the creation of districts, when the actual fact is that Government has lost interest in its own motion?  Mr Speaker, I beg to be guided.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, as if that was not enough - (Laughter) - in the State of the Nation Address, the President, when commenting on new districts said, the idea of generating new districts is no longer financially tenable. So, how can we procedurally deal with the matter when the Head of State, a fountain of honour, also discouraged the idea of new districts?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is on the Order Paper because it remained a substantial business of this House. A motion was brought to this House and was referred to a committee. It only came back about a month ago when the committee reported on it. 

The honourable member for Busongora North, this matter has not been debated. When it was presented the minister immediately requested that since the request was for review of the ban on creation of new districts, he would like to seek the authority of the House to go back to Cabinet and come back to advise us whether to proceed with the matter or not. That is where we were. So it was not debated. The vehicle which was carrying the districts supposed to be created has now been stopped by a ban. Would this motion still be valid?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No! 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But it is not for the Speaker to remove a motion from this House. It is the minister to make a statement to that effect.

4.10
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you rightly observed, this motion has been with this House for some time. The reason that I did not withdraw in the immediate past was because, as I undertook in this House, Government wanted to give time to review the recommendations of the committee.

And as the minister responsible for the motion, I have brought the recommendations of the committee to the attention of Cabinet and I did correctly report last time, that Cabinet in its wisdom maintains the moratorium.

In view of that position, and in view of the fact that the motion is now effectively redundant before the House, it is my pleasure to move that this motion be withdrawn under the provisions of Rule 53 (1) of our Rules of Procedure. 
Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are seeking leave of the House to withdraw the motion. 

MR MWESIGE: I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker. May I seek the leave of this House, under rule 53(1) of the Rules of Procedure, to withdraw the motion for the creation of new districts as mentioned in the motion? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Chrispus Kiyonga, hon. John Byabagambi, Member for Mukono Municipality, Member for Busongora North and Member for Fort-Portal Municipality. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR MWESIGE: Well, Mr Speaker, this motion as you know was moved following a number of petitions from a number of district councils across the country. Indeed, it was tabled before this House in accordance with the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of this House. Along the way, Government took a decision to review its budget and expenditure and came to the conclusion that the cost of creating a single district, if you are to consider all the requirements that a district needs to start, including its headquarters, adequate staff, would come to about Shs 59 billion.

In view of the resources available and the priorities of Government then and now, Cabinet found it prudent to, for the time being, suspend or impose a moratorium on the creation of new districts until such a time when resources will be available to continue with the creation of districts as required by the Constitution. Therefore, due to that reason, Mr Speaker, I was requested to come to the committee and communicate the position of Cabinet. That is the reason I am here - to seek leave of this House to have this motion withdrawn. In brief, Government simply cannot finance the creation of the 25 districts that we had proposed to create. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that leave be granted to the honourable minister to withdraw a motion he moved under Article 179(1) (a) of the Constitution for the creation of new districts in Uganda. That is the motion before you and that motion attracts a debate and debate starts now.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a point of procedure. In respect of this motion and more so that the honourable minister has officially withdrawn it - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is seeking leave of the House to withdraw. 

MR SSASAGA: Okay, since he is seeking leave to withdraw, I do not see why we should waste more time to debate a motion which is going to be withdrawn as well. So, procedurally, I am proposing that you just put the question other than have members debate it.

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move on a point of procedure. The author of the motion has sought leave of this House to withdraw the motion. Are we procedurally right to continue debating a motion that has aborted, given the fact that the author is already seeking leave to withdraw it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us get this clear. The motion that has been presented is seeking leave of this House to withdraw the other motion; that is the motion. Therefore, we are not debating the motion for creation of districts but the minister is seeking leave to withdraw it, citing the circumstances he has outlined before the House. That is what it is. So, the question that I propose for you is: should leave be granted to the minister to withdraw his motion? That is the matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural issue. When the Minister of Local Government came here to table the motion on the creation of districts, he came with a certificate of financial implications. This meant that Government was ready to fund. Now the same minister has come and is saying Government cannot finance this. He now has a “certificate of no finance”. Does it mean that these certificates of financial implications are just for the sake of coming to Parliament to be presented and things go on like that?

The procedural issue I am raising is: was the person who issued the certificate of financial implications right or wrong? Are these certificates relevant?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me handle that first. Honourable members, this motion was presented in the financial year 2012/2013 and a certificate of financial implications was indeed presented with the motion for those districts that were supposed to commence that same financial year and not for all of them. If I recall the motion properly, they were supposed to be phased in three years. There were districts that should have commenced immediately, but the motion was not concluded. The motion came back to the House about a month ago in the year 2015. So, is the certificate of financial implications that was issued for the financial year 2012/13 still valid? The answer is no, because the budget of that financial year closed.

Was there any certificate of financial implications given that was coming in for the subsequent years? No. Certificates of financial implications cannot be anticipatory; they can only reflect on the financial year in question. That is how we need to proceed with this. You cannot issue a certificate of financial implications for the financial year 2015/16 and again issue another for the financial year 2016/17. That would not be a certificate of financial implications because that budget has not yet been handled. Okay? That is where we are.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, it is a dark day in Kibaale today because the honourable minister, who was duly appointed to Cabinet by the President, is withdrawing a motion that pledged to create, among others, Kagadi and Kakumiro districts on grounds that there is no money.
 
On 4th August, the President of the Republic of Uganda, at around 3.00 p.m., in a place called Burora, stood and said the reasons he had not created Kagadi District were majorly two - the tribal differences, which had subsequently been resolved; and two, the issue of money, which he said that he had subsequently solved and he had no problems of money. So, I am taken aback and totally confused this afternoon. I even do not know how to read Article 98 of the Constitution, which says “There shall be a President of Uganda who shall be the Head of State, Head of Government and Commander-in-Chief of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and the Fountain of Honour.” Now, he is the fountain of liars –(Laughter)- using or directing his minister this afternoon –(Interjections)– You are free to put me to order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you can still make the same point using proper language.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I said it is a dark day in Kibaale and you know those are the people that I represent. When you read Article 99, it says the President is the Chief Executive. When you read Article 111, you realise that he is the one who appoints the man withdrawing the motion and he is the head of Cabinet. So, I get confused when this happens.

When did this happen? We have even letters from the same honourable minister writing to the chairman of Kibaale District saying, “Creation of Kagadi and Kakumiro districts. You are aware His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda pledged to create Kagadi and Kakumiro districts out of Kibaale District. According to his Excellency the President’s directive, the said districts should start effective 1st of July 2012. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has made a provision of Shs 2.2 billion…” I have even been following up the ministerial statements for the Ministry of Local Government and this money, year in and out, has been appearing. How can you say at this stage that there is no money? Where did you put that money?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, did you rise on a procedural point? Honourable minister, the Member rose on a procedural point. Please, can you now -

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I am winding up and he has no power to guide me here. It is you, Mr Speaker, to guide me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you now raise the procedural point?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, in light of Articles 98, 99 and 111 and the pronouncements made by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda on 4 August in my presence, is the minister procedurally right to stand this afternoon and create darkness at noon –(Laughter)– in Kibaale? Is he procedurally right to create darkness in Kibaale by withdrawing the motion to create, among others, Kagadi and Kakumiro districts?

MS NABBANJA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Kibaale is part of Uganda. The reason these districts were proposed was basically because of lack of service delivery.

Mr Speaker, we have a very high population of over 800,000 people and we have a very big administrative size where we have five constituencies, 37 sub counties, 1,735 villages and 220 parishes. We have districts with populations of 85,000. Kalangala District has a population 53,406 people. Our neighbouring district, Ntoroko, has a population of 66,422 persons, Bukwo District has a population of 89,253 and Buvuma has a population of 89,960. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, a technical team from the Ministry of Local Government carried out all the technical studies and found out that the counties of Bugangaizi East and Bugangaizi West qualify to be elevated to district status. The letter from the Minister of Local Government has been laid on the Table by my colleague. 

Mr Speaker, Kagadi and Kibaale altogether are 4,322 square kilometres compared to some districts with only 84 square kilometres. We are crippling with service delivery. You can imagine in the report of the Committee on Local Government Committee – see Annex II – in 2014 there was a lot of imbalance in this country. Kibaale District was given a provision of just Shs 29 billion yet Luweero, with a smaller population, was given Shs 30 billion and Iganga was given Shs 31 billion. Which yardstick does our Government use? (Laughter) 

Secondly, our people in Kibaale have been wishing that these two districts be created since 2001; it is a strong wish of our people. The Minister said he did not have money, but where is he getting the money to create new municipalities in our local governments? (Laughter) Where is he also getting money to bring in more MPs here by creating new municipalities and counties? Mr Speaker, we feel segregated. This is deliberate because if the President came to Kibaale and directed you - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order!

MS NABBANJA: The President directed you, Minister of Local Government; you work under a presidential directive. How can you come here to deceive this Parliament that he directed otherwise?
Mr Speaker, I feel hurt. We have supported this Government 100 per cent. Now our people have seen that this Government is not willing to serve us. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, give the procedural point. (Laughter)

MS NABBANJA: Is the Minister procedurally right to withdraw a motion now when the President has just directed him to create these two districts?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the people of Kibaale are currently watching. We have supported this Government with all our hearts. They are watching you playing with our minds. We are tired of being deceived and lied to as though we are children. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can I now rule on the procedural point that you have raised? Order, order!

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table some of the papers to justify our cause. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members! 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, this is a booklet from UBOS that has the record of the 2014 Census. On page 5 - The title is, “National Population and Housing Census, 2014.” There are some districts with 54,000 people but we are 800,000 plus. I lay it on the Table. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, this is a letter from the Minister of Local Government where he has been directing that the creation of these districts starts. It is addressed to the district chairman and here it is.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What date is the letter?

MS NABBANJA: The date is 2 July 2012. Mr Speaker, the motion that this very minister brought to this House on the creation of our districts is also here and I lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That motion was already – 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, these are – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Please, go along with the Speaker. That motion was already laid before the House; you do not have to lay it again. Proceed.

MS NABBANJA: Okay. Mr Speaker, this is a resolution by our district council, showing that our people have a strong wish for the creation of these districts. I lay it on the Table.

Mr Speaker, together with my other colleagues, Members of Parliament, here is a justification to show that we are marginalised. It is entitled, “Justification for the creation of Kakumiro and Kagadi districts out of Kibaale district.” I lay this too on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What date is that?

MS NABBANJA: It is dated 13 August 2014. Mr Speaker, I want to thank you once again but also request the Minister of Local Government - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can, I now rule on the procedural point, now that you have raised it?

MS NABBANJA: Okay, let me raise the procedural point. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I am ably informed that some of our people are in the gallery of this House. 

Mr Speaker, is the Minister of Local Government procedurally right to continue marginalising the people of Kibaale by withdrawing the motion that he brought himself, yet the President on 4th directed that the motion be brought back to the House? Is he procedurally right? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am required to give procedural guidance on this highly emotive issue of the creation of new districts and particularly the sentiments coming from the district of Kibaale raised on this procedural matter.

Honourable members, this is the procedure: a motion was brought to this House under Article 179 of the Constitution by the Minister of Local Government. It is possible, and I am certain, that this motion had been cleared by Cabinet to come to the House. It was brought in the year 2012 and many districts were supposed to have been created in a phased manner. A certificate of financial implications for the districts that were supposed to be created that financial year was also attached to the motion. 

That motion was referred to our own committee of this House, which carried out a study. In the middle of the committee’s handling of this matter, I think we all received a public declaration quoting the President as saying that there had been a ban on the creation of new districts. The honourable minister has informed this House that following that, he appeared before the committee when he was summoned to explain and presented these facts on the ban that had been issued on the creation of new districts by the Cabinet and he communicated this to the committee.

The fact that a ban on the creation of new districts was issued by the same institution that had cleared the creation of these news districts undermines the foundation of that motion. However, acting in faith and in hope, the committee proceeded with the motion that was before it and made a recommendation that that ban be reviewed because time had passed and new considerations could have come up or situations could have changed because that was now 2014/2015. 

When the committee reported in 2014, it said that the ban should be reviewed. When this matter came back to the House, the minister requested that since that was the recommendation, he was returning back to seek the view of Cabinet on the review of the ban that had been issued by Cabinet. The minister came back and reported yesterday that Cabinet had maintained that ban. 

Procedurally, therefore, this is the situation that we are in: Even if it was with a Bill, if the subject matter of the Bill has been removed and the person that had proposed the Bill has done things that would make the Bill not necessary to be brought, or if a motion has been brought to this House and a subsequent decision is taken that takes away the basis of that motion, would it still be a motion? Would it still be a motion? So this is where we are. 

What should have happened is that at the time that the ban was issued, the minister should have been candid enough not to spend any further time of this Parliament, engaging the committee in a fruitless and futile venture to continue processing a motion that was already invalid, but he allowed the committee to proceed for years with this matter. Today, after the lapse of three or so years, the minister has now sought the authority of the House to withdraw this motion. 

The foundation of his motion is clear, that the authority that had engineered the motion has withdrawn it substantially. The motion was to create districts and the Cabinet, the same institution that gave this authority, has substantially issued a ban on the creation of new districts. So, there is no motion and, therefore, no basis for this motion.

The question before us now is whether the minister is proceeding properly to seek leave of the House to withdraw a motion whose foundation has already been removed. The minister is proceeding correctly. The question that you now have to decide on is: should that leave be granted? 

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is for you and not me to answer. That is the debate that we should have been engaged in. The minister has moved a motion seeking leave or permission of the House to withdraw his motion whose base has now been undermined. That is the leave that the minister is seeking and the motion that we should be debating. So, can we debate this motion, honourable members? 

4.46
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The power to approve districts lies with this Parliament. For us, as a Parliament, once the motion is properly processed we are very ready to consider any such motion given its merits to its logical conclusion.

Mr Speaker, I have seen the expressions of my honourable colleagues, hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire and hon. Robinah Nabbanja. For sure, honourable members, if you choose to put yourself in the seats of those Members of Parliament, given this political period and what is happening in those areas, it becomes understandable when the people’s representatives come here and ask valid questions like why would 100,000 people be in one district and yet we have districts with less than 100,000 people. This, therefore, means that in the future if we are going to consider districts, we create a legitimate condition or formula on how districts are to be arrived at. 

This creates two scenarios; if it is true that the minister has ever come to this Floor and made a commitment to grant Kagadi a district, or any government official has done the same before a committee of Parliament, then such an official will in the future have to come and explain the circumstances under which the people of those areas should be disenfranchised to this level.

What is true is that if we choose as a Parliament not to grant the permission, what will Parliament do with the motion? This motion is moved by Government and Government has come to explain that the circumstances under which those conditions were given – the certificates and assurance - have since changed and therefore this motion is no longer attainable. The only logical thing that we should do is one; given the submissions of hon. Robinah Nabbanja, we need as a Parliament and Government to come up with standardised procedures on what qualifies to be a district – what qualities one should have to be in the various administrative areas and what qualities to become a city. If these issues had been sorted out long time ago, nobody would be asking any questions. Once we give those assurances, then we have no alternative but to go ahead and grant the permission. 

I stand here to say that even if we did not grant the permission, the motion will definitely collapse anyway because we do not have the locus standi to process it to its logical conclusion. This is because the owner of the motion has withdrawn it and the grounds of its sustainability have since refused to exist. 

Mr Speaker, I therefore wish to move that we do grant the said leave to the minister to withdraw. However, the minister has a moral duty, together with the Government, to go and explain to the people of Kibaale the circumstances under which this is happening and to give them reassurance of what is likely to come. I stand here to support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon – (Laughter) - we have pupils and teachers from Bolo Bright Children School represented by hon. Odonga Otto and hon. CD Lowila, Pader District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

We also have pupils and teachers from Kidindinya Primary School represented by hon. William Ngabu Kwemara and hon. Flavia Kabahenda, Kyegegwa District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, can we agree on the time we are going to allot to this debate? Let us do two minutes.
	
4.52
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here not to grant permission to the minister to withdraw the motion. I also do not want to agree with our colleague, hon. Dombo, who says that Parliament at this stage is helpless because the movers of the motion are withdrawing it. This motion has been here for a very long time. Kagadi and other districts in Kibaale were supposed to start on 1 July 2012. This means the Government should have had this idea around 2010 and 2011. Now, to come here in 2015 and say, “I am withdrawing the motion” I think would be very unfair and I request Parliament to be serious and we stand our ground.

Secondly, we have had a very serious government since 1986. I am now afraid of where we are going. Where you promised creation of 23 districts from 2012 and this is 2015 and you are withdrawing the entire list! This is because of no objectivity and lack of criteria of creating these administrative units. We are talking of resources. However, I want to disagree with the minister that Government has money –(Member timed out.)

4.54
MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin from where my colleague has ended, that the minister is telling this Parliament a lot of lies. There is no district that needs Shs 59 billion to start because in the budget, there is no district in this country that spends Shs 50 billion. The biggest district with the biggest budget is about Shs 40 billion. How can you say that starting one takes Shs 59 billion? That is telling this House lies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, respect the language prescription of the rules.

MR BESISIRA: Mr Speaker, that is because it is the main reason he has given. However, even starting a county or municipality is a cost to this country. Where is this money that is starting counties and municipalities coming from and yet there is no money to start even two or three districts?

Mr Speaker, I implore my minister that instead of withdrawing the motion, Government should have had the courtesy to say, “Yes, we brought 25 or 26 districts but we are able to manage three or four”. You bring 25 districts and then you say you cannot manage all of them and yet the other day you brought 43 counties and they were all managed and the municipalities are waiting, and you want the people of Kibaale to continue supporting you? (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I think today –(Member timed out.)

4.57
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It worries me more because this is a sign that we do not have planners in the Government. If we had competent planners, we would not have gone to this level. (Applause) Do we have planners and researchers? What circumstances did they consider to bring the motion here? 

When we talk about hon. Adolf Mwesige or Cabinet - I would implore members not to attack the name of hon. Adolf Mwesige. We should attack the whole Cabinet because the entire Cabinet took a collective decision. It means that there are reasons they are not bringing to this House - whether economics, politics, discrimination or poor planning. I blame the entire Cabinet. Why should you blame hon. Adolf Mwesige? Is it because he is bringing the unfortunate motion here? 

Honourable ministers and members, the other day we passed 43 counties. How much money was that? We are going to bring cities and we have municipalities. We have committed ourselves and in the event that these things are happening, there must be development and development cannot be an event; it must be a process. 

If we are talking about Government and there is a fountain of honour and he comes to my district and makes a proclamation, the President’s proclamations must be implemented to the letter - (Member timed out.)

5.59
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to partially oppose the motion to withdraw the request. The justification is that given the statistics and the facial expression by hon. Nabbanja, it clearly shows that the Minister for Local Government would be coming to Parliament with a motion to merge some of the one-county districts that do not deserve to be districts.

Mr Speaker, having said that, hon. Dombo alluded to the fact that we are helpless; that is not correct. When the motion was brought to the House and it was seconded, it became the property of this House. Therefore, the minister is just expressing a desire that he actually intends to withdraw and the withdrawal is subject to leave by this House. If this House does not grant leave, then the motion will not proceed.

I would like to talk about the certificate of financial implications, which hon. Nandala-Mafabi alluded to. I do not think that when these certificates are issued, they have an expiry date. What would happen to a Bill which has been before a committee and it was issued three years back and it has never been concluded? Does that mean that because of the time it has taken, therefore the Bill has been overtaken by events? I do not want to believe that.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the challenge before us is a question of fairness. The ad hoc manner in which Government operates is what has put us where we are now. That is why yesterday when the minister was asked the criteria for creating municipalities, he talked about the population. I did a background search and found out that some of the municipalities do not have a population of 100,000 people and yet the minister was on the Floor telling us that that was the criteria. 

I would like to conclude that hon. Adolf Mwesige, whom I take to be very serious, needs to get back to Cabinet and do some research so that when he comes back to speak to Parliament, he does not stretch us to look at him as if he is the problem yet there is no coordination within the entire Government. He is now taking the blame because he is at the forefront of this type of incompetence and yet we know he is a very intelligent person.

Mr Speaker, having said that - (Member timed out.)

5.01
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 18th May this year, the Members of Parliament from Karamoja went to see the President about the delayed creation of Nabilatuk and Karenga districts. The President said he had set a ban but he would review it. He was in Nabilatuk on 14th October last year and he gave a go-ahead that the new districts still waiting – it wasn’t a ban but a moratorium on the districts which are still waiting.

Mr Speaker, the President has been moving around the country telling people that they will get new districts. How can we accept the reason that there is no money to create these districts when we have just created 43 counties and we are going to create municipalities? What kind of reason is this? What are we telling the people of Uganda? Are you telling the people in Nabilatuk that you do not have money to create Nabilatuk District whereas you have money to create those smaller municipalities of yours? This is not right. 

I am not party to the withdrawal of this motion. Let this House process the motion and we pass it. If this Government does not have money, let them deal with the lack of money but we shall pass this motion for the creation of districts as it is.

We have been waiting for Nabilatuk District for the last three years. We know we have the population and the capacity. Why do you want to refuse to give us a district? The Constitution is very clear that people shall be ruled according to their own wishes and how they determine. Which people and party want to impose their own ideas on us when we want a district? We do not want a county. Why are you refusing to give us what we want when the Constitution allows it? It is the wish of the people of Nabilatuk to have a district and we have - (Member timed out.) 

5.03
MS BEATRICE MPAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I stand to oppose the motion because of the following reasons: 

First of all, according to the population of Kibaale, which is bigger than other districts including mine, and also the services - The other day, our committee was in the district and being a member of the Committee on Government Assurances, we found out that it is the President who assured the people of Kibaale that a district will be created and the minister reassured them by bringing this motion. Therefore, on this issue of the minister asking for leave to withdraw the motion, as Parliament we should not grant it.

Also, there is discrimination in resource distribution in this country. You find one region is benefiting in many things and the other one is getting few resources. Therefore, our Government, which I serve and love most, should learn how to distribute resources and treat all people equally. Recently, we sat here and approved 43 counties and among those counties, other districts had less than - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the speaking time is two minutes and you cannot give information to a member in two minutes.

5.06
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. 

I would like to sympathise with the minister because I think he is being crucified, as the messenger. However, I understand the pain that my honourable colleagues are going through. Ours is worst in Tororo. Mr Speaker, in 2005, this House approved the division of Tororo District but up to today, we have not set off whereas it is in the Hansard that we should have taken off on 1 July 2006. Therefore, at the end of the day, the withdrawal of this motion is a precursor that even ours that is still at the committee stage may be withdrawn since ours is separate from this particular one. I would like to take this opportunity to seek clarification from the minister on the fate of Tororo.

5.07
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to oppose the withdrawal of the motion. 

I also would like to seek clarification from the minister on why we are having a lot of calls for the creation of districts. Why is it happening across the whole country that even those districts with less than 200,000 people are right now calling for the creation of districts? There seems to be a problem with service delivery. We could ask the minister to create a system on how districts can be created so that there are guidelines on how the technical team will map them out. At this time, I implore the minister that we should move towards the regional tier system because this is the basis on how delivery of services can easily reach the people as it supports the planning and absorption of this budget.

Yesterday we approved creation of constituencies, and I believe the support of the constituency funding is entirely on the Member of Parliament. I do not see how many services a constituency can deliver to the population other than a district. We would have even talked about creation of constituencies while we have the constituency development fund. Probably, that would have helped the Members directly to support planning for their areas.

Mr Speaker, I am not going to support the minister’s request to withdraw the motion. I only suggest that he goes back to amend it and come with the criteria on how other new districts can easily be created. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the list I have so far; we will finish with these and then continue: I have Jie County, Oyam South, Kyadondo East County, Kitgum, Kalaki, Jinja Municipality West, Masaka Municipality, Serere County, Kawempe North, Obongi and Bukedea. Let us go with these and then we will move on from there.

5.10
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join members who are opposing the withdrawal of the motion. 

Mr Speaker, just yesterday, you were telling Members that you can lose all you have except hope. The motion today is about killing hope and I think the people of Kibaale are right to say they would rather die and leave their hope.

I would like to find out from the minister when Government ever seeks criteria. When does Government ever determine a district without a demand by the people? Where has Government been to see that the population of Kibaale is up to 800,000 when it is busy bypassing them and creating smaller districts?

Why are we still wasting time instead of dealing with the question of corruption? Just in the recent past, the Office of the Prime Minister misappropriated up to about Shs 50 billion; that is the money we are talking about, which would have created these districts. 

Mr Speaker, I think we better change the system of giving assurances. If every village is going to ask and because we want to vote, we make a promise and then when we come here, we say the money is not there, what are we going to do to this country? Where are we exactly heading? 

I think it is important that we reflect back on the question of resource allocation. We need to look at the question of doing strategic decentralisation. Let us look at how much money remains in Kampala in the ministry when the people down in decentralisation are getting meagre resources that cannot even transform –(Member timed out.)

5.12
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the greatest issue that Members are concerned about is that of fairness and criteria. 

The honourable minister is seated here but when you go to his constituency, the town council is almost in his village and urban area. (Applause) What criteria did you use to create those town councils when we have bigger places that will require town councils? 

Mr Speaker, very many people have asked for districts; our districts have brought resolutions. There are places that the minister has gone and sought resolutions from and he has come and created districts, municipalities and cities without district council resolutions. However, there are those who have district council resolutions and they are not given. That is not fairness. 

The honourable member of Kibaale has laid on the Table the census report. If you bring the municipality here, honourable minister, we are going to tell you that there are municipalities that do not have the required population yet we also have those that have been shelved with the required population. What criteria are you using? Tell us. 

This is because all of us have constituencies to which the President has pledged. The President just left Apac and he pledged a municipality. There is no municipality in your new programme. He has also pledged a satellite city in Karuma where the Karuma project is. There is no city of Karuma indicated in your 11 satellite cities. How do you expect members who have genuine concerns to support you on the Floor? 

Honourable minister, you are very arrogant. (Applause) You should learn to listen to Members and talk to them in a way that is courteous. (Applause) We sit here and we were elected like you people. The fact that you sit on the front bench does not mean that any Members at the back cannot sit on that front bench. You are supposed to serve us as a minister, but when –(Member timed out.)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I am standing on a procedural point. I have listened to the prayer from the Minister for Local Government requesting to take leave to withdraw the motion. I paid attention to the reaction from many members of Parliament. I have also heard the contributions from everybody who has submitted. 

I would like to request, Mr Speaker, as a matter of procedure that you allow us suspend this debate. This is in order for me to go back to Cabinet. As the acting Leader of Government Business, assigned by none other than Prime Minister Ruhakana Rugunda, obviously I have called for the debate. Let us go back to Cabinet as ministers and then come back to this House on Tuesday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are the moments that make this Chair very difficult. What we are debating here is in national interest and when debating matters of national interest, we cannot have sides. We cannot have minorities or majorities because it is the national interest. It is a call of duty for any Member of Parliament. It does not matter what colour you wear. 

I think it is that spirit that we should adopt in processing these issues. This country will not end today if new districts are not created; it will not end today if municipalities are not created and this country and its people will always move forward. We are here specifically, honourable members, to do just that; to promote the national interest of the people of Uganda. 

In my view - even the member who is speaking when the Speaker is speaking, yet he is a senior member of this House - I do not want to go into those details. I am urging you Members that let us get back. This is the Parliament of Uganda. This is where we debate issues of national interest. This is the highest legal forum in this country. Nothing becomes law unless we have approved it. Nothing becomes policy unless we say so. It is not a budget until we have said yes to it and that is why the spirit should guide us on how we proceed. 

If it is indicated that there is likely to be tension in the continuation of debate, it is within the authority of the Speaker to suspend the debate for us to give ourselves a period in which to reflect on whether we are okay. That includes all of us - the ministers, the Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition who I now see wants to stand up to speak. 

However, a request has been made and the way this debate is going, we might end up reflecting on things that we should not reflect upon as a national Parliament. Therefore in that spirit, can we sleep over these matters and come back to it after we have interacted amongst ourselves. 

Unless the Leader of the Opposition wants to rule on this matter -[MR WAFULA OGUTTU: “I do not want to rule on it.”]- Can I rule on this? 

5.21
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to make my remark before you make your ruling and I agree with you ruling.

Some time back, when I was contributing on the creation of counties, I really warned my colleagues here in this House that we are dealing with a dicey emotive topic. However, we rushed through and created the counties and the constituencies, largely.

We have asked the government to come up with a scientific method or way of determining what a county is and what a constituency is; any administrative unit or a district. Government has not given us that and yet there are many areas, which qualify to be districts. I really sympathise with hon. Nabbanja because Kibaale is large. However, we have smaller areas as she gave us statistics; we have very small districts, which you are again breaking up into other divisions.

There must be a scientific way. Instead of giving districts because of votes, as the honourable from Karamoja said, we are messing up our country. We therefore ask that before the minister or the Government Chief Whip is granted permission that we suspend it, we should ask the minister to maybe suspend it for a year so that he comes back with convincing criteria for creating these administrative units and constituencies. Bringing it back tomorrow will not help. We are going to have the same fight. That is our proposal; that we need a scientific way of arriving at this creation of administrative units.

Lastly, hon. Adolf Mwesige, please endeavour to be truthful and respectful of this House. You do not –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, you are crossing the line. (Laughter) 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I am not crossing the line; I was going to give a justification for that statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, it is not necessary.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: We simply would like the minister to organise himself before he comes here. He cannot bring things here, withdraw them and go back, suspend; no, he should do research first and he has people to do that for him. He should be ready when he comes here.

We cannot go on wasting people’s time and resources because of incompetence –(Interjections)– yes, incompetence on the side of the ministry because they would come here when they are ready.

Mr Speaker, I think it is okay to rule and the suspension can be granted but we need the minister and Government to come back when they are ready, not in piecemeal just as it has been. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me rule. Can I rule on this matter please? I was going to give my final ruling on the subject: The matter that was raised by the Government Chief Whip was a procedural issue; that going by what is going on, would it not be proper to suspend debate on this matter and then come back to it when we have done some consultation? I think that it is in the interest of this debate itself and also in the interest of the people of this country that it is necessary at this time to pause this debate.

We need to pause it and then replay it when the time is right for us to do so. Therefore, because of this and the foregoing things that I have already said, I am suspending this debate on the motion by the minister seeking leave to withdraw his motion and we will see how to handle it next week. Okay? Can we deal with the Bill? There is a Bill that we can finish.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. The minister is going to consult and I am so happy that you said that this House is the one that has the power to determine policy, pass the budget and do anything as long as it is lawful.

You have allowed the minister to go and consult; I am sure you have also allowed us also to go and consult. I also have the figures. I would like to correct my sister; your number is 788 not over 800. We also have other districts –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, get to the procedure.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Since we have the power to do anything lawful, will it be procedurally right that when coming back, we should also bring – if the minister is going to bring his information about districts, we should also bring districts and counties which also need to be merged or divided? (Laughter) Would it be procedurally wrong for us, when coming back next week, to also bring our interests from the entire country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we know the matter that is before the House. The matter, which is before the House, which is being suspended is the minister’s motion seeking leave of the House to withdraw. I cannot import anticipation of any matter on what else can come next week. This is a motion I am deferring debate on and the content of it is clear; seeking leave of the House to grant him permission to withdraw his motion. That is what we are suspending.

Any other matter that is outstanding is within the right of the member to bring it by any other means, which is permissible under our Rules of Procedure. We will therefore come back here next week to continue with this debate and probably, possibly and hopefully take a decision on the matter in a way that absolves us as Parliament and moves the national interest of this country forward. This item is therefore suspended until next week when we come back here. Let us proceed to the Bill.

Honourable members, item number 6 is on the creation of municipalities and I would pray that we also defer it to next week so that we are well set for it. (Applause) The situation is going to be the same. Can we have item No. 7. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOTTERY AND GAMING BILL, 2013

5.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Lotteries and Gaming Bill, 2013” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for second reading. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister of State for Health, hon. Chris Baryomunsi, hon. Fox-Odoi, hon. Mariam Nalubega, hon. Benard Atiku, hon. Nyakikongoro and hon. Sanjay Tanna. Would you like to speak to your motion, hon. Minister?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the object of the Bill is to reform the laws relating to the conduct of lotteries, gaming and casinos in this country; to regulate the mushrooming casinos and gaming in the country. 

At present, lotteries are regulated separately from casinos and gaming activities. Whereas the law relating to lotteries is contained in the National Lotteries Act, Chapter 191 of the Laws of Uganda, casinos are regulated under the Gaming and Pool Betting Control and Taxation Act, Cap 292.

The two laws are presently administered by the National Lotteries Board on behalf of the Treasury. It is this Bill that will merge the two and allow the smooth administration of the gaming, lotteries and casinos in this country so that they are regulated. Where we think we should have some strict way of how to protect the young people; do that and allow the administration of these activities to be smooth and in line with the laws of Uganda.

The purpose of this is also to consider the emerging technologies that are in place that our children are using in gaming but at the same time make sure that those who are involved in these activities do pay taxes to Government.

Mr Speaker, I beg that this Bill be debated and finally passed into law. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you beg to move that the Bill be read the second time. That is the motion.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I had already moved that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, in winding up, you are saying something else - (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Yes, I once again beg to move that the Bill be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this House received this Bill for first reading on the 7 February 2012. This is one of the Bills that have stayed in the committee because of some other urgent business that kept coming up. 

The committee has since examined the Bill and is ready to report. However, to pave way for that reporting, the motion for second reading of the Bill has been moved and I now propose the question for your debate; that the Lotteries and Gaming Bill, 2013, be read the second time. That is the motion and to kick off the motion, I ask the chairperson of the committee to report accordingly.

5.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you have said, it was referred to the committee and therefore, I will read the observations made by the committee.

The committee makes the following observations:
    1. The present legislative framework governing the gaming industry is outdated and no longer forms an appropriated or effective regulatory framework that can be used to govern a modern and fast expanding gaming industry.

    2. That gaming is a reality and inevitable in society as a source of leisure and form of entertainment. This therefore calls for measures focusing on promotion of responsible gambling.

    3. That there has to be a clear policy on the management of problem gambling and hence a fair portion of the proceeds of the gaming industry must be returned to Government for the benefit of good and important causes and dealing with adverse social impacts of gaming activities.

    4. There is a need for strict regulation of all persons, locations, practices, associations and activities related to the operation of licensed gaming establishments, the manufacture, sale and distribution of gaming devices and its associated equipment and operations of online gaming.

    5. Establishment of an independent regulator; there is need to establish an independent body whose functions will be to regulate and monitor the gaming industry and foster competition through licensing of operators. At an appropriate time, we shall propose that organisation.

    6. Gaming tax and license fees for collection; the gaming industry can produce a substantial portion of the overall revenue to the Consolidated Fund. The committee finds that the best practice, for example in Tanzania, is to mandate the regulatory body to function as a taxing and licensing board for the assessment and collection of a gaming tax and other charges which are peculiar to gaming. The failure to pay such taxes within 30 days will automatically result in the surrender of the gaming license and require immediate closure of the gaming operations.
 
However, it is important to note that;
    a) The regulator will not collect PAYE or other chargeable taxes and other laws, which are collected by URA.
    b) The revenues derived are not retained by the regulatory body but are remitted to the Consolidated Fund.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the regulatory body established under this Act should be mandated and equipped with the relevant competence to correctly assess and collect gaming tax.

In conclusion, the committee has proposed a number of amendments as attached to this report and recommends that the Bill be passed subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move.

Before I sit, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes that were used in our deliberations. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes of the meeting of the committee. Honourable members, that is the report of the committee. We can now commence debate on the principles of the Bill for the next 25 minutes. This will be the appropriate time to debate. We can start from Fort Portal Municipality.

5.38
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How much time do we take each? Three minutes.

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Speaker, the culture of gambling is something that is new in our society especially with modern machines that are now causing heavy losses and conflicts in families. We have young people who are stealing money from their parents because they are being enslaved by these small machines. 

Mr Speaker, you cannot believe that the Chinese have brought smaller machines even up to village level. Recently, some of the voters in Fort Portal took the law in their hands, grabbed those machines and carried them away from that place because they had lost a lot of money. Children are not going to school; they instead go and gamble.

I do not even know under what parameters - these foreign people just come to our country and penetrate us up to that level without being stopped. Even though we do not yet have a law, which can prevent that, I think there is an urgency that Government expedites measures to temporarily suspend these gambling activities until a clear law is in place. That is my prayer.

5.40
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just like my brother from Fort Portal, I represent an urban constituency and gambling is such a challenge. I believe once the Bill is passed and the board is in place and the powers that have been enlisted in the Bill shall empower the board to regulate the depth at which this gambling must go.

While an urban constituency can have people that can perhaps have knowledge over so many issues - the Vice-President is my neighbour and in his constituency, almost every little village has a machine that takes a minimum of Shs 500. You find little children looking for change out of sheer ignorance to go and insert in a machine; whatever they get from there, given their knowledge, heaven knows.

Mr Speaker, we have a duty to protect our economy and also protect the integrity of our society. I hope once we get to discuss the nitty-gritty of the Bill, we shall make sure that the law is prohibitive in a way. I would like to implore Government not to be desperate in using this as a source of revenue but it should be a source of revenue that inevitably -when it is inevitable, the revenue should come. However, the first priority should be to protect society from being invited into gambling as a source of income. I do not believe that gambling is a source of income for the poor.

Necessarily, it is a game for the wealthy that have the luxury of money, time and space. But for us to allow our young people to look at this as employment will be very dangerous and I believe we shall be able to filter through the different sub clauses to make sure that finally, the law is protective of our society and our economy. I thank you.

5.43
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like my colleagues have said, gambling is a bad thing that we face in this country. 

We may talk of licencing and regulating but this needs a lot of study because we have seen other regulators in other sectors in this country failing. Therefore, we need to take time.

I agree with hon. Alex Ruhunda that for the time being, we can suspend because when you go to the villages and the towns, the gambling there is beyond control. Unless this Parliament prevails over this situation, we are getting problems.  Young people - and Mr Speaker, liberalism must have a limit. In our constituencies, the level at which people are taking alcohol; you find someone taking alcohol up to 3.00 a.m. Relatedly, gambling should be stopped for the timing being. I rest my case.

5.45
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Coming in the line of debate immediately after two members of Parliament who represent urban constituencies in the names of municipalities definitely makes me agree with the views expressed so far.

What is happening at the countryside is unbelievable. In urban centres, students are even gambling money meant for fees. I have got a friend whose son ended up gambling school fees. Therefore if unchecked, it is an issue that will completely become a nuisance in this country.

Mr Speaker, there is even a high rate of petty theft at the moment as we speak. Children definitely have to look for money in order to enter these halls and they stay out late. As you drive to the constituency along the roadside, you find children as late as 1.00 a.m. or 2.00 a.m. and most of them concentrate around these betting halls. Therefore, I think it is only right. 

It is unfortunate that this Bill came to Parliament in 2012 and we are debating it only at this time. Nevertheless, we hope that at the end of the day, we can still be able to achieve the intended purpose for which this Bill was mooted.

I urge that in the process of making this law, betting owners who do not adhere to the principles that are going to come out of this should be heftily fined. A country that does not protect the future of the youth is a wasted country. If we do not put heavy fines to the owners of these betting facilities, definitely it will escalate.

Mr Speaker, I feel this is a law that has come just at the right time and I implore colleagues that when we move to the next stage in the process of making this law, we unanimously agree to the principles that will help the youth and those who are participating in this. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.47
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the work of the committee. However, the Bill as it is, leaves a lot of areas vague. I will read out two issues; “Powers of the board; issue guidelines, directive and instructions to any licensed persons for proper management of a Casino, Lottery or Game.”

Mr Speaker, I would have preferred a timeframe within which this House can debate on some of those guidelines. For example under 18 years, the issue of a child going into these betting houses is totally unacceptable. However, today you find 13, 14 year old boys, like my colleagues have said, betting on Arsenal and Manchester United. It is crazy.

Secondly, my observation is that when you go to these gambling houses, there are slot machines. It talks about taxation; that the board will tax. However, we do not have access to those technologies that can measure the amount of volume churned through these machines - for example, the number of coins that have gone through the slot machines - because those machines can be reset. In this Bill, we have not specified how this regulatory authority will supervise and should there be a breach, what the reprimand is.

Mr Speaker, while the interest of the Bill expresses our interests here and whatever is in every member’s heart and law abiding citizens back home, we need to have a stronger law.
Therefore, I support what my honourable colleague from Fort Portal Municipality and what hon. Mpuuga has said. We need to suspend these gambling activities because they have penetrated to the deepest villages. They are sucking out liquidity without adding value to this economy.

Mr Speaker, it is so bad that you find - they are talking about the youth but you find the old; women, men, every single person is so hooked onto this betting and gambling. For example, slot machines are accessed by underage pupils and there is no regulation to access. To begin with, how did these machines come into Uganda - (Member timed out.)

5.50
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the establishment of the Lotteries and Gaming Bill in respect to setting up a regulator. This is an activity that is being practised all over the world and it is high time Uganda took a decision to regulate the sector.
I agree with the observations of the committee that we need to establish strict regulations. I do not agree that we should ban because even if you banned it here, people will fly to other countries and go and practice this activity. What we can do from here is to regulate. Let us put in place stringent conditions for people to engage in this activity.

Mr Speaker, the observation highlighted by the committee in respect to setting up strict regulations will go a long way in regulating and enabling even Government to be able to raise revenue from this sector.

As said by one of the honourable members, we need to put a system in place to check the operation of these lotteries and gaming businesses. We have had a problem of establishing the number of calls that are made. We depend on the mercy of the telecom companies to tell us how many phones are made and then they assess themselves.

We also need to put in place a system that can be able to establish how these activities are being made. Otherwise there is a lot of people are making gain out of this business and the government is losing out. I support that a strong regulator be put in place to regulate the sector. I thank you.

5.52
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the minister for this Bill. 

With me on the iPad, I took a photograph of one of the machines that the Asians are using to fleece our people. These machines have been deployed almost in every trading centre in West Nile and here in Kampala, I reside in Mbalwa. I also saw that even these retail shops now have these machines. They have made provisions there for these machines to accept coins. Therefore, that means even the least of society - the poorest of the poor - are being fleeced by these machines. Therefore, I strongly support this Bill. 

In Arua, people now sleep with their goats in the houses because if you leave your goats outside, you will not find them. The youth are moving around; they will get your goat slaughter it, go and sell and the money goes to gambling.

Just go to Kisenyi here, there is a place called Ovino. I am a business man and I have an outlet there but in Ovino, the place is crowded with people some of whose monies have been eaten and have nowhere to go. Therefore, there is a lot of desperate moments and I do not know what the situation will be like if we leave lotteries and gaming the way it is in this country.

I have travelled; I have been to Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Sudan and even Congo but you do not see this kind of situation. Therefore I think we need to expedite the process of this law because if we do not, tomorrow we risk falling victims to these youth because somebody is desperate; you can no longer leave your things the way they used to be.  

Therefore, I would like to support this Bill. As said by hon. Tanna, there are few provisions that the mover of the – (Member timed out.)

5.55
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamongi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From the report, the committee notes that gambling or gaming is a reality and it is inevitable in society and it is a form of entertainment. I would like to depart from the committee on that point. First of all, we cannot say that it is inevitable to have gambling; I think that is over stretching it. That we need gambling for us to live is not true.

On the issue of entertainment, my understanding of entertainment is that you should reap joy out of it; it should be interesting and joyful. However, most of the people who have participated in these gambling activities have ended up miserable and crying. Therefore, we cannot take it as any other normal entertainment because it is not.

Mr Speaker, if we consider that it is a source of substantial revenue to Government, I think as Government, we need to be very serious and know that we shall not accept anything for the sake of having money out of it. We cannot just look at the point of money and say we can benefit from this in the Treasury yet we are having a big negative impact on society. Therefore, if it means limiting the gaming activities in this country, let us do it. After all, we are not reaping anything from it as I speak now. Are we taxing the foretellers? We are not. Therefore, why are you looking at this gaming as a source of revenue for Government?

The rate at which we are losing funds, at which the young generation is being destroyed by gambling needs not be over emphasised. Everybody has talked about it, it has gone everywhere. It is my hope that maybe as we consider this Bill, we shall consider limiting this gambling to urban centres to certain limits.  We cannot just let it go everywhere deep in the villages for a person to sell his food to go and gamble or a child to sell something from the family to go and gamble.

We need to have limits to this. There are places, for example Kampala, where people have excess money. Those can afford to go and blow it out anyhow but not in the rural areas where we have the majority as poor people.

Therefore in conclusion, I would like to say that our economy should not be looked at as just a very free and liberal economy where everything should enter. Like a colleague has said, why is it that what is happening in Uganda is not in other neighbouring countries? We are just free and open, ready to embrace everything however destructive it maybe to our people. 

I therefore would like to submit, Mr Speaker, that this law must be looking at strongly limiting gambling activities and making sure that we make it harder for these people to promote their business in this country. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had agreed on two minutes. Please, it is two minutes. 

5.59
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to apologise for the way I spoke earlier to my brother, hon. Adolf Mwesige. It was really because of that argument. 

However on this matter, it is a big security issue. For us in Karamoja, because of the removal of the gun and the return of peace, we see strangers carrying these machines and they go deeper in the villages and infiltrate us. Some stay there up to morning; we do not know what they do. It has introduced petty thefts, which people do not know in these parts of the country; that you can let your goats stay out and find them in the morning and they can be moved to somebody’s kraal and you get them.  

We need to particularly pay attention to the penetration; I agree with my colleague that penetration should be limited to urban centres. Those with municipalities, I think we should stop it at the municipalities. It should not even go beyond the district headquarters because going to the villages; it is hindering our people from managing their children, families and it is introducing a lack of sense of guidance to our youth.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, although it is not detailed in the Bill, there is also a lot of gambling going on electronically through this public telephone companies where they encourage young people and say put Shs 100 and you will get Shs 200, 300 million. Someone really spends so much money with hope that they will win something. That is also electronic gaming and it is not in this Bill and we need to pay attention to adding it here. So many children spend time on these machines hoping to win some money from Airtel or MTN with these promotions and they spend a lot of their fees on this.

Thirdly on this matter of the Gaming and Lotteries Bill, it is a matter of morality. To what extent can we be free –(Member timed out.)

6.01
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to thank the committee for the report and the minister for the Bill. As my colleagues have said, it is very annoying to see these machines scattered all over the country and in every small bar in the rural areas. There are young people who should be busy doing some useful work but now just have this mentality of quick gains; putting coins in the machine and getting out rewards.

As my colleagues have said, they do not work even for this money which they put in the machines, they just go asking. As we go around these towns, you find these young people crowding on these machines as they touch their throats because they want something to drink from you. Young people who should be gainfully employed and young people who should be reading their books they are busy wasting their time on these machines. 

I do agree that it is very necessary to regulate the business and the age at which the children who should engage in these machines and also the hours when these machines should be opened.

As hon. Atiku said, I think the word is to fleece; that these people use these machines to fleece the people unknowingly. The people just take it as a game and do not know that they are wasting every coin that should be put to use into this machine. I do support that there is a regulatory body to regulate the business for the sake of our children. I thank you.

6.03
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. Lottery and gaming are foreign things and they are done by rich people in developed countries.

These people come and use excess money for playing around but for us here, we have taken it as a business; a way of getting money. The little money you have - and the children are all going to use that money.  It has reached so far that the last time I was in my constituency a parent asked me; “When will you stop this gambling in Parliament?” We are fed up of children becoming thieves; even the women go to sell their products, they also want to go gambling.

The issue is very serious and I would like us to have either tough laws or ban it altogether. What do we gain out of this apart from taking the little money we have? We would like to see - the recommendations put here are not tough enough. At what age, time, how long and how much money should we use? If you want us to spend even Shs 50 to get Shs 200,000 that means all the children become thieves.

I would like really to stop this gaming especially in the rural areas. It is not helping us but making us poorer all the time. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.05
MR BENSON OBUA (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

Gambling has been with us for a very long time except that our gambling, in our traditional sense, has been very rudimentary. I remember when growing up, there were some people who were so addicted that they could even gamble away their wives –(Laughter). The wife could just see some people coming to take her away and only to realise that she has been gambled away.

Having said that, the nature that modern gambling has taken is threatening the very fabric of our society and our young people are doing unthinkable things. Mr Speaker, allow me to submit to this House that gambling - the modern type sports betting - has already cost lives in rural areas. I knew of a young man in Lango who came so close to winning Shs 100 million and lost and the young man just died out of shock.

I think we should be tough in the area of regulation and we should make sure that even as people gamble - because I do not think we are going to put a full stop to it really - but let those who are willing to be robbed knowingly be robbed in a sensible way. However, at the same time let us make sure - because in the developed world, governments have used money from gambling to build infrastructure. We can sweep those monies which people do not know how to use and put it into the hands of Government to build a lot of things but the idea of gambling is very destructive. Just go and google on your iPad right now how gambling is dangerous or bad for you and you will see it is really very dangerous.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit that let us support the Bill but let us make very stringent guidelines and make it –(Member timed out.)

6.08
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also support this committee. You know, we have been in war and the generation which is right now between 26 to 30 years have lived in camps. In the camps, they never went through this rigorous informal training where children are taught how to fend for themselves. There, they were in receipt and so laziness was the order of the day and this gambling encourages laziness. 

You find many of our boys engaging in sports betting and never work hard. Right now, we are still a developing country; we are not yet developed and we cannot run away from hard work and farming.

This gambling, lotteries and gaming need a regulatory body to regulate them because some of us shouted that this is immoral. Our children, for instance the boys, are supposed to be the security for property in a home but they are the people who remove property from the home to go and sell and go for gambling. It is very unfortunate. 

I think if this law comes in place, it will help us to try and regulate so that we rebuild this population where almost more than half of the population of our young people especially the males are involved in sports betting and unnecessary games. They need to be regulated so that they are reduced and so they can begin to also work hard.

Maybe the time and age; if it is online - because I see that there are also some online. I do not know; we need these technical people to help a lot. I saw in some developed countries that if you would like to watch maybe a film, you really have to pay money. Therefore, there should be some ways of making these children pay money so that they do not waste a lot of time. It shouldn’t be just for sports betting, lotteries and gaming only.

It is very sad for our case where we have been in war for over 20 years. We have lost a generation or even more than a generation. Thank you.

6.11
MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee. 

I will begin with a concern that when Bills are brought to this House and they take very many years, they are at times overtaken by events – just as you have seen with the issue of the districts. Therefore, it is necessary that we expedite some of these Bills so that when they are passed, they are passed in time. This is because by the time they are thought about, there must be a need for that legislation.

Mr Speaker, I have a few questions for the minister: how did this betting start in this country? How did it come to this extent without us regulating it up to this time? Have we done an analysis to find out the benefits or if it is necessary for us to give them this leverage? Why are we looking at making it legal? 

Our cultures are different; a colleague here said that this is a practice, which is in other countries. The other day we passed a law here on the gays – though there is something that happened to it - but there are certain things that are not African. We also have to look at our culture. What are we benefitting? As we do this – as we license some of these betting and lotteries and the rest, we need to look at where the person we are licensing is going to place it and which people is he going to engage? This is because it seems it has now gone to everybody. 

Even as you are seated in your courtyard, you find someone coming with – I do not know what they are called; are they boxes or what are they? By the time you realise – some of us no longer have these young ones but our grandchildren are looking for how they get Shs 500 to go and bet. This is really dangerous to our country.

We need to see how we can regulate this. Before the government says that we should have a law, it should have told us –(Member timed out.)

6.14
MS C.D. OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very grateful that this Bill is on the Floor of Parliament today. I thank the committee for their report.

Mr Speaker, while debating the statement on the International Youth Day, some colleagues talked about the money for the Youth Livelihood Fund being returned to the centre and one wonders what is happening – with all the complaints from a cross-section of people within the communities about unemployment and people complaining that the youth are not being supported - but money was returned from a number of districts to the centre.

Quite a number of the youth are engaged in this gaming activity and they do not take time to think about their future. They cannot sit down and come up with realistic plans on what they can do – activities that are productive. It is quite painful that these gaming activities are also ruining the future of our children; the youth who are still at school. 

In my sub-county Pajule where we have Pajule Technical School, the government is investing to skill these youth. However, when you move around within the centre, you will find that these children leave school and waste a lot of time at the centre on these gaming activities.

At least the children who are in boarding schools have some controls. These who go to day school – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is past 6 O’clock and going by the trend of the debate, I see all the debates on the principle of the Bill are in support. Don’t you think it would be the proper time for us to move to the next stage? Can I put the motion for second reading? 

Honourable members, I now put the question that the Lotteries and Gaming Bill, 2013, be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING BILL, 2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this would be the proper time to pause this matter. We will resume next week.

The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.17 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 18 August 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

