

Thursday, 18 August 2022

Parliament met at 2.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I think we have a few matters of national importance today, which we should handle, but in the interest of the business, I will push most of them to Prime Minister’s Time. The Prime Minister will be coming.

Item three on the Order Paper, if you have copies of the Order Paper, is not a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow. This is a loan, which we passed over two years ago. So, it is an assessment report, which I required the Committee on National Economy to do. So, I need that correction to be made. We are not having any resolution for borrowing today. We only want to know why the delay, after over two years of Parliament passing a resolution authorising Government to borrow to address various infrastructure concerns of Karamoja, up to now, nothing has been released. The committee did an assessment and we shall be allowing them to do that. 

Today, colleagues, I held a meeting with the National Physical Planning Board. We discussed matters concerning physical planning of this country. In the areas where you stay, you will realise that after you struggle to buy land and put up a building, before you even complete it, someone builds apartments way above your house. The occupants there will then start viewing directly into your compound; you no longer have privacy. Then a church will come next to you; a discotheque will come next. That is why we need the National Physical Planning Board. 

Today, I held a meeting with them and indeed, they told me their issues. So, I request the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to have an urgent meeting with the Board, with a focus on how best we can help them.

For example, out of the Shs 1.5 billion, which was also meagre, but which they were supposed to get for both compliance and enforcement for the whole country, this quarter they received only Shs 100 million. Now, Shs 100 million cannot even pay staff and you want them to enforce some regulations? 

No wonder, I have come to understand the issue raised by Hon. Peter Mugema - also known as “Panadol” - about the open space in Iganga, which was being built on, but the Prime Minister stopped it, the Physical Planning Board and everyone stopped it, but they have gone ahead to build. I understand town clerks have gone ahead to give permits even in areas like wetlands, and that is why even people now own lakes.

There is a time - it personally happened to me. I was going to buy some land in Masaka last year; it was big land. When I sent my surveyor the sellers said, “No, put a deposit before you can buy. Bali kumpi kulitwaala” (They are about to take it). However, I insisted that my surveyor first does their work. I said, “No, I am going to survey it.”

When we did the survey, we found out that more than half of the land was in Lake Victoria. (Laughter) It was not even in a swamp, but a real lake - (Laughter) - but someone had a title for it. Some of those titles are taken to banks and someone even processes - it is a very big issue.

I instruct the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to immediately meet with the Board and the relevant agencies to do with the operations of the Board so that on physical planning, we stop admiring other countries, especially this Parliament that has exposed people like us and who are young and ambitious - why do we keep admiring Dubai! We now even admire our neighbours. We say, “Do you see how beautiful they are?” It is because we are frustrating our own efforts. So, they need our support.
 
Minister of Finance, please, you cannot give a whole Board only Shs 100 million to operate, do enforcement and compliance? Shs 100 million for the whole country, colleagues? That is what they have been given. So, we request Ministry of Finance to intervene and ensure more releases are made for the Board.

I have the Board members and the head of Secretariat. The Board is led by Madam Amanda Ngabirano. They will be giving me the full names, but I called them to come and witness the proceedings of this House.

Honourable members, as you also saw in the House yesterday, we have continued to face challenges of ministers not attending the House. I am glad that today, the frontbench is somehow doing fine. Of course, when I was handing over to my colleague, the Hon. Hamson Obua, the new Government Chief Whip, I told him I will be asking him for ministers –(Laughter)– which is the toughest question you can ever have answers for, as a chief whip. However, our laws and rules provide us with solutions to that. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I want ministers to know that they are Members of Parliament. And so, the rules that apply to Members of Parliament, apply to them too. Therefore, whether the Member’s constituency is Rwakitura –(Laughter)– or any other - because there are ministers who say, “My constituency is Rwakitura - appointing authority.” So, whether your constituency is Plot 1, Nakasero, Mitooma or Amuru, you are a minister and a Member of Parliament. 

Therefore, honourable members, I wish to remind all of you that under Rule 112 of our Rules of Procedure, ministers are Members of Parliament and are all obliged to attend this House. Ay Member, including ministers, who misses 15 consecutive sittings of Parliament will be referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, in accordance with Rule 112(8) of our Rules of Procedure. (Applause)

I also want to inform you, honourable members, that the House is now fully open to all of us and we must attend sittings. I, accordingly, instruct the Clerk to Parliament to resume registration of attendance of all Members at every sitting. If a member misses 15 sittings, we no longer want the excuse of COVID-19. Colleagues, we have opened Parliament fully; you must attend Parliament. We are going to start picking your registration lists; clocking in is now a must for each and every one of you. 

If we assess, as presiding officers, and we find that you have missed 15 consecutive sittings of Parliament, you risk losing your seat. We have resolved it as presiding officers and we are going to take serious action on it.

Colleagues, yesterday I called on the Minister of Energy to present a statement on the emergency operations around Isimba Dam regarding flooding so I will be amending the Order Paper to include that. Also, the Minister of Agriculture will come with a statement because we have issues around agriculture, hunger and so on. He has had a statement on the agriculture value chain pending on the Order Paper for a long time. So today, I will also amend the Order Paper to include him.

I will also amend to let the Government Chief Whip designate the new Members who were sworn in yesterday to committees as per the Rules of Procedure.

The members of Physical Planning Board are here: 

Madam Amanda Ngabirano, who is the chairperson of the board; 
Ms Jackie Kemigisha, board member;
Ms Sarah Naigaga, board member;
Dr Ernest Kimbugwe, board member; 
Mr Edward Simbwa, board member;
Ms Florence Nambooze board member; 
Mr David Wamai, board member.

Colleagues join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

I know there are reactions to my communication. Let me start with Hon. Nsereko, Hon. Macho, Hon. Silwany and Hon. Ekumi for two minutes each. Clerk, please ensure that we use two minutes each.

2.31
MR MOHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wonderful communication. Procedurally, you have spoken about the quorum of this House and attendance.

Under rule 24, when determining matters in this Parliament, at times of voting we shall refer to one third -(Interjection)– the mask was vacated a while ago.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsereko, just a minute. 

MR NSEREKO: Okay, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, there is a guidance I gave and I have given it several times; the moment you respond to a colleague who is not on record, you are bringing rumours on record. That is what you are doing. Whoever will be reading the Hansard will ask, who was he responding to? They cannot connect because the Hansard captures only you on the Floor. Others talking from the sides are not captured. 

Therefore, I implore you to stop responding to colleagues who are trying to take you - those are rumours. That is what we consider. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In lieu, your guidance to the House would mean that we vacate the ruling that was previously held by the House as regards matters of quorum, which we had adopted as a result of COVID-19 restrictions. 

In this matter, we had previously agreed to the number being 100 in the House and one third being present would warrant us to take a position on any matter. I would like to seek your clarification on this matter. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to applaud you on the matter of the physical planning body and the limited facilitation that they are getting. Of course, the whole world would like to move on a path of a planned society, Uganda inclusive. We are part of different world protocols, treaties and orders and if we do not empower such people then our future is bleak. Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker for the opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Nsereko. I get the point you have raised; we have moved on because we have come to check on Hansard and we have MPs who have never spoken. When you ask that MP, he or she says, “I have never been given a chance to attend because of COVID-19.” (Laughter) 

There is an MP who went and stated on radio somewhere in the north that to speak in Parliament, you must first lobby the presiding officer, but I never see him here. I have tried to see him here all the times I have chaired because I want to give him an opportunity without him lobbying me, but I have never seen him.

Therefore, we want your people to see you. Yes, your constituents voted for you to be seen so we want you to come to the House. We keep assessing situations, we consult with the Minister of Health and all that. Where there is a situation, we shall be informing the House otherwise, in case of any changes.

2.35
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I thank you for your communication, which was very clear to this House. However, it has become a practice and a culture and even today in your communication, you have told us that Parliament made a resolution, the Speaker directed, the Prime Minister stood here and said, “I am the Prime Minister of Uganda. The Iganga construction should stop and the Town Clerk continues to build.”

Mr Speaker, it is becoming a common practice that the decisions we take in Parliament are not respected. They instead take other decisions as Government and they continue disrespecting the decisions of Parliament and implementing other things. For example, why would a town clerk go ahead to allow construction when the Prime Minister of the country has said, “Stop, there is a court process”? 

Mr Speaker, if this indiscipline continues where you make a directive in Parliament and they disregard your directive - If we continue moving in that direction, we are not going to deliver the mandate of the people that put us here in Parliament. 

Wouldn't it be the right time for us to take strong decisions on certain people so that there is somebody who is responsible for something? You cannot disregard the Speaker of Parliament, the Prime Minister of Uganda, Parliament and all other institutions in the country and you just continued with a lot of impunity. I thought that is something that we should take strongly as a decision that will benefit us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. In my instructions to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, I need you to visit that same site in Iganga. I need the committee to go on ground and clearly identify what the problem is or where is the best- Because open spaces are for the public; it is to benefit all of us.

Now, regarding the ministers, I forgot to announce that the Government Chief Whip should coordinate with the Prime Minister and submit to the Office of the Speaker a rota of ministers’ attendance by Thursday next week so that we know if it is a Thursday, it is Tayebwa attending, if it is a Tuesday, it is Anywar attending. Whoever misses according to that rota is the one we shall go for. (Applause)

2.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker, before the Government Chief Whip was appointed - and when I was still serving as Minister of State for Sports, the Ministry of Education and Sports received a circular from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, informing every ministry to submit a rota in terms of how ministers will apportion themselves to attend Parliament. I know, for instance, the Minister of Education and Sports submitted and my day then was Thursday. I believe that will be automatically replaced by my brother and friend, Hon. Peter Ogwang. 

Mr Speaker, with your directive and deriving my powers from rule 15(10), which states, “Other functions of the Government Chief Whip,  Opposition Chief Whip and Party Whip shall include –

b) keeping Members informed of Parliamentary Business.” I undertake to extract that list and submit it on the Floor of Parliament for ministries that have complied, including those that have not. We will even write to those who have not yet complied. I even then put the ministries, which have not yet complied to make sure they comply before Tuesday, next week such that by Thursday, we are ready to brief Parliament on the rota of ministers who should attend. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Ministers, this will be to your own benefit. I have been here and when a minister comes to the Floor, you hear a Member asking, “Who’s that one?” – Moreover, a full minister. 

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, you are a gift to this Parliament because I see your guidance is bringing very good innovations. Right now, I do not know who the Cabinet Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is. I think with your ruling, I will be able to know. (Laughter)

As I proceed, I congratulate my brother, Hon. Obua, for the new appointment as our whip. I know that through his hard work and nursery bed of politics of the youth council, where the Speaker and I also belonged - the ministers, I do not know because the way we are trained, I see the fire in the House on the Front Bench. 

I also want to appreciate your guidance, Mr Speaker, on the national planning board. The fact of the matter is that this country Uganda needs this board more than any other country in East Africa. We have town councils and new cities, but the planning of these urban places is very badly neglected. Of all the cities, I think it is only Kampala with a city square where people can go to sit, relax and plan. All squares that were in the cities have been grabbed.

I, therefore, want to strongly support you that the Committee on Physical infrastructure should go ahead so that it can implement some of the regulations put in place for our Government to run. Thank you.

2.42
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have directed on attendance, a directive that is not being issued for the first time. 

I fear that the presiding officers are rendering themselves powerless. We have ministers here that have never come to Parliament. Hon. Janet Kataaha has never stepped here –(Laughter)– I thought that in your communication since you said you are going to refer ministers to the disciplinary committee, you are going to announce starting with Hon. Janet Kataaha. 

Also, fundamentally, the office of the whip is an office of Parliament. The NRM, through their internal arrangement, elevated the whip to become a Cabinet Minister - I am fearing. The whip is at the same level as all Cabinet ministers. Maybe, in NRM, there is no protocol such that a Cabinet minister will be ordering another. 

I sympathise with the Hon. Obua that he will be ordering Gen. Otafire to come here. If the NRM was following universal standards, the Prime Minister should be the one ordering ministers to come to Parliament, not a Cabinet minister ordering fellow Cabinet minister. You are going to have a problem, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There are two things. First, you heard me say, “Government Chief Whip, co-ordinate with the Prime Minister” because the Government Chief Whip is here every day, and is under the Office of the Prime Minister so it makes it much easier.

Secondly, colleagues can be absent from this House even for two years as long as they have a clearance of the Speaker after giving a reason, which the Speaker feels is valid. There are very many reasons that we consider. If you come and show us why you cannot be in the House, we consider your case on a case-by-case basis. 

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have officials from Napak District. We have been talking about Napak nearly every day here. I am glad we have officials from there represented by Hon. Nakut Faith Loru, Hon. John Bosco Ngoya and Hon. Peterkhen Lochap. They include:

Mr Amos Lochembo - Senior Social Worker, Moroto Catholic Diocese.
Mr Michael Tumwesigye - Executive Director, In Need Home.
Mr Dingamanya Mary Assumpta - Counsellor, Moroto Catholic Diocese.
Mr Lokuta John - Community mobiliser, Karimojong in Katwe and Kisenyi.
Mr Abura Bruno Noveli – Teacher. 
Mr Matteo Aradoli - Volunteer from Italy.
Ms Rachele Sala - Volunteer from Italy.
Mr Goergia Cassano – Volunteer from Italy.
 Dr Johnson Ngorok – Opinion leader from Napak.
Mr Moses Kapolon – Opinion leader from Napak. 

They have come to follow proceedings of this House. Colleagues, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

2.47
MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate your concern about planning. We created more cities and my hope was that we had learnt a lot of lessons from the congestion and poor planning in Kampala. 

Mr Speaker, if you drive into most of these cities that we created, you notice that they are getting slummier; they will be bigger slums than Kampala is. 

It is my humble appeal to this House that we put greater emphasis on planning. If you are landing at Entebbe International Airport, you may think you are headed for a very serious punishment, especially if you are coming from countries that planned their areas. It is very embarrassing. When you are driving into Entebbe or getting out of Entebbe, it is another embarrassment for which you may need some psychological attention, especially if you have travelled out of this country and been to serious cities. 

I would like to appreciate your concern, Mr Speaker. I appeal to the honourable members in this House that if there is something that we should put our attention on and be counted for, it is to champion the planning of our cities. This is in order for us to avoid repetition of what has happened to Kampala. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, you clarified the point I was going to talk about. I have nothing useful to add on. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Kumi?

2.49
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Aware that Uganda is on the move to urbanisation, I would like to thank you for the observation of the problem affecting the performance of the physical planning department. The low facilitation given to that department directly affects the performance of the physical planning committees at local government level. 

Honourable members, we have physical planning committees up to the subcounty level, but you will find that their frequency of holding meetings is very low because of no facilitation. 

We have a number of local governments, including municipalities that, up to today, do not have physical plans. What is being done is guesswork. Across the country, a number of centres are coming up and developing and people are establishing structures. However, what happens is that because of lack of physical planning in these growing centres, you find that after people have struggled to erect them they end up getting demolished, causing a lot of losses. 

Therefore, I am here to give a bit of testimony that, that funding affects the performance in local governments. Our people, who are our voters, in turn, get affected. Therefore, Parliament should really support that. In any case, if possible, if a supplementary budget could be given, it could support their work. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us just have the Chief Opposition Whip. Colleagues, we have assigned a committee, but now we are debating. Please, time is not on our side. 

2.51
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Members of this House, under the leadership of the Leader of the Opposition, undertook an emergency response oversight visit to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Hon. Nambeshe, the Leader of the Opposition does not lead this House. 

MR NAMBESHE: He led the Members. It was a delegation – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From the Opposition? 

MR NAMBESHE: Of course, including others from the other side. What would be wrong with that, Mr Speaker, Sir? (Laughter) We undertook an emergency response oversight visit –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am going to include you on the Order Paper. 

MR NAMBESHE: It was in your communication and I expected that space – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, they have shown it to me. It was an oversight on our part. I am going to include it. 

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have matters of national importance. Colleagues, we cannot do reactions for this long. We can never finish.

2.53
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, the urgency was more on reaction to your communication, but now that you have picked me to raise a matter of national importance, for the sake of time, I am just going to summarise and lay this document on the Table so that anybody who is interested can study it. 

I am raising a matter of national importance concerning the late Robert Erasmus Ekinu. The late Ekinu was appointed as an Administrative Officer, at the base of Public Service, in 1963 and rose to be Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury – up to 1986.
 
When the NRM Government came to power, he was appointed deputy minister. During that time, there was a lot of insecurity in Teso and other parts of the north. So, Hon. Robert Ekinu, together with other Members of Parliament, took brave action to go and engage rebels in the bush, which ended up with this man losing his life. 

During that time, his home was occupied by the Government soldiers for about nine to 10 years. The property that were there were damaged and so on. 

Mr Speaker, there are communications from the President and the Attorney-General concerning the compensation of this public servant. Unfortunately, no positive action has been taken that satisfies that. 

The most important thing, Mr Speaker, is his pension. The pension of Robert Ekinu – and many other public servants – were affected by currency devaluation of 1987. That actually reduced his pension to Shs 32,000, which is not even enough to carry a member of his family from Teso to here.

Therefore, I am asking you, Mr Speaker, if you could direct the Minister of Public Service - although the records are there. The President has written and both the Minister of Public Service and the Attorney-General have acknowledged the need for compensation. I am raising this because I know that in our communities, there may be people suffering the same fate. These people have not been paid for their property and, above all, their pension. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a document which has been summarised by the family with all the letters from the Attorney-General, the Minister of Public Service and His Excellency the President, urging Government to compensate the family and to pay Robert Ekinu’s pension. I beg to lay the document for anybody to scrutinise and agree with me. 

My prayer is that Robert Ekinu be paid while the wife is still alive. She is battling high blood pressure and diabetes – only God knows when she will go. It is important that something is done as a matter of urgency. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister of Public Service, please, handle this matter and report back to the House in one week's time. 

2.57
MS SUSAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. The Minister of Health stood here and told us about the malaria vaccination that they are about to carry out on our children at school. 

I would like to ask the minister if it is possible to give us a list of all the vaccines that we are using in this country and she should tell us whether these vaccines are certified by the World Health Organisation. This is because I have suffered, looking after a child who was vaccinated against the so-called Rubella and the child almost died.

I am just afraid, and I want to know if the minister can come out clearly and explain to us if the vaccines we are using are certified and good for use, because as we hear now, people are dying even from COVID vaccine; we have been vaccinated, but we want to know clearly that it is good and it is not going to endanger us in Uganda. Mr Speaker, I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Health?

2.58
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Ruth Aceng): Mr Speaker, I thank my sister for what she has raised and for her worries. We have not started vaccinating people in Uganda recently. Perhaps even my mother, the Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, was vaccinated when she was growing up as a little girl and many other elderly people in this country. Therefore, we must really appreciate and embrace vaccines.

Uganda is among the 194 WHO countries; we subscribe and we are members and we vote. There is no medicine or vaccine that comes into Uganda that is not WHO-certified and they cannot even accept. One time, there was a country that wanted to give us donations of Duo-cotecxin and WHO rejected and said: “That is a country that subscribes to WHO. Therefore, unless it is WHO-certified you cannot receive it.” Therefore, there is no vaccine that enters Uganda that is not WHO-certified –(Applause)

Mr Speaker, there is no medicine in this world that does not have side effects; even Panadol has side effects and we continue to monitor. If my sister has met with a challenge, I humbly request her to come, we have a discussion, and we find a solution. 

The malaria vaccine that we want to introduce in 2023 is highly required in this country. Right now, we have many regions in this country, including my sister's own region, where we are having an upsurge of malaria. With many children and older people dying; we are trying to look for all solutions to reduce mortality.

In addition, the vaccine is in short supply; only 10 countries can access it, and we are running like mad to try to be one of the 10 countries. I think we need to appreciate and really welcome these vaccines. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, the other day I informed you that matters of national importance, communication and everything will be stopping at 3.00 p.m. and it is now 3.00 p.m. Therefore, the rest of the matters will come under Prime Minister's Time; I will allow you on questions for oral answer. Next item.

STATEMENT ON THE EMERGENCY TOTAL SHUTDOWN OF ISIMBA HYDRO POWER PLANT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Energy. Is the statement uploaded?

3.02
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I submitted a copy to the Clerk and requested that it is uploaded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, is the statement uploaded?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Please check because I submitted. Can I be reading?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, are you okay? They read the statement as we wait for it to be uploaded? Should we – Oh, the Clerk has informed me it is uploaded. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I need a copy here, Clerk.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Honourable colleagues, this is a statement to Parliament on the emergency total shutdown of the Isimba Hydro Power Plant.

Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, the 183-megawatt Isimba Hydro Power Plant, which is located in Kayunga District experienced an emergency shutdown on Monday, 8 August 2022.

The shutdown was due to the flow of water into the powerhouse that triggered a dam safety procedure to ensure safety of staff and protection of the equipment. The flow of water into the powerhouse arose from an operational challenge.

The objective of this statement is to update Parliament on the emergency total shutdown of the 183-megawatt Isimba hydropower plant and request Parliament to note the measures being taken to restore power production at the plant.

On Monday, I issued the same statement to Cabinet, to update it, as we are required as ministers. I also issued a press release to really calm down the people who had become worried and I had planned to issue that same statement to this Parliament this week. I am, therefore, grateful for the opportunity you have given me to bring my colleagues on board on Isimba.

What was the cause of the emergency shutdown of this plant? Mr Speaker, at about 11.00 a.m. on 8th August, which was a Monday, Isimba powerhouse flooded, and some equipment was affected. One of the generating units had been put out of use to allow the contractor to undertake routine maintenance. 

In addition, at the time of the incident, the scheduled works included installation and testing of the equipment supplied by the contractor for safe access to the powerhouse.

As the operations and maintenance team at the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited was attempting to create a safe working environment within the powerhouse area, a malfunction occurred causing flow of water into the powerhouse. Investigations are underway to establish the exact cause of this incident. 

As you are aware, water and electricity are the best friends at one time. However, on another time, they are the worst enemies. Therefore, our team had to make sure that the environment is cleared of water so that they can begin on the inspection.

Consequently, dam safety procedures were automatically triggered to ensure the safety of our staff and the protection of equipment and prevention of potential dam failure. I thank God that we did not have any incident of loss of life.

What have we done on restoration?
The powerhouse was de-watered using the station drainage pumps and it took about 10 hours to remove all the water and create a safe working environment.

Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited responded spontaneously by taking the following measures to ensure continuity of electricity supply in the country:

1. Initially, they imported power close to 60 megawatts in order to stabilise the electricity grid. 

Mr Speaker, you may recall that Uganda as a country has had power trade arrangements with the Republic of Kenya since 1960. These arrangements normally come in handy whenever we have challenges similar to what we are experiencing with the Isimba Hydropower Plant that affect grid stability. 

I also beg to report that, as of today, the amount of power that we are importing from Kenya has gone down to less than 30 megawatts. I will tell you the reasons and it will continue going down – (Interjections) - I seek your protection, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, you will have time to submit; let us listen. We are eating into our own time.

MS NANKABIRWA: Exactly! 

2. 	Electricity dispatch of 50 megawatts of power from our own Namanve Thermal Power Plant, which is a security plant, standby to be utilised under such circumstances.

3. 	We dispatched 20 megawatts from Kakira Sugar Power Plant.

4. 	We are optimising the generation capacity of available power plants across the country. 

5. 	Implementation of load shedding to balance power demand and supply, and ensure that grid stability is achieved and sustained. 

The Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited has undertaken the required analysis and has prioritised the restoration of generation through –

detailed analysis to ensure the restoration of generation at the Isimba Hydropower Plant within three weeks from the time of incident, including reviewing the safety and operation procedures; and

returning the plant to automated operation within six months since the equipment has been manufactured and shipped to Uganda.

Mr Speaker, as to whether Uganda has excess power and why should we import, is the question that I know whose answer everybody wants to hear. On many occasions, we have informed the country that we are not consuming all the power that we have generated. Today, we are going to have the answer. 

Following the press statement that I issued yesterday, on this matter, there have been inquiries regarding the country’s installed power generation capacity and the importation of power. I wish to inform the honourable colleagues that the country’s installed power generation capacity is 1,378.1 megawatts, which indicates excess generation, relative to the country’s peak system demand of about 900 megawatts, including about 50 megawatts of power exported to Kenya. 

On a day-to-day basis, the available generation capacity, which we call firm capacity, from the different generation plants keeps on changing due to a number of factors, which include among others:
The routine maintenance of generation. For example, at Nalubaale, where we are carrying out maintenance, some units are switched off. You can’t carry out maintenance when you are generating. So, when you switch off one or two units, it means you are now going to have a deficient or you are going to have less power. 

Low hydrology affects generation capacity. Most of these rivers have hydrological problems: during dry seasons, you generate less. At a season like this, where we have started experiencing rainfall, generation will go up; this is where the difference comes from; it is because of the hydrological behaviour of our rivers. 

The biggest percentage of our energy mix is hydro power, almost 90 per cent. So, anything that affects the production of hydro power, will end up reducing our capacity. Sometimes there are faults affecting generation capacity. Sometimes generator efficiencies go down with age of equipment.

In addition, power from some of the plants is not fully evacuated, due to lack of transmission and distribution infrastructure, which we continue to address through increased investment in the sector. 

You have different generation plants, if I can demonstrate - that plant there is generating 30 and has generated 30 and that is its capacity, another one 20 and another one, but you need power somewhere. You must have the infrastructure to remove that power, which is generated, to a point, where you need it. Those are the transmission lines and substations and the transmission lines and substations do not end there; you have to do last mile connection minus that, you will remain with that power generated and you count it; it’s part of your generation capacity. 

However, when it comes to consumption, you are just looking at it because it is not yet uploaded on the national grid. That is how we come to talk about “excess”. I always put it in quotes because it is not “excess” per say, because the people of Kiboga still need power. But it is excess because we are not using it because we are constructing the evacuation infrastructure and you always appropriate money to my ministry to do evacuation and transmission. 

Mr Speaker, during this week, starting 15 August 2022 the available firm capacity is about 640 megawatts. The variance is as a result of the low hydrology I have talked about and the variability of the grid connected solar power plants routine maintenance. For one unit of 50 megawatts at Bujagali - if you are working on maintenance – and it is switched off, you will have switched off 50 megawatts and the current outage at Isimba.

However, it is important to note that without major breakdowns on the system, like the loss of a major generation facility, as we have experienced, with the Isimba Hydropower Plant, Uganda’s current total generation capacity is sufficient to meet our current electricity demand needs.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I request the House to note that the cause of the total shutdown of Isimba Hydropower Plant, which occurred on 8 August 2022, was a trigger on a dam safety procedures to ensure dam safety, the safety of staff and protection of equipment, following the flow of water into the powerhouse. And I again, thank God that no lives were lost following that incident. 

I would like you to note that Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Ltd (UETCL) continues to implement measures to ensure continuity of electricity supply. 

I request you to note that appropriate measures are being undertaken by Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited to restore power production at Isimba Hydropower Plant within three weeks and testing of the plant has commenced today. In these three weeks, Mr Speaker, we have decided to use the manual mode. 

Our plant has two systems; the automated system and the manual mode. The automated system will require shipment of equipment. The manual mode is now what we are going to test. That means within the three weeks, we will begin generation, but not to the full capacity. Full capacity is expected to be triggered after six weeks. I hope that we shall not suffer any delays and as we do that, we shall be reducing on the amount of power that we import from Kenya.

The cost associated with all the required remedial works are still under assessment and it is expected that they will be accommodated within the operation and maintenance budget for the plant from what they have looked at quickly. However, detailed investigations are under way and once a comprehensive root post-analysis report is finalised, my ministry will take appropriate action based on the findings and recommendations. 

I beg to request that my people on the ground be allowed time to do the work quickly. Of recent, we have received invitations from various people; committee of Parliament wanting to come and see, but like you could be aware of such incidences and such plants which generate power, we need limited interruptions, but I will be guided.

Right now, we are working around the clock to make sure that at least we restore generation and we have given ourselves three weeks for the manual mode and six weeks to install the equipment. 

I beg to submit and I thank you very much for your kind attention. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I will give you time on this issue. 

Honourable minister, thank you so much for explaining some of these issues because it has brought light to a lot of things. Now we have come to know that we have generation capacity and installed capacity. However, we should also look at consumable capacity because when you keep talking about what is installed and what you are generating, but you include that which you cannot utilise then we are misled as a country. This is especially when it comes to paying deemable energy costs in excess of hundreds of billions every financial year. 

Honourable minister, now that you have come to this ministry, I hope you will address the issue of the mismatch because why do you build a line and sign an agreement that the day it is commissioned you will start paying and you do not plan for evacuating that power, and you spend around three years paying? That is poor planning. 

Honourable minister, we also have a fear because when you say that at the beginning of rains Isimba has flooded, what about when it starts raining seriously? Some areas have not even received any rains; we have just started receiving rains, and flooding has taken a dam. What about when it starts raining El Nino; what is going to happen? Hon. Beatrice Anywar can tell us how much rain is coming. I am scared. (Laughter)

Honourable minister, this is a dam we commissioned not more than two years ago and we know the rain patterns. How can we say we never foresaw such a situation? Can we remedy it? 

Honourable colleagues, I open up to you. Let me start with the former Chairman, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. I am going to allow you 30 minutes so that we can pick many of you. Two minutes each strictly.  

3.23
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for this opportunity to make a contribution on this debate. 

I have had an opportunity to visit Isimba and I think I was with you. Many times we went there and we raised our concerns. I am happy you are trying to reiterate them in a very humble and gentle manner. We did make a very comprehensive report; it ended up – actually you know where it ended up – at the highest level possible in this country. We were invited to explain and we did explain. Our fears are now coming to bear very clearly. 

Anyway, we have 1,378 installed capacity – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, our rules do not allow us to debate in parables that a colleague went somewhere, meeting which high offices - A statement has been issued by a minister and in your wisdom, you chose a former chairman of a committee to benefit Parliament, but he speaks as if you are in a conversation with him. Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byarugaba, please converse with the House not with the Speaker.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. 

Mr Speaker, 1,378 megawatts is the installed capacity. Honourable colleagues, I would like to know how much of this is from thermal because thermal is one of the most expensive sources of power. Is this also part of the 1,378 megawatts? 

Secondly, the flooding of the powerhouse. Is this the first time? During the construction, we were all invited and we witnessed almost similar incidences. Even before the rain starts - the catchment is mainly River Kagera which is the biggest tributary to this. There is no rain down there in the south, but already it is flooding; I am worried. 

Thirdly, we have small power stations. Mr Speaker, the honourable minister would probably know that there is a power station in Kikagati, greater Mbarara, which was constructed and completed, but up to now that power  station– it is scheduled to produce about 15 megawatts that could maybe cover most parts of western Uganda –has not been commissioned. The power has been evacuated and it remains redundant. Wouldn’t that be saving a lot? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, please set two minutes strictly.

3.27
MR JAMES OLOBO (NRM, Kioga North County, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard the minister very well. My concern is that there is something the minister is hiding. 

Shoddy work in this country -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What do you mean? Is it “Shaddy” or “shoddy”?

MR OLOBO: Shoddy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very good.

MR OLOBO: Shoddy work, wherever it is. This thing happened with Karuma -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, order.

MR OLOBO: It affected my people in Amolatar. The roads and gardens were flooded, but Government did not even compensate people. 

When I hear about Isimba again, I am worried about my people in Amolatar. Flooding again is going to come at a time when my people have famine. We should address this issue of shoddy work; corrections everywhere. We spend money, but the work is not done well. 

My concern is about the people of Amolatar. Environmentally, we are in the Peninsula and when these floods come, it can even swallow the whole district. Please minister, be honest and tell us about the issue of shoddy work.

 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. James.

3.29
MR BENARD SEKYANZI (NRM, Budyebo County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement she has made. I am confused! I know that we are the ones who export power or electricity to Kenya. The minister is again telling us we are going to import power from Kenya - Let the minister tell us the truth. Let the minister not confuse the country. What is the truth? I am already confused. (Laughter)

Not only that, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR SEKYANZI: I request the minister -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please continue.

MR SEKYANZI: I request the minister - our people are crying. In Uganda, everywhere we are crying. 

Now, there is the issue of the metres. Government said it is going to provide metres to our people, but people are buying the metres by themselves. My colleague talked of the shoddy work. Minister, you need to change so that our country benefits. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Bernard, I will tell the minister not to confuse you next time. Let us allow Hon. Kwizera; our returnee and then I will go to the back.

3.31
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Kisoro Municipality, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you. In my view, the ministers’ statement is too early. The country has no capacity to find out the cause. The installed capacity is known because the contractor handed it over and the commissioning was done. Does the country have the capacity now? 

The minister should be telling us that they have now engaged, or advertised for the contractor; the professional person to come and carry out the study. Thank you.

3.32
MR GODFREY WAKOOLI (NRM, Butiru County, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ugandans out there are listening and watching this Parliament this afternoon. 

Mr Speaker, the minister has given us a very worrying statement, especially at a time when, we, as Government, are telling people that we are going to shift their lives from subsistence to commercial agriculture and we intend to put money in their pockets. 

We have said that the Parish Development Model is going to be an engine to get our people out of poverty. Yet, we are capitalising on power to ensure that we add value to products that we are telling our people to engage in. 

Instead of the minister telling us that most of the dams we have, intend to produce power and distribute it to our people so they can engage in commercial agriculture, she is now telling us that we are having a problem to an extent that we need to import power from - 

I can tell you, Mr Speaker, where I come from, I have a whole subcounty without power. Yet, we are telling people we need to get them out of poverty through commercial agriculture. It reminds me that it seems most of our ministers are reading books very well. There is a book called, ”Confessions of an economic hitman”. We are giving this country projections, but we are not actually achieving them. 

We are telling people, “When we create these dams, we are going to generate a lot of power” and that we are going to grow our economy by this percentage. But, at the end of the day, we are finding that we are turning into economic hitmen of this country. Our people out there sent us here to represent them so that services can reach them. If we continue telling our people stories, I can assure you, Members, that we are going to continue coming –(Member timed out.)

3.34
MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the elaborative explanation. Indeed, we had to understand. However, honourable minister, the biggest concern I want to bring to your attention is about the suppliers that we normally give work.

Honourable minister, you need to take a very keen interest in ensuring that we give contracts to people who have the capacity to deliver. A case in point is Kitgum District. We have had the issue of installation of a transformer almost coming to four years and it is just going to be completed. 

Of recent, a supplier called me and said, “Member of Parliament, please, can you help and have these transformers commissioned. I have them ready, but there is no one to come and help with the commissioning”. Honourable minister, suppliers normally let us down in terms of quality. 

I also get disappointed when we have delays in the name of “clearance” from URA. We are one arm of Government. There is an emergency to do with electricity. I think there should be an expedition in the process of clearing equipment which are being brought into the country to fix these issues. Otherwise, without electricity supply, we cannot register any development for this country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. I have some engineers in the House. I also want them to give us their opinion. I will start with Eng. Aleper. Hon. Afidra, are you an engineer? Hon. Karubanga, are you also an engineer? We also have Eng. Susan Amero. (Laughter)

3.36
MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We need to thank the minister for the report. One of the issues facing Uganda is hiding the truth. The minister must have visited Isimba after the incident, but the minister has not visited Isimba - she has said no. 

Mr Speaker, I come from that area; I want to be clear on this. The issue that happened was not flooding. The issue was technical and there are chances that it was intentional. (Applause) I need the minister to pick interest in this. The people that are managing Isimba are the same people managing the thermal plant in Namanve and so on. (Applause)

After the shutdown of Isimba, pick interest in the cost of thermal power in this country. I want the minister to pick interest in the capacity of the person who managed at that time. Investigate the qualification of that person. 

Mr Speaker, some of these things that are happening in Isimba are not by accident or mistake; they are intentional. Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited (UEGCL), that is managing these power dams, is the same UEGCL that is managing the thermal plant that requires fuel. The people that are managing the other side are the same people managing this side. So, let the minister not come here and say, “It is an incident where rains have just begun and flooding is here”. 

Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kibalya, if I may ask you: UEGCL is Government institution, owned 100 per cent by Government of Uganda. Why would UEGCL sabotage its own plant? 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, let me respond. Everybody knows what we call “connivance” here. I am submitting and I have asked the minister because we want her – the minister has committed to you, Mr Speaker, that in three weeks, they will restore Isimba.

Mr Speaker, through your office, request the minister to come back here after three weeks and see whether she will have restored Isimba. It is not possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, in three weeks’ time, come back here and update the House. I had picked Eng. Cuthbert Abigaba. Colleagues, I want to pick some technical – let us utilise the technical people we have in the House. We have some engineers here; let us utilise them. I am going to pick about two of them. Colleagues, please. The reason why we ask you for your qualifications is, sometimes, for you to guide this House on technical matters. Eng. Cuthbert?

3.40
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you so much, Mr speaker. I am a registered electrical engineer and I think I appreciate the subject matter very well. 

Mr Speaker, the minister has told us that our generation capacity is 1,378 megawatts and that we consume up to 900 megawatts, including what we export to Kenya. So, that means we are generating more than we can consume. In engineering studies, it means that our engineers are not doing us a good job. It means we are investing much money in this electricity, yet we cannot even consume it. So, there is a problem.

Secondly, the minister has told us that Isimba has a capacity of 183 megawatts. So, when you subtract that from the 1,378 megawatts, it means we are able to generate 1,200 megawatts, without Isimba. However, right now, she is telling us that the generated capacity is actually 640 megawatts. That is why I tend to side with my brother, Hon. Kibalya, that there is either some kind of sabotage or, possibly, the ministry has run out of competent engineers to manage these systems. This is because, if you have a capacity of 1,200 megawatts, how can you generate 640 only? It means that most of the generating equipment is just redundant –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.42
MR MOSES ALEPER (NRM, Chekwii County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to, first, thank the minister for the elaborate presentation she has made. When you look at that presentation very well, it clearly illustrates the difficulties that we have with people whom we have given responsibility to manage such.

This is clearly what the minister should have been telling us during the start or planning for such an agency – like the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Why? You know how much power we need. You know how much we are going to generate. You should also know how much we should evacuate and at what time.

One time, when they presented a supplementary budget for Karuma, the minister told us that we were going to commission evacuation of the power. One of the questions I asked her categorically was: “Do you have the capacity to evacuate that power?” She said she had it. 

Now, this report falls short of something. I would have expected the minister to tell us that after commissioning that project, it was either still running within the defects liability period or not. An outlay of such an amount of money normally requires that when it is commissioned, there should be parallel running of the project with the contractor and the team that will take over. 

She should have also told us whether there was such a provision so that we know there was something put in place for such eventualities. This is what the report falls short of and these are the technicalities that should have been brought in this report. I beg to submit.

3.44
MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to and read the report and two things come to mind. 

First, there is clear ineffectiveness and poor planning of our electricity generation. If you know the capacity that we consume and this one small dam breaks down, I do not see how it almost shuts down the whole system, yet you have often told us and we have provided money for deemed energy for this country. 

I want the minister to clearly state to this House that every year, we appropriate more than Shs 100 billion for deemed energy, yet every other time we are crying for infrastructure. That is why I said there is a planning issue. How would you start generating what you know you cannot evacuate? (Applause) Why wouldn't you start with the process of taking this power to the people, before you even go and construct it? 

So, I think it is either the connivance issue or the normal issues of procurement and corruption in this country, where we run for things where we can make our own fortunes very fast. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, it is the issue of environmental impact of whatever happens in this electricity generation. Whenever we hear of a flood - and my colleague has just talked about it - we do not seem to be mindful. I am glad that there is a minister for environment here. Recently we saw in Mbale, where a whole industrial park was flooded and in –(Member timed out_) 

3.46
MR ODRIA ALIONI (NRM, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think this Parliament needs to look at the issue of electricity in this country seriously. 

Mr Speaker, you and I have been on the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources from the 10th Parliament to date –


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I am no longer a member of that committee. (Laughter) You upgraded me.

MR ALIONI: I am sorry, Sir. I am still at the Committee on Natural Resources. Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, the issue of generating power and not utilising it, is just like a joke in this country. Right now the Committee on Natural Resources is in West Nile because of the issue of lack of electricity in the entire region. We have -(Interjection)- I am here to represent-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please go on. 

MR ALIONI: Mr Speaker, why is it that we have power that has been generated, but not utilised and the entire West Nile region does not have electricity? I think the minister needs to come out clearly and convince this House because the last time she was in West Nile, we clashed and the meeting did not end well. Her security team with my security team -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, please we have already moved on and we strictly want two minutes. Sorry. Oh, I am told it is a maiden speech for Hon. Alioni; come back and complete. (Laughter) But honourable member, you see the microphone went off when you started talking of “clashing”; so I hope you do not clash again.

MR ALIONI: No. Mr Speaker, with due respect, I do not think that we are going to clash again. But my humble submission and prayer is that my friend here needs to come out to explain to this Parliament and defend the ministry against issues of kickbacks that are affecting works in this country, especially in her ministry. 

There are other details that she knows, with the due respect. Let the ministry wake up and tell this Parliament the way forward. We are not going to get loans upon loans and the money is not properly utilised. How do you get a loan to evacuate power and transmit, but at the end of the day, you generate the power and you fail to transmit? You are killing our money. The country is losing. It is not a joke. This country is going down because people are not sincere. The ministers we appoint are not open to Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, I pray, through your office, that the ministry gets to sort out issues of corruption within their sector; and we have this power which is generated to be transmitted. I beg to submit. Thank you very much. 

3.50
MR ROBERT SSEKITOLEEKO (NUP, Bamunanika County, Luweero): Thank you, Speaker. Issues of electricity in Uganda, you will move an extra mile even before or after electricity and you find that there is a very big problem in whatever we think about. As you are operating, today, there are many questions where we come from. I am blessed that one time, the Minister of Energy happened to pass by in my constituency to officially launch- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alioni, after submitting, please, take your seat.

MR SSEKITOLEEKO: Mr Speaker, I am humbled that one time the Minister of Energy passed by my constituency to officially launch the line, but up to now we are still waiting. The question is: In which ministry in Uganda can you just streamline things for purposes of the interests of Ugandans? When you stress the issue of the economy, they will tell you that the cause is the war in Ukraine. 

Now we are even waiting for the Ministry of Energy to tell us that the war in Ukraine has brought about problems of electricity in Uganda. (Laughter) We shall not wait for such questions. You need to open up and just know that Ugandans are there who are following you - you first do the mistake intentionally and then you come to correct. 

We are seeing that Isimba Dam was like a promise that everything is going to be sorted with immediate aftermath. Now you are saying flooding is the cause of the total mess. People are there and have paid for electricity, but they are waiting for wires, transformers and everything, but nothing is coming - (Member timed out.)

3.52
MR NELSON OKELLO (UPC, Maruzi North County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue is about the flooding of Isimba Dam. The minister talked about the use of the low hydrology. There is no design of a hydropower dam without full analysis of the hydrology of the river –(Applause). Without full analysis of the river hydrology, the design is incomplete. 

Mr Speaker, there is no power dam which will always operate at full capacity; that is why we have the units. Even if you go to Bujagali, there are like five units. Even in Isimba, there are about four units. And if there is flooding in one unit, then the other units will be in operation; they can never shut all units.

Mr Speaker, there is still a problem which has to be investigated. The committee on Natural Resources should investigate, through your office, Mr Speaker. 

My honourable colleague talked about the issue of the defect liability period. This project has just been concluded and commissioned.  And remember in 2016, this project Isimba and Karuma were identified -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. I had allowed the lady - No, colleagues, we are coming to the Prime Minister’s Time at 4.00 p.m.

3.54
MS CHRISTINE NANDAGIRE (NUP, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister mentioned about the excess of electricity, which we are having here in Uganda. I am here to inform her that we have rural electrification which was given all over Uganda, but in rural areas, we do not have electricity. In Bukomansimbi, we do not have electricity, honourable minister. 

Therefore, if it is in excess, I am just begging you to give Bukomansimbi so that we can get electricity. Thank you very much. I beg to submit.

3.55
DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. What has happened in Isimba Dam speaks of the dangerous situation in the energy sector. The President of the Republic of Uganda, on a number of occasions, has intimated to the people of Uganda that currently the nation is in surplus in terms of energy. If a dam that generates 183 megawatts breaks down, when you have excess power, there is no way the minister can come on the Floor of Parliament and say that we are importing power from Kenya because of the situation in Isimba.

I would like to propose that this Parliament institutes an investigation into the energy sector in this country. The majority of the people of Uganda - 81 percent - are not on the electricity grid; we have only 19 percent on the electricity grid.

They go without power yet power is a driver for the economy. We have invested so much, but our people cannot access power yet we are hearing stories that are unexplainable. 

Mr Speaker, through a committee of Parliament, let us have an investigation so that we have a full report on the energy sector in this country.

3.57
Mr david karubanga (NRM, Kigorobya County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this chance. I would like to thank the honourable minister, for the statement. I would like to say that I agree with her entirely because I have quite some exposure on power generation. 

However, the minister was mean with the cause. This is because when there is a flood in a power station, there are mainly two causes. Either there is a failure on the power supply and the dewatering pumps or there are leakages overpowering the dewatering system, which are the dewatering pumps. So, what she did not tell us is the cause. 

Power stations world over are monitored either remotely or locally. That means there are gauges where one can see the indications on the cause of the fault and a charge technician is able to go and attend to it. 

Therefore, I also join other colleagues who say that the construction of power dams has been a big problem. Right from the third power projects - that is Kiira - we had the design where there were parallel dams. When it came to the equipment, there were leakages. Isimba and Karuma dams were the same. The leakages we had in these dams are even much more than what we have in the old dam; the Owen Falls Dam, code-named –(Member timed out.)

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable colleagues, it is time. Our rules require us to go to Prime Minister's time. We cannot conclude this. Kindly take your seats. Everyone is saying, “Just, just.” Even if I allow that, we will not finish this. 

Honourable colleagues, we cannot complete debate on this issue. Therefore, I am referring it to the Committee on Natural Resources to report back in three weeks’ time. And in doing your work as a committee, please ensure that you do not interfere with the repair works that are ongoing. We do not want Parliament to be used as an excuse for failing to repair the damage at Isimba Dam.

Honourable minister, I think I will get time – okay.

Ms nankabirwa: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

The Deputy Speaker: Motion? 

4.00
mr Ibrahim ssemujju (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of Isimba and energy need to be concluded. I am, therefore, moving a motion that we suspend the rule requiring that Prime Minister’s time starts at 4.00, for an hour and have this matter concluded. (Applause) 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable colleague, Rule 52(2) of our Rules of Procedure is very clear. Such a statement, when presented by the minister, can be debated, but not for more than an hour. We have used over 45 minutes. The time is at the discretion of the Speaker. Therefore, I have an Order Paper, which we arranged very well. 

We should remember that the Committee of Natural Resources is going to the ground to investigate the matter well. Nearly, each and every colleague here wants to talk about the issue, but there is information that is coming up, which needs to be verified. 

Honourable members, there are very many contradictions and allegations. I think we would be doing the matter justice if we allowed the committee to go to the ground. All Members are ex-officios - those who are not substantive Members. You can appear and help. 

We cannot finish it in plenary. That is why I propose that we send it to the Committee on Natural Resources for a thorough investigation in three weeks’ time. By that time, the minister said even Isimba will be operating. They will come here and tell us whether it is or not. Yes, point of procedure.

Ms Cecilia ogwal: Mr Speaker, I want to appreciate your wrap up as we debate. However, we realise there are two sides to this debate and so, this document is not complete because it has given us only the side of generation, evacuation and distribution; it has not given us anything about the tariff. 

Mr Speaker, I am aware that Isimba hydro plant is the cheapest. I think it is about 5.2 US cents per hour. I know that the national average is about six something – 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, allow me to interrupt you. In the public gallery - because I can see some of our guests are moving out before I recognise them. This afternoon, we have students and teachers of YMCA College of Business Studies in Jinja South East Division, Jinja City. They are represented by Hon. Nathan Igeme Nabeta. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Ms ogwal: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was raising a matter of concern and I want my sister, the Minister, to respond to it. You have talked generally about the production, but you have not told us the impact on me as a consumer. Many other people are tuned to this debate because they want to know that.

Isimba is the cheapest source, which is 5.2 –

The Deputy Speaker: No, it is Kiira and Nalubale. 

Ms ogwal: I know, but for now, I want to know the impact on the tariff after we have imported and the shutdown. May I know how it will affect the consumer? That is where my interest is because I am not an engineer, but a consumer. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, a minute. This matter has been referred to the committee.
 
4.05
The minister of energy and mineral development (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I cannot oppose your wise ruling. However, my worry is that we are being listened to globally. There is a side that has been given a lot of allegations without substantiation and the media is going to report on this matter from that direction. 

I will come back, but allow me mention a critical issue. The cause of the shutdown at Isimba was not due to too much rain water outside –(Interjections)– read my report properly.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, continue. You are protected.

Ms nankabirwa: The plant got flooded by water, which engrossed into it because of the maintenance work, but not because of too much rainwater –(Interjections)– please read the report.

The Deputy Speaker: Colleagues, let us listen to one another. If you do not want to get information from the Minister of Energy, where are we going to get it from? That is why we are saying our committee will go ahead to verify.

Ms nankabirwa: The second point I want to bring out is that in my report, I said that we will get the critical cause after the report is fully done because people are on the ground doing investigations. So for somebody to allege that I am too mean with information is insinuating improper motives in Ruth Nankabirwa. I beg that I come back next week - I can even come back every week because the issue of power is very critical. 

Responding to Hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s query on the tariff, this incident is not going to be felt in the end-user tariff. In other words, we are not going to increase the tariff now because of what happened. We always rebase the tariff in January and we have been reducing it systematically for three years. In January, we shall do the tariff rebasing, but for now, we are making sure that the end-user is not affected by the incident.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, rule 41 is clear where we have gone now. However, the Committee on Natural Resources and sectoral committees, we want you to have your time. You are the ones overseeing these sectors. Therefore, we want you to utilise your time effectively and report back. 

Honourable minister, whenever you have an update for this House, please reach out to us and we shall give you space. 

Before anything else, let me allow Hon. Milton Muwuma to submit. I promised to give you space on Tuesday so that you can table minutes and other documents for the report from the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on field visits to Government prisons and prison farms. You can just lay them on the Table.

4.08
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Milton Muwuma): Mr Speaker, on 16 August 2022, I did present a report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs regarding field visits to prisons and prison farms as selected. 

Mr Speaker, with me are the minutes of the committee meeting that was held on 14 July 2022 regarding the same with attachments of some of the administrators of the prison farms and the prisons. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. In my communication, I had allowed the Government Chief Whip to designate new Members onto their committees. Please, Honourable Government Chief Whip  – I will allow procedure after this, honourable. 

4.09
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 15 (10) (c), rule 187 and rule 188 (2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I designate the following honourable Members of Parliament to the sectoral committees: 

Hon. Eddie Kwizera Wa-Gahungu, MP, Bukimbiri County to the  Committee on Natural Resources; and

Hon. Derrick Orone, MP, Gogonyo County to the Committee on Natural Resources. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I put the question that the Members are designated to the mentioned committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

4.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 15(10)(c), rule 158 and rule 160(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I designate the following honourable Members to standing committees as follows: 

Hon. Eddie Kwizera Wa-Gahungu, MP, Bukimbiri County to the Committee on Public Accounts, Central Government;

Hon. Derrick Orone, MP, Gogonyo County to the Committee on Public Accounts, Central Government; and 

Hon. Aggrey Bagiire, MP, Bunya County West to the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises). 

I beg to designate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I put the question that the honourable colleagues whose names have been read and designated be allowed to join those committees. 

(Question put and agreed.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, you had a procedural matter. After that, we shall have the Prime Minister’s Time. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, in her statement, does not want visits to Isimba Hydropower Plant. You have also cautioned the committee that while doing the work that you have referred to them they need to be very careful so that Parliament is not used. We had a committee here visit Lubowa Hospital site and it was almost lynched there. 

The procedural issue I am raising, Mr Speaker, is how will this committee do their work where the minister has discouraged visits and yet you, Mr Speaker, have said that they need to be cautious? That is the procedural issue I am raising, knowing that a committee has ever been chased from Lubowa.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. Indeed, when a minister goes on record and says, there are sensitive repairs going on which should not be interfered with, we also have to exercise caution as a House. Colleagues, let us know that we have to act responsibly. 

I have said the committee should go to the site. Where they find challenges, they can come back to the presiding officer, and we shall work out mechanisms. Nonetheless, the committee will be strongly supported to ensure that they do their work effectively. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I have a procedural matter. We as members of the Appointments Committee - and just a year ago, the rules were misread. They said the Appointments Committee is a standing committee whereas we are entitled to be on a standing committee. I have been raising this matter and this is the third time I am doing so. I would like to implore our Government Chief Whip to ensure that the members on the Appointments Committee are designated to a standing committee because we have been lobbying for a whole year. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Yes, the Government Chief Whip knows about that matter we discussed. He is working on it with the Chief Opposition Whip. You know, we also have the sectoral Committee on Science and Technology, which was a standing committee, but is now a sectoral committee. 

Therefore, we have given them time to harmonise. Next week, they will be given space on the Order Paper to re-designate. However, these colleagues did not have any committee. That is why we wanted them to start work - Colleagues, we have rotated around procedural matters in the Prime Minister's Time.

MR NAMBESHE: No, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, as you recall, documents pertaining to Atiak were laid on the Table. You came out unequivocally and said that you were going to subject them to scrutiny as you peruse through and ascertain whether they are authentic. I am raising this because you pledged to get back to the House today. If they are authentic, what could be the consequences?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I never pledged to come back to the House today. Please, I am doing my work and I am going to do it effectively. The Office of the Speaker is going to work on that. If there is any allegation on a staff of Parliament, it is not a matter of discussion here in the plenary. We have our administrative mechanisms for handling that, and I am working on that together with the Speaker. Thank you. Clerk, please call the item.

PRIME MINISTER'S TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, when the Prime Minister finishes, we shall have two important items: One, on action taken to improve food security and mitigate the impacts of the long dry spell because we have been having very many issues around it. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is here. Two, on the oversight visit by the Leader of the Opposition to areas affected by floods in eastern Uganda. Prime Minister, I request that during those two items, be here with us.

4.17
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Rt Hon. Speaker, I got a question from Hon. Nandagire Christine Ndiwalana, Member of Parliament for Bukomansimbi North County, where she received information concerning the outbreak of various diseases arising from the usage of unsafe water in Bukomansimbi District. Her prayer is that I should update the House about this outbreak. 

The Ministry of Water and Environment together with the Ministry of Health, in collaboration with Bukomansimbi District technical staff, are not aware of any disease outbreak, and one of the key areas monitored by the Ministry of Water is water quality. 

In the Financial Year 2021/2022, Bukomansimbi District Water Office carried out water quality sampling and testing of sources in the district and 100 per cent of the sources tested met the national standards for drinking water. 

Bukomansimbi District Local Government has good potential for underground water in nearly all the subcounties except Kitanda and Bigasa subcounties. 

Mr Speaker, safe water coverage stands at 86 per cent as at 30 June 2022. The district has a total projected population of 169,583 people, comprising five subcounties, four town councils, 39 parishes, and 254 villages. 

The water technology options comprise:

163 protected springs;
262 shallow wells;
102 deep boreholes;
one pumped water system with 655 tap stands;
310 rainwater-harvesting tanks of at least 10 cubic millimetres capacity; and
16 valley tanks, and one dam for production facilities. 

In the Financial Year 2021/2022, the ministry together with the development partners under the programme of Uganda Sanitation for Health Activity (USHA) supported Bukomansimbi District to build its capacity to implement the Market Based Sanitation Implementation Approach (MBSIA) and Strengthen Community Led Total Sanitation (CLTS). In addition, Uganda Sanitation for Health Activity has rehabilitated boreholes and shallow wells and also constructed sanitation facilities in the entire district. 

Under Uganda Sanitation for Health Activity, still, the ministry has implemented a 600 million solar-power piped water project in Bigasa Town, covering Bulenga rural growth centre. This project is ongoing and due for commissioning in November this year and targets serving more than 500 households. 

Mr Speaker, let us appreciate Government's intervention in Bukomansimbi District. However, Hon. Nandagire Christine should provide my office with detailed information on the symptoms of the disease, the affected persons and their locations for Government to follow up.

Hon. Etuka Isaac Joakino, Member of Parliament for Upper Madi County raised this issue: Given the escalating famine situation in Karamoja, the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, Hon. Hilary Onek, flagged off 552 metric tonnes of maize flour, and 238 metric tonnes of beans at the Office of the Prime Minister Stores in Namanve, Wakiso District, on Wednesday 20 July 2022 and Government committed Shs 135 billion to feed Karamoja for the next three months. 

His prayers are: 
“
Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister assure and confirm to Ugandans the number of beneficiaries who have actually benefited from relief aid? 

You will recall in 2020, 40 per cent of the beans given as relief food to the vulnerable people had gravel and stones; can you assure Ugandans about the quality of food that you have provided to the people of Karamoja this time round?

Can Government initiate a comprehensive value-for-money audit into the funds committed by Government to provide food in Karamoja?” 

Mr Speaker, my response is that the district disaster committee held meetings to identify the most vulnerable population, following the needs assessment reports by the district technical teams. My office dispatched relief food to the most vulnerable population estimated at 388,500 people in the Karamoja subregion. The relief food was dispatched to the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) who are the accounting officers in their respective districts. 

This is the summary of the relief food delivered to the Karamoja subregion from March to July 2022:

March to April 

Maize flour - 740,000 kilogrammes (740 metric tonnes)
Beans - 370,000 kilogrammes (370 tonnes) 

June 2022 

Maize flour - 1,605,000 kilogrammes (1,605 tonnes)
Beans - 625,000 kilogrammes (625 tonnes) 

July 2022 

Maize flour - 5702 kilogrammes (5072 tonnes) and
Beans  - 286,000 kilogrammes (286 tonnes) 

Mr Speaker, as a requirement, all food supplied to the Office of the Prime Minister is subjected to quality assurance by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). A certificate is then issued and presented to the Office of the Prime Minister’s stores on the delivery of supplies. 

Mr Speaker, the Office of the Prime Minister requested for Shs 135 billion and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has so far released Shs 20 billion from the Contingency Fund to cater for Karamoja and other parts of the country, affected by disasters. (Applause) 

Question No. 3

Hon. David Muhumuza, Member of Parliament, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo District, said: “Kyenjojo District is the largest district in the Rwenzori West Policing Region. It has two main highways of Kampala-Fort Portal and Hoima-Kyenjojo-Kamwenge. Accidents, highway robberies, thefts and murder are common, but the district has no single police vehicle to help them when need arises. 

The district occasionally borrows a vehicle from Kitagwenda District, which is too old to serve the purpose. The DPC, OC/CID and CI are all committed and hardworking women, which is good affirmative action for women empowerment, but they are not well facilitated in terms of mobility.

Prayer: 

When will police vehicles and motorcycles in good working condition be delivered to the district for quick responses when issues of security and safety arise?” 

Mr Speaker, my response is that Kyenjojo Police Station was allocated a brand new vehicle; a Toyota Hilux single Cabin, UP 5489, model 2015, signed for by the DPC, SP Martin Mbabazi. 

The vehicle, like other vehicles in the same series, has a mileage of 157,268 kilometres as per the records available from its last service. Kyenjojo District police vehicle is still in good motorable condition. 

Question No.4

Hon. Susan Mugabi, Woman Representative, Buvuma said that there is a move by the Buvuma District Executive Committee, in collaboration with the National Forestry Authority, to evict residents of 14 villages in the subcounties of Nairambi and Buwooya, in preparation for the National Oil Pump Project, and the need for Government to resettle the affected people.

Her prayer is that I update the House about this matter.

Mr Speaker, Buvuma District is one of the areas earmarked for palm oil development, where Government is implementing the National Oil Palm Project, through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

The project has acquired its own land in parts of Buvuma and is also encouraging smallholder oil palm farming by private landowners in the district. 

As part of the environmental and social safeguards, the National Oil Palm Project works with local leaders and other stakeholders with land interests in the project area to ensure the oil palm plantations are free of conflicts. 

In February 2022, the National Oil Pump Project wrote to the National Forestry Authority, notifying the Executive Director of the project’s intention of engaging the smallholder farmers in Buvuma. The project requested the National Forestry Authority to open boundaries of two forest reserves to ensure that the smallholder farmers do not encroach on the forest reserves. 

The National Forestry Authority, therefore, engaged the district leadership and the district security team, on the intention of reopening of the boundaries of the two forest reserves; Lukale and Bugomba, located in Nairambi and Buwooya subcounties. 

On 2 August 2022, a meeting was held at Buwooya Subcounty Headquarters and attended by the RDC, LCV chairman and over 300 members of the community. The purpose of the meeting was to inform the community of the intended boundary opening exercise and solicit their support and participation as neighbours to the forest reserves. 

Mr Speaker, the district surveyor and the National Forestry Authority embarked on the exercise of reopening the boundaries of the two forest reserves. The exercise has started with identifying existing points/coordinates of the previous survey marks before a cutline is made on the 11- kilometre total boundary length for the two forests. 

Bugomba Central Forest Reserve has a total area of 272 hectares with a boundary length of 5.9 kilometres, while Lukale Central Forest Reserve has a total of 383 hectares and a boundary length of 6.1 kilometres. The two forest reserves were gazetted in 1948. 

Mr Speaker, during the exercise, it was discovered that some of the residents had encroached on the forest reserves and these are the people claiming that they have been living on the land for years and fear that they will be evicted from the forest reserve. 

The Ministry of Water and Environment, together with the National Forestry Authority, are engaging the district leadership to get the best ways by which the encroachers will evacuate the forest reserves. For now, the encroachers have been given time to harvest their crops and voluntarily vacate the forest reserves and pave the way for the forest restoration.

Question No.5

Mr Speaker, Hon. Ronald Afidra is concerned about the delayed construction of Kia-Kia and Aringa bridges, affecting transportation of pregnant mothers and school-going children in Madi-Okollo District. 

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Works and Transport has said that the works on the above bridges are ongoing projects of Government. Government is planning to construct Kia-Kia Bridge on the Rhino Camp-Rigbo-Ewang Road – and Aringa Bridge. 

The feasibility study and design for the bridge is done. These are the efforts Government is making to gradually improve and maintain the road and bridge infrastructure in Madi-Okollo District, using the available resources.

In Madi-Okollo District, through the Uganda National Roads Authority, Government has embarked on maintaining the roads as follows:

Wandi-Rhino Camp – 27 kilometres
Ocoko-Inde – 18 kilometres
Okollo-Inde – 29 kilometres
Pakwach—Inde – 18 kilometres
Inde-Rhino Camp – 23 kilometres
Arua-Nebbi – 34 kilometres
Rhino Camp Ferry Access – 5.8 kilometres

Mr Speaker, I would like to assure you that Government of Uganda has prioritised investing in developing and maintaining the road infrastructure, as a key transport infrastructure across all districts of Uganda. 

Government is aware of the importance of the transport infrastructure in supporting the socio-economic development of the Ugandan society and is committed to use the available resources to provide the needed infrastructure. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We are now going to have oral questions. Colleagues, your question should not go for more than one minute. 

Clerk, you need to extract for us some videos of the British Parliament - not exceeding five minutes - so that we can have at least five minutes - because we learn every day. 

In the meantime, you can go to YouTube and see their Prime Minister’s Time. They do not even take a minute to ask a question because it has to be sharp. Also, the Prime Minister does not need to take more than a minute to answer. They should be sharp; sharp and direct questions with sharp and direct answers. So, let us ensure that we do that. 

Hon. Flavia Kalule?

4.37
MS FLAVIA NABAGABE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You hinted on a matter of food insecurity in our country. In Kassanda District where I hail from, 11 of the 15 subcounties that I have were largely affected by three calamities: drought, hailstorms and army worms, leading to loss of coffee, beans and maize plants for most of my people, who are farmers. 

Unfortunately, we have not had any aid coming to these farmers. My question to the Prime Minister is: Is it possible for your office to provide aid in terms of food to my farmers? Secondly, it is now raining; is it possible for you to provide seeds to our farmers so that they can be able to plant some food to withstand the jeopardy they are currently in? Thank you very much. 

4.38
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, it is true there are a number of districts that were affected by calamities, including drought, especially the cattle corridor. There are a number of districts that are in distress and they need food aid.

Of course you are aware that during our budgeting process of 2022/2023, we pulled resources from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, in order for us to start the Parish Development Model. And we all agreed in this House that the money that we were always using to purchase seeds should be given to farmers under the Parish Development Model, for them to purchase these seeds themselves.

Therefore, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Government did not budget for giving out free seeds this time round. But I request the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, if he has any additional information, since he is here, to come and give me a hand.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries? 

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Fred Bwino Kyakulaga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for allowing me to say something. With your indulgence, the statement I will be giving is really speaking to the same issues. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Businge Joab?

4.41
MR JOAB BUSINGE (FDC, Masindi Municipality, Masindi): Mr Speaker, I am rising- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, we know why you are rising. Just hit the question straightaway. 

MR BUSINGE: My concern is: I represent Masindi Municipality and over time, Government has provided road equipment to district local governments, but municipalities have not had the opportunity since 2010. Those which were received in 2010 have become obsolete and the municipal urban roads are in poor condition. 

Of late, Government, according to information from the Ministry of Works and Transport, has planned to procure road equipment for only 15 district local governments -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, go straight to the questions. Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

4.41
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, Government budgeted Shs 58 billion to buy road equipment for the new districts. Thereafter, we shall buy road equipment for the remaining municipalities. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Santa Okot?

4.42
MS SANTA OKOT (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine was supposed to be an issue of national importance, but you guided so well that it should be brought during the Prime Minister’s Time. 

The Ministry of Internal Affairs is in charge of registering Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) through the NGO Bureau. The Ministry of Internal Affairs registered an NGO called Countryside Harvester. It went and registered in Gulu City - that is where their head office is. 

But this NGO went and operated in the different areas including my district Pader, and mainly in Aruu North constituency. They told the people that they are going to give them farm inputs and they said they had got about six enterprises - one is the dairy cattle, piggery – about 10 of them, and then –(Interjection) please, this issue is very important; so, let me tell you, it has happened in northern Uganda -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, please, do not allocate yourself more time. You should ask me. But let me allow you to conclude. Ask your question.

MS SANTA OKOT: The NGO has taken over Shs 500 million from the people in Aruu North constituency, and they said it is not only in Aruu constituency because when I talked to Hon. Peter Okot, they had also stolen more money from his constituency. 

My prayer is to ask the Ministry of Internal Affairs to bring this Countryside Harvester and the bank which helped them to collect the money from the people - which is UBA Bank - to take back the money that they have collected from the people. They have taken money from Otuke, Oyam, Dokolo, Kitgum - in all these districts in northern Uganda - and because they are the ones registering these NGOs, I request them to come and help. 

I reported the issue to the regional police commander; I reported the issue to the police in-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, you are a senior legislator; we cannot continue like that. We have picked the point. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I know you are good at fighting thieves - these that are harvesting from the communities instead of giving. 

4.45
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, on these harvesters who are registering themselves as NGOs, please allow me to inform this House that we shall, through the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security, investigate this and the culprits will be brought to book.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is very important. We shall request that you update the House after this has been done. 

Hon. Florence Nambozo?

4.45
MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this morning as I came to Parliament for the parliamentary fellowship, I was attacked at the yard while we were in traffic jam. There was a lot of rain; it was at 6.55 a.m.; we were in a jam and it was raining heavily. 

Someone came close and we thought they were only trying to cross the road. Unfortunately, he got out a knife and pointed it to my driver - who is my daughter - and told her, “If you do not give me money, I am going to stab you.” Fortunately, she was security conscious. She didn’t lower the window. So, he plucked off the driving mirror of my car. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this can happen -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where was this? Around Nakasero?

MS NAMBOZO: No, at the Electoral Commission lights. This can happen to anyone else because the rains are just starting. We could not go forward nor backward. We were so frightened in the car. I know that the security was not on the road. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please, this is not safe for anyone. We are not secure because you cannot run away in traffic jam. Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I definitely know that around that area there are cameras and our cameras are functional. I am going to direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to investigate this and we shall get the culprits.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.47
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is Government policy to have a primary school per parish. However, we have subcounties, which do not even possess a single primary school. What plans are there to have those subcounties or parishes have primary schools with special emphasis on Lwajje and Lyabana subcounties in Buvuma District? Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, this House is aware that money was allocated to us to roll out the UGIFT programme across the country. I request the honourable member to inform the Ministry of Education and Sports, so that those are also catered for.

4.49
MS JENIFER MUHEESI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kazo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about seedlings. The rainy season has started and the people of Kazo, just like people in other areas, are waiting for the seedlings. We cannot tell what is going to happen. 

Another matter is a matter of national importance. In Kazo District, we are faced with the theft of animals. The district has done its best to curb the thieves, but they are held up by man power. We request the ministries concerned – the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security to intervene –(Member timed out.) 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, Government is aware of those thieves in the cattle corridor areas. We have a special force in the police that is geared towards that. I will use my powers as the Prime Minister to direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to go to Kazo and make sure that the police in that part of the country arrests all the thieves in Kazo. (Laughter)

4.50
MS JULIET BASHIISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitoma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about one of my parishes, called Nyakizinga. It has no power, it has no health centre, is with no Government secondary school, and all the bridges are down. 

Apparently, Mr Speaker, they are even soliciting signatures to be curved away from Mitooma and go to Ntungamo. It is a big shame for a subcounty to solicit signatures to secede from its mother District to Ntungamo. Mr Speaker, I request that we are helped so that we remain with our 18 subcounties since this one is running away from us. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my people are running away because I do not deliver services. (Laughter) They are going to Ntungamo to get services. Please, help me also – (Laughter)– to at least retain my people. A whole subcounty –(Laughter)–

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, social services to the districts is our responsibility. Therefore, through you, Mr Speaker, I request the Member to write to my office, so that together, we can see what is lacking in those areas and we provide those services.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And we stop immigration from Mitooma to Ntungamo. You can use this. You qualify to be on the frontbench. (Laughter)

4.53
MR APOLLO YERI (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you. Prime Minister, I will be very brief. The central business of Tororo Municipality -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you focus on the microphone? Honourable member, she will hear you. You do not need to look at her face. Just submit –(Laughter)- she will hear you.

MR YERI: The central business of Tororo Municipality tried to patch the roads, but they failed. The tractors came and removed the marram. It is now very dusty. We have written to UNRA, we have written to the Ministry of Works and Transport. Even people are closing their shops. What do you want us to do next in order for us to have the road tarmacked? Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, I know Tororo very well. I am almost a native in that area. That road is well known to me and I promise that UNRA will attend to the matter.

4.54
MR RONALD AFIDRA (NRM, Lower Madi County, Madi-Okollo):  Mr Speaker, thank you.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, like I told you, there are questions of national importance and I am mixing because I told members that I will be picking them during Prime Minister’s Time. 

MR AFIDRA: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the question I want to put to you is in regard to Pawor Seed Secondary School. It was constructed by two contractors at a cost of Shs 1.4 billion in 2018 and completed in 2019. As I talk, this school has witnessed the greatest shoddy work that ever existed on earth. My question to you is: I have written to the Ministry of Education and Sports in regards to that school. Whereby, according to the standards there be, it should not be occupied for any education services. Could you, in your own power, investigate and put to book those who undertook that (19.16) shoddy.

We need your indulgence. Can Government come to the rescue of Pawor Seed Secondary School, which is a Government Seed Secondary School, so that it can be occupied by students.

4.56
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, regarding the Pawor Senior Secondary School, a Government-aided school, if there is any shoddy work that was done, we shall investigate, question the contractor and make sure that the contractor repairs all those defects. 

However, I also request, honourable colleagues, that we need to always monitor together with the districts. Sometimes some of these contractors are bigger than our people at the districts. When you get such challenges, involve us so that we can handle these thieves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There is an honourable member in a checked coat at the back. [Hon. Atwijukire: You had allowed me, Mr Speaker] Hon. Kimosho, then the honourable member. Honourable member, you are next.

4.56
MR DAN ATWIJUKIRE (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue I am raising with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has been triggered by an incident that happened in my constituency where a private guard at a SACCO office shot dead a priest; and this private guard was drunk. 

I want to get it from the Prime Minister and the entire Government whether there is a clear strategy on management of private security guards in this country. Even when walking out here, you see young people walking with guns, of course poorly paid –(Member timed out.)

4.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I was trying to look for my brother, Gen. Muhoozi, and I have located him. Please come and help. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs?

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker, through the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that is a valid concern; for private security companies to standardise training, inspection and management of arms and it is in the offing. We are going to do that and we hope we shall regulate the sector better.

On that particular case, I think Hon. Kimosho could give us further and better particulars on whether the suspect was arrested and brought to book.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.59
MR PHILIPHS LOKWANG-ILUKOL (NRM, Napore West County, Karenga): Mr Speaker, my issues are: we have our marauding animals, which issue has been sung every time. Elephants have destroyed even the little that was being cultivated by the remnants of the Karimojong. However, my people in the park have failed to control these animals. What should we do? 

Secondly, we have talked about cattle rustling; it is there. We talk about it every time. Is there any law that can stop them because as Karamojong, we have tried to put the Moruitit Resolution, but the law says it is illegal. Is there any law?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

5.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, regarding these wild animals, especially the elephants that are destroying people’s crops, you are aware that we budgeted for money to do electric fencing in a number of national parks and that area is one of them. 

The other one - now that my minister is here, I have seen Hon. Agnes Nandutu –(Laughter)- the senior minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. It is a question of the law.

MS NABBANJA: Now that we have a maiden speech –(Laughter)- I am armed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I will give you time to go, cross check and report back on the matter next Thursday. I had picked Hon. James Olobo.

5.01
MR JAMES OLOBO (NRM, Kioga North County, Amolatar): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, since the issue of the balaalo came up in northern Uganda, the President directed that only two routes should be used for transportation of cattle to northern Uganda; Karuma and then the eastern route through Jinja. 

The cheapest route, which my cattle traders were using across Lake Kyoga on the Namasale-Zengebe ferry, was not put in this. This has affected my cattle traders to the extent that they now want to demonstrate, after waiting for six months. 

What is there in Karuma and Jinja? It is only a checkpoint. We have the police in Amolatar, we have the police in Naka –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there are no prayers, honourable member. This is Prime Minister’s Time. [Hon. Olobo rose_] What is the question?

MR OLOBO: The question is: what is special about Karuma and Jinja that you cannot put for me a checkpoint in Zengebe? You are my friend; we have been fighting together and I have helped you in so many wars. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Prime Minister?

5.01
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the concern of the Member, together with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. We also have the Balaalo Committee, which is chaired by Gen. Muhoozi. We shall sit and see - that is a simple matter - and give them another route.

MR SSEKITOLEEKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is in line with Hon. Kimosho’s –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member. If your issue is already sorted, let us give others a chance.

5.03
MS KENNY AUMA (UPC, Woman Representative, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is about the fishermen in Kwania who are being beaten. Some of them are being arrested without trial. 

The question I am asking is, this is the only livelihood that our people of Kwania depend on. If they are now being arrested without trial, what is the way forward for our people? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.04
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, the NRM Government believes in the rule of law and therefore, if somebody is arrested, they must be tried in the courts of law. I request the honourable member to give me a list of those who were arrested so we can help them either face the law or –

Secondly, colleagues, I would like to explain this: the reason we are policing, especially those people who are fishing, is for their own good such that we can now harvest mature fish for our people. Thank you. 

5.04
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister when the NRM Government is going to pay for all the property that was destroyed in the NRA war in Luweero, now that you are in power. I want to know when you will pay and compensate the people of Luweero. 

5.05
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, Government has been compensating the people who were affected by the war in Luweero since 1986. We have a ministry responsible for the Luweero Triangle and Rwenzori that has been moving around the country, especially in the areas of Luweero and Rwenzori, registering members who were affected by the war. Therefore, I will make sure that I get in touch with Hon. Kaboyo so that the people he has talked about are compensated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Our champion in the walking competition? 

5.03
MS KENNY AUMA (UPC, Woman Representative, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister concerning the Parish Development Model (PDM). 

As you all know, in banks, loans are insured. This one concerns the Prime Minister and the question is: can the Prime Minister tell Ugandans what is going to happen to the PDM money or loan in case a member dies, say of a stroke or due to drought? 

Mr Speaker, the people in my constituency are poor people. The PDM money is a loan that they are supposed to pay back; so, they fear to lose their houses, land and being arrested.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, you are aware that Government is giving a grant to the SACCOs and it will be charging 6 per cent of the money borrowed to the farmers, and this 6 per cent will cater for those eventualities. Therefore, I would like Members to know that this money is a bit secure because people will be in a group. Although they are going to borrow as individuals, they will be in an enterprise group. 

5.08
MR JIMBRICKY OCHERO (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have one question, basically. For the last three years, my constituency has been receiving power once a quarter. For three months, we get power for a day. (Laughter) 

I made a lot of effort and wrote to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development and I even made a follow up. Nothing seems to be happening. My question is: what is not happening?

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Member is reporting something very important. People are getting power only for four days in a year and that is something I have picked interest in. I promise I will invite the whole district, together with the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, in my office and see how we can collectively handle this matter. 

5.09
MR SIMON OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister relates to two schools that were constructed by State House in my constituency - that is, Ojie Secondary School and Kabwele Secondary School. These schools were commissioned by the President, but up to now, they do not have head teachers, teachers and furniture. 

Secondly, there is an initiative by the community in Akadot, Kadami Subcounty; they constructed a hospital, but they are stuck halfway. They request Government to take over the hospital so that it becomes a Government hospital. Therefore, I request the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to assist in that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Prime Minister, you will lend me another five minutes so that we pick about two to three more questions. 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, Kadami, Kabwele and Akadot are areas I am very well conversant with because I was a Resident District Commissioner (RDC) in that area. I will request the Member, together with other colleagues, to come to my office so that we can now join hands with the Minister of Health to handle their matter. 

5.10
MR BASIL BATARINGAYA (NRM, Kashari North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My secondary school, St Andrews, was gutted by two fires - and I know you have been very busy. I am seeking your assistance because the rains are setting in. We are for holidays, but we request to be assisted such that the school is roofed and beds restored in it. Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I got a letter from the honourable member requesting for iron sheets. We are in the process of giving him the iron sheets so that that school can be restored and he is aware.

5.11
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are aware that this country, no matter what happens, will always go through problems. (Interjections) The issue of famine will never stop in this country. What programme has Government come up with, say build silos, for keeping food because we need to be ready every year?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is the next item we are going to handle. 

5.12
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Karuma Bridge was built in 1963. We have been promised that it will be refurbished. When will Government do so? Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I will come with an update next time. I do not have any.

5.12
MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Over 60 per cent of traffic in this country is in Kampala. Most of the roads have outlived their design life. This quarter, KCCA did not receive money for roads from Government of Uganda; not even the Uganda Road Fund. I would like to ask the Prime Minister what she is going to do about the roads. 

5.13
MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, KCCA, like other ministries, does not need to receive enough money this quarter because of what you know –(Interjection)– Yes, you know. The Ministry for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs will receive money next quarter.

5.14
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on Tuesday this week, this House was informed that the prisons were congested and overcrowded. The reason given was that some of the prisoners were sentenced to death and they have not been executed. And His Excellency the President has also not exercised his prerogative of mercy; he is not pardoning them. What plans do you have as Government to decongest the prisons in Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want them to execute? (Laughter)

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I will consult with the President about the matter and report back to this House.

5.15
MS GRANIA NAKAZIBWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, good enough you are our neighbour in Mubende and the subcounty I am talking about is in your neighborhood.

In 2020, when His Excellency the President was moving through the gorilla ways, he reached Kanyogoga in Butoloogo Subcounty and the people reminded him that he had promised to give us electricity. That area is very hard to reach. People do not have network for the telecommunication – 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, your question?

Ms nakazibwe: In case they get issues, they find it very hard to get network. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when should we hope to get power to save our people in case of anything?

The Deputy Speaker: Colleagues, please, stop sending me chits for picking you. I am just rushing to quickly pick.  

Ms nabbanja: Mr Speaker, I know Butoloogo Subcounty and Butoloogo Town Council. We had a meeting with the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development together with the district authorities of Mubende, including the honourable member. We agreed that power would be extended to that area this financial year. What I am going to do is to, again, engage the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, together with the Member, and see that those people are served. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you.

5.17
Mr hassan kirumira (NUP, Katikamu County South, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Bombo Barracks is expanding the perimeter walls around the barracks. We are aware that part of the land belongs to the barracks and part of it does not. 

We would like to know whether Government is going to compensate the people of Bombo, whose land has been encroached on. Thank you. 

Ms nabbanja: Mr Speaker, I am aware, as the Prime Minister of this country, that Bombo Barracks is undergoing renovation and opening up of the boundaries. For those affected persons – because of this development – it is their right to be compensated.
 
5.18
Mr david lagen (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My questions directly get to the Prime Minister, on the issue of security. Every day, we continue to lose lives in Agago District, especially as a result of the cattle raids. Right now, many of the community members are being displaced from their villages. The cattle rustlers are following people in the gardens and taking away their ox ploughs.

What are the plans of Government in mitigating this challenge, which is becoming a big problem? 

Secondly, we have issues of disaster –

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, we are allowing one question. Your colleagues are here. 

Ms nabbanja: Mr Speaker, I am aware that there is a subcounty councillor - a lady - who was found in the garden, killed by rustlers and her ox plough taken. That was last week. We have had a number of meetings, engaging the UPDF and have beefed up the security of that area – and he is aware. Therefore, I want the Member to come to the office so that I can give him the details of what we have so far planned to do.

5.19
Ms zumura maneno (NRM, Woman Representative, Obongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have a question. Obongi is one of the districts in West Nile that is not having power. The people there have never seen an electric pole. When are you connecting Obongi to power? Thank you. 

Ms nabbanja: Mr Speaker, this Parliament passed a loan to ensure power connection to all districts in the country. We are now also targeting subcounties. This district – Obongi – will also benefit from the same. 

5.20
Ms Margaret AYEBARE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I want to know how one can get police deployment in his or her area. Mbarara District has no police – (Interjections) - listen to what I am going to tell you. 

In one of our subcounties, Kashare, the police post was closed down because of lack of manpower. It is the one that borders Kiruhura, where there are cattle thieves. (Laughter) The problem has been that people still think of Mbarara District – under Mbarara City –(Member timed out.)

Ms nabbanja: Mr Speaker, the matter of cattle theft has been here. We shall use the same way to help the people of Mbarara. However, about getting a police post in an area, I think now that we have the Minister of Internal Affairs here – please, come and help me explain the procedure to the Member. 

The Deputy Speaker: The Member says it was closed down, so, she needs it reopened. 

5.22
The minister of state for internal affairs (Gen. David Muhoozi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Muhoozi, you are from Kiruhura.

Gen. muhoozi: No, I am not. I am from Mbarara, actually. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I want to start from the point of saying there is no police post in Mbarara; it is wrong. What I will evaluate is the spread of the police in Mbarara and then I will get back to the Member of Parliament. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. Leader of the Opposition?

5.23
The chief opposition whip (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I want to salute you for the responses you have given. I have very few comments to make. I will begin with the one of the Woman Member of Parliament for Buvuma, about those people living along the fringes of the two forest reserves and the conflict - running battles – with the National Forestry Authority officials. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there are better ways you could have devised for conflict resolution. I suppose, as Government, you must be having some conflict resolution mechanisms, better than just evicting them. 

If you say the project has already acquired its own land and there are people affected within, those should be project-affected persons that could also be accorded compensation, like you have pledged for those affected around Bombo Barracks. 

The other question was by Hon. Etuka. When mentioned about the Shs 20 billion out of the Shs 135 billion that was appropriated for procuring food and non-food items for the people starving in Karamoja, you said, vividly, that it was part of the Contingencies Fund. I do not know whether you are aware that this Fund has been abused. It is a creature of the Constitution - Article 157. 

Also, section 26 of the Public Finance Management Act gives a formula. It requires 0.5 per cent of the annual appropriated budget of the previous year. If the previous year was Shs 44.7 trillion times 0.5 per cent, it would be Shs 224 billion in the current budget of Financial Year 2022/2023. 

Can you imagine a paltry Shs 62 billion is what has constantly been allocated to all the budgets since 2015, by the way? You better check; we have been receiving that Shs 62 billion. This is in absolute contravention of the law. I suppose you had better move as fast as a flash - like the “Majegere” you are - to address this challenge, Madam Prime Minister. 

Lastly, on this question of Bukomansimbi, you should have dispensed more justice to it. If you would recognise that Bukomansimbi is part of the beneficiaries of the water for production – there is that programme - and the Fund for Water for Production - your response was shy about mentioning whether this particular beneficiary is also appreciating or rather getting anything from that fund. This is because there are a number of those that have been marginalised, even when they are in that cattle corridor. Otherwise, so far so good; I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, today, we exceeded the Prime Minister's Time by 30 minutes because I tended to pick very many questions, and yet the rules talk of only one hour. Maybe we shall need to revisit the rules in future. Otherwise, many of you still have many questions, but I have nowhere to buy time from. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE ACTIONS TAKEN TO IMPROVE FOOD SECURITY AND MITIGATE THE IMPACT OF THE LONG DRY SPELL AS WELL AS THE PERFORMANCE OF THE TRACTOR SCHEME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please use only 15 minutes. I hope it is uploaded on the intranet.

5.28
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Yes, it is, Mr Speaker; we submitted it. This statement is in response to a matter of national importance raised by Hon. Anthony Akol, Member of Parliament, Kilak North, regarding the need for Government to urgently avail farmers across the country with seeds and planting materials to enable them harness the onset of the rains, especially after a lengthy dry spell. 

Subsequently, Mr Speaker, you ruled that, and I quote: 

“The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should present a comprehensive statement to the House, highlighting actions taken to improve food security and mitigate the impact of the long dry spell as well as the performance of the tractor scheme.” 

Background
 
In May 2022, the Minister of Agricultural, Animal Industry and Fisheries alerted the Cabinet about the looming threat of food and animal feed insecurity given the low crop germination rates, coupled with the African Armyworm invasion that affected cereals and pastures in season A. (March to July 2022). 

During the State-of-the-Nation Address on 7 June 2022, His Excellency the President, reiterated the critical need to adequately plan for food security, given the prevailing and emerging threat of poor crop performance in most parts of the country caused by the unpredictable weather patterns, drought, pests and diseases, especially the African Armyworm coupled with over reliance on rain-fed agriculture. 

As you are already aware, the country is currently experiencing food and animal feed shortage. According to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, routine food security analysis for July 2022, the national food security outlook for the country was as follows: Karamoja is 41 per cent food insecure; Teso is 21.4 per cent food insecure; Acholi, Lango and West Nile is 14.4 per cent food insecure; Buganda is 17.7 per cent food insecure; Rwenzori is 6.3 per cent food insecure; Busoga, Bukedi, Bugisu and Sebei is 5.4 per cent food insecure and; Bunyoro, Ankole and Kigezi is 4.2 per cent food insecure. That was up to July. 

The Integrated Food Security Phase Classification Annual Report for the period of 22 March to February 23, issued in April 2022 shows that in the last two years, there has been continued average to below average crop and livestock production in the country. 

The factors contributing to this situation include; unpredictable weather patterns, drought, pest and disease outbreaks, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic that limited the supply and availability of fertilisers due to the Russia-Ukraine war that disrupted the fertiliser production logistics and limited access to irrigation and irrigation technologies. 

The insecurity in the Karamoja Subregion further exacerbated the food and feed shortage in that particular subregion and neighbouring areas in the previous months. As a result, the national average retail prices of selected commodities released on 29 July 2022 by UBOS indicated an increase in the price for one kilogramme of maize grain as of July 22 from Uganda Shs 1,415 shillings in June 2021 to Shs 2,552 in July 2022. 

Our responses 

Improving food security and mitigating the impacts of prolonged dry spell. 

The adoption of the Parish Development Model by Government, as a new policy direction, brought about a policy shift from the hitherto Government-led distribution of inputs to farmers by NAADS and OWC to now farmers acquiring inputs on their own with support from loans obtained from parish-based SACCOs with government funds as a grant. The advantage with the PDM is that if all the SACCOs eventually get operationalised with the budgeted funds, more money than ever before will be sent directly to the smallholder farmers at the lowest unit of the parish. 

The PDM approach will also remove the persistent complaints from the citizens about centrally procured inputs, claiming late delivery of the same out of season and sometimes also raising the issue of poor quality of inputs.

The strategy under PDM is to push funds into parish-based SACCOs from where farmers can borrow and procure inputs of their selected enterprises on their own. Funding for this new arrangement of the PDM led to the pulling of resources previously under NAADS, UCDA and in other MDAs. The effect of this policy shift has been the inability by MAAIF (the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries) and its agencies like NAADS, UCDA and NAGRIC to give out inputs directly to the farmers as before. This is because there is no money.

We, however, believe that with the conclusion of the PDM SACCO registration and disbursement of funds to the ready SACCOs by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development currently on-going, a number of smaller farmers will be able to increase production, both in the current season; season B and the subsequent seasons as more SACCOs get ready. 

My colleague, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, will further give a detailed statement on the same to the House soon, as you will schedule him. 

In addition to the advantages of the PDM articulated above, Government took this decision deliberately to wean off farmers from hand-outs that most of them take for granted, do not own and therefore affect sustainability of the poverty alleviation programs. 

The other advantage of PDM is that every other financial year, more money in the form of grants will go to the parish to benefit more smallholder farmers and also create a strong revolving financial institution framework at the small local level of the parish to benefit more smallholder farmers and also create a stronger revolving financial institution framework at the small local level with the parish.

Economists strongly believe and have advised Government that this approach will help to bring more smallholder farmers, especially those with no ability to get securitised loans into the money economy and empower them to develop and run a sustainable financial institutional framework at their local level.
 
Mr Speaker, while PDM targets the smallholder farmers to enable them to engage in high value crops on an intensive scale, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) came up with a proposal recently, on strategic interventions to target large-scale commercial farmers and institutions with big chunks of arable land. 

The rationale of this is that PDM targets the smallholder farmers, and excludes the big large-scale commercial farmers, yet the latter are required to produce on large scale the low-value enterprises that are not suitable for the smallholder farmers because of land acreage limitations that even the former will need for food and animal feed security. 

Mr Speaker, it is on the basis of the above, and the anticipated challenges in production of food and animal feeds, that MAAIF took a proactive step to propose interventions to address the looming food and animal feed insecurity in the country that will help to complement the PDM. 

This proposal has since been presented to and approved by Cabinet. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is in the process of supporting the participating agencies and entities. 

Under this intervention of large-scale food and animal feed production, Government of Uganda through MAAIF has: 

One, collaborated/partnered with Government agencies that hold chunks of land to immediately enter into production of identified food and animal food security crops, i.e. maize, beans, soybeans and sorghum. 

The identified agencies under Government are: the National Agriculture Research Organisation, NAGRIC, the National Animal Genetic Research Centre and Data Bank, Uganda People's Defence Forces, National Enterprises Corporation, Uganda Prisons Service and the National Leadership Institute-Kyankwanzi. These have commenced farming activities for this Planting Season B of 2022. 

We have also identified and profiled, and we are in the process of concluding MOUs with some large-scale commercial funding entities, individuals and institutions with reasonably big parcels of land as well as vehicles for large-scale production, as well as market centres or off takers for smallholder farmers. 

These are expected to enter into production in Season A of 2023, which is March. Many of the farmers profiled so far are from Northern Uganda. Profiling of the same category of farmers continues in the whole country, through the district local governments.

MAAIF has also deployed its entire fleet of equipment for water for agriculture, production; excavators, water bowsers, etcetera to water stressed districts to help farmers to dig/construct their small and medium size on-farm water tanks and dams. 

The water bowsers have been sent to some districts in the cattle corridor to help with emergency water haulage; haulage is frequent fetching of water. 

The challenge however, is that the MAAIF fleet of such equipment is very limited; we only have 14 excavator sets, 14 water bowsers, yet the demand from the farmers is high. 

We have accordingly as MAAIF put our requests to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to help source money to procure more of these equipment sets and thus build our mechanisation and irrigation capacity to intervene and help farmers. I will seek and appeal for your support on this, honourable colleagues.  

Similarly, I wish to inform the House that Cabinet some time back approved the operationalisation of 19 zonal agricultural mechanisation/irrigation centres namely:

 Acholi to be based in Nwoya;

Greater Mubende to be based in Kyankwanzi;

Lango to be based in Dokolo District (Agwata);

Sebei to be based in Kapchorwa;

Greater Luwero to be based in Nakasongola;

Bugisu to be based in Mbale;

Karamoja to be based in Kotido;

Kigezi to be based in Kabale;

Madi (Moyo and Adjumani) to be based in Adjumani;

Greater Masaka (Masaka, Kyotera, Rakai, Ssembabule, Bukomansimbi, Kalungu, Kalangala) to be based in Masaka District;

Greater Mpigi (Mpigi, Butambala, Gomba, Mukono) to be based in Mpigi District at Buwama;

Teso to be based in Soroti;

Busoga to be based in Inganga at Namungalwe;

Bukedi to be based in Tororo District;

West Nile to be based in Nebi District;

Tooro/Rwenzori to be based in Fort Portal;

Bunyoro to be based in Kiryandongo;

Ankole to be based in Kiruhura at Ruhengere where  Government has a ranch; and

 National Referral Centre Wakiso District, this will cover Wakiso, Kampala, Mukono, Kayunga, Buikwe.

So far, out of the 19 that Government approved and planned, only three zonal centres are operational and this is Mbale, Dokolo and Mpigi, and two are being developed at Kiyrandongo and Kiruhura.

With the requested for and anticipated financing on agricultural mechanisation and education from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we hope that all the 19 centres will be operationalised in the medium term. 

At these centres, colleagues, farmers will be helped to hire earth-moving equipment for farm development at subsidised rates. 

The centres will also be skilling centres in farm equipment use, operation and maintenance. 
They will also act as hubs or workshops for equipment servicing and repair. 

Performance of the tractor scheme 

Mr Speaker, MAAIF with the support of Government and this august House is pursuing an ambitious plan of increasing the percentage of arable land under production, from the current 34.4 per cent to at least 50 per cent in the medium term; all the land that God gave us only 34.4 per cent of that land is the one we are using to produce food yet we quarrel over land. 

To achieve this, MAAIF prioritises procurement and distribution of tractors of different sizes. That is why we call them appropriate immigration technologies. 

Currently, the whole stock of tractors in the country, both private and public owned stands at 4,000. However, some of these are not operational; that tells you that we have a huge deficit of mechanisation tools. 

It is our plan and following the PDM approach, that each parish at least in the medium term has a tractor. 

Mr Speaker, through the district production system, and through the elected leaders like you honourable colleagues, MAAIF has gotten lists and continues to get more lists of farming cooperatives, groups and large scale farming entities like religious institutions requesting for tractors. We will continue to respond as our budget allows. 

The criteria we follow in allocating tractors to beneficiary groups is guided by the following factors:

 It has to be demand driven, giving priority to the most feminine prone sub regions;

 There must be proof of availability of land suitable for mechanisation. So, colleagues, when people ask you to recommend them, you must also verify that; 

There must be confirmation/recommendation for the beneficiaries, from either the local government leaders or you Members of Parliament; and

 We respond where there are Government pledges like of H.E the President to churches and elsewhere. 

Mr Speaker, as a mitigation measure against abuse of such tractors that we give out, every funding entity that receives a tractor or any other mechanisation/ irrigation equipment, signs a binding MOU with MAAIF stipulating the terms and conditions of use. 

MAAIF retains the right/authority to recall the machinery if the beneficiary is found to be in breach of the terms and conditions. 

An IT solution software is installed in each of the tractors to enable a 24 hour digital tracking. This is an innovation in the recent tractors we are giving out. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues for listening to me. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, when you look at this statement, it is closely related with the report from the committee on the Parish Development Model, which is coming on Tuesday. 

Debating this without the other statement; we shall be repeating ourselves when it comes. (Interjection) – No, clarification is how we open up. Colleagues, no please. We sent our committee and they are finalising. I do not want to open up in any way. Go, take your time and read this. The minister will be here on Tuesday to clarify on what is not clear. I have deferred the debate to Tuesday next week. 

Colleagues, we have our guests from Karamoja who have come here. Remember the report we had started on yesterday, but we also have a report from the Leader of the Opposition. I think it would be courteous enough to complete that report of the committee because our people are going back to Karamoja and they have come to specifically listen to the presentation of the report on street children. Chair of the committee, please you should be done in 15 minutes. I am sure everyone has read through it.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON A MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO RESPOND TO THE PLIGHT OF KARAMOJONG CHILDREN ENSLAVED IN STREET BEGGING AND CHILD LABOUR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair, present your report.

5.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I laid the minutes and the report. Yesterday, we had gone up to page five; we had finished the introduction and the background.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us resume from page five where you had reached. 

MS KABAHENDA: Yes, we shall continue from page five where I was talking about the table submitted by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to the United Nations that paints a picture of the number of street children that have been withdrawn over years. 

As a committee, we put a disclaimer that while these figures give an indication of the children rescued, they neither reveal the actual number of children on the streets nor state their districts of origin or whether the same children are not being re-trafficked. 

I request the Members to go with me to page seven where as a committee, we observed that the absence of reliable data affects proper planning, resource allocation, programming and the designing of appropriate interventions and makes it difficult, leaving these children in a limbo practically. The girth of statistics is made worse partly due to the laborious process of obtaining a birth certificate. The lack of reliable statistics is also an indictment against Government for failure to notice some of its most vulnerable human beings. 

Mr Speaker, on page eight we have our observations to that effect. 

The committee recommends that:

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Uganda National Bureau of Statistics carry out an audit of all street children in the country periodically, starting from within 12 months from the date of adoption of this report;

That the Ministry of Internal Affairs, through the police, should investigate, arrest and prosecute child traffickers;

That the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the National Identification and Registration Authority put in place measures to ease the process of acquiring birth certificates as a means of identity, nationality and citizenship. 

It is worthy to note that the phenomenon of migration from Karamoja is not entirely new. Over the years, Karamojong has moved to other parts of the country in search of opportunities, especially when harvests were poor. Many went to work on big plantations in Kakira, Lugazi and Masindi and on small family plantations in other parts of the country, particularly those near Karamoja, especially Teso, Lango and Bunyoro. These were mostly adult men and this particular kind of migration was dignified and not forced and people went back home after regular periods, much different from the mass movement of children and young people as is the practice nowadays.

Mr Speaker, we cited push factors to this effect and we are citing limited social services as one of the push factors and our recommendations on page 10 are – 

The committee recommends that Government, through the Ministry of Education and Sports: 

a) 	should construct more primary and secondary schools and technical vocational schools in Karamoja in line with Government policy of having a primary school in every parish, a secondary school in every sub county and subsidise them in order to attract more learners;

b) 	ensure compulsory, free boarding education for all schools in Karamoja, at least up to Senior Four;

c) 	provide meals for all learners in all schools in Karamoja;

d) 	construct more vocational and technical schools in Karamoja to contain the returnees from the streets and the dropouts who may require reskilling.
 
On security, Mr Speaker, our recommendation is on page 11.

We recommend that Government should scale up efforts to address insecurity and prioritise Karamoja in the medium and long term planning and expenditure framework.

On famine and hunger, we recommend that:

The Ministry of Karamoja Affairs should prioritise Karamoja in all development projects and encourage participation of the local population;

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should implement projects in Karamoja that employ technologies such as irrigation schemes to increase food production and green houses and community dams;

The Office of the Prime Minister should urgently put in place measures to provide regular and adequate supply of food relief for Karamoja and of course, also food reserves. 

On poverty, alcoholism, drug abuse and gender based violence, our recommendations are: 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should: 

Prioritise Karamoja regardless of all efforts to combat gender based violence including the construction of gender based violence shelters and youth skilling centres with tool kits; 

Implement affirmative action with regard to all poverty alleviation programmes in Karamoja, including the Parish Development Model; 

Create awareness and sensitisation about the dangers of alcoholism and involve the local communities in all the activities carried out.

b) 	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should increase the availability of micro finance for income generating activities for all districts in Karamoja.

Mr Speaker, on the connivance by parents and/or caregivers and peer pressure

The committee found that parents and caregivers were heavily involved in the trafficking of children from Karamoja to different towns in the country. 

The committee interacted with some youth at Kobulin Youth Skill Training Centre who had been rescued from various towns, including Kenya. 

The committee was concerned that during the interactions with the LC1 executive members from Napak, men seemed unconcerned about child trafficking, indicating that it was the women who were responsible for all the matters relating to their children.

At the meetings the committee held in Napak, it was revealed that the women take care of the home, including meeting all needs and engage in business, while the men look after the animals and take little interest in the affairs of children.

Mr Speaker, our recommendation is that: 

The Ministry of Internal Affairs, through the Uganda Police Force, should investigate all cases of traffickers and prosecute all those parents or caregivers that connive or conspire to traffic their children. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should create awareness among local governments about their responsibilities regarding the welfare and protection of their children.

Mr Speaker, the pull factors looked at were the porous borders and the traffickers, and our recommendations to that effect are:

The Ministry of Internal Affairs through the Uganda Police Force should increase deployment in Karamoja and investigate, arrest and prosecute all those persons involved in trafficking children;

Parliament should increase the budget for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to cater for recruitment of more personnel to effectively patrol borders of the districts with high incidents of child trafficking.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs should have closer working relations with districts with high incidences of child trafficking to ensure coordinated work regarding interception of trafficked children. 

Mr Speaker, we looked at the frameworks that we, as a country, have developed ourselves and those to which we are signed and ratified that are used to mitigate, reduce and eliminate the vice of children being trafficked. 

Mr Speaker, we looked at the Orphans and Vulnerable Children’s Policy, 2004 and Alternative Care Framework. We looked at Withdrawal and Prevention of Street Children Strategy, 2008, Street Children Action Plan, 2018. 

The street children received annually at Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre are in the table below and the setting up of Kobulin Youth Skills Training Centre. 

When the committee visited the training centre, it noted a number of shortcomings:

Lack of fence. This absence of the fence critically gives the children that have been returned leeway to be re-trafficked and the temptation to return to where they had come from. So, the absence of this fence poses a security risk to the inhabitants.

Inadequate and inappropriate structures. There are insufficient structures to decently accommodate all the inhabitants and a number of the structures are made of iron sheets; they are makeshift. 

There was inadequate sanitation facilities, and the very many numbers of children we found there were using almost three thesis of toilets. 

There was no electricity.

While the institution does provide training to various youth in various areas, the youth stay at the centre for a short time. The youth and the principal of the centre, noted that this time was too short for the learners to perfect skills being taught. 

The committee was also informed that the training was hampered by the lack of start-up kits for the graduates, making it difficult for them to practice the skills and live sustainably. In a number of cases, many of the youth returned to the streets out of frustration or getting re-trafficked. Dwelling Places, which is one of the NGOs working with children in Napak, provides some start-up kits for graduates and pays some rent for one month for each of them, but this was very inadequate. 

We also looked at the Inter-Ministerial Taskforce on Street Children. We know that Cabinet in 2019 established an Inter-Ministerial Taskforce on Street children. The taskforce is made up of Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry for Karamoja Affairs, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Cabinet also directed the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to support local governments to implement Uganda National Parenting Guidelines, enactment of by-laws, and mainstreaming of vulnerable families in Government programmes as a means of preventing children from going to the streets. 

Mr Speaker, we looked at the Coordination Office for Trafficking in Persons, the National Taskforce against Trafficking in Persons, and the National Children’s Authority. We looked at the National Child Policy, 2020 and our observations on page 20 are:

The interventions of Government are welcome and should go a long way in ensuring the rights of children, including preventing them from finding their way onto the street. However, the phenomenon has instead increased, necessitating Government to invest in addressing the root causes as is highlighted in the Children Policy.

The committee observes that while the various interventions are well intentioned, they have not fetched the desired results and have placed no significant dent in the problem of the street children because they have either not been implemented or have been poorly implemented. 

On page 21, we are looking at – even where the strategies have been implemented, some of the approaches employed have been questionable and have produced unwanted consequences. The withdrawal of children from the streets, for example, is constantly brutally carried out and many of the children are bundled up and pushed on the trucks to Kampiringisa and some have always ended up back on the streets,

Moreover, Mr Speaker, Kampiringisa is a juvenile detention centre and these children are not in conflict with the law. That is not to mention the sorry state of the facility in Kampiringisa, the fact that it houses far more inhabitants than it was meant to, leading to overcrowding. 

The very act of taking street children to Kampiringisa in a brutal manner is an indication that Government has not planned well for street children because other than Kobulin Youth Skilling Training Centre, there is no specific institution meant to rehabilitate these street children. 

The committee recommends that:

a. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should:

establish regional reception centres for children that require protection and security in a phased manner, starting with the Financial Year 2023/2024.
increase the operational budget for and renovate, retool and expand Kobulin Youth Skilling Centre and Kampiringisa Juvenile Rehabilitation Centre.

prioritise Kobulin Youth Skilling Centre in the implementation of all projects by the ministry, including the Green Jobs and Fair Labour Market Programme, and provide these youth trained from there with tool kits and enable them to establish enterprises after leaving the centre.

construct industrial cottages in Karamoja sub-region to enable the youth get work spaces after rehabilitation. 

Mr Speaker, we saw in Napak some construction, similarly a cottage industry that has spent now close to two years as a white elephant that would actually house these young people trained from Kobulin, to work and enter or transit into the service sector.

Expedite the completion of the Gender-Based Rehabilitation Centre in Moroto that has spent now five years under construction. Mr Speaker, we would also require accountability and authentic audit on that construction in Moroto that was meant to be a gender-based rehabilitation centre that has spent now five years without completion. 

b. The Ministry of Local Government should: 

increase the budget allocation for Probation and Social Welfare Officers to enable them reach all families with vulnerable children.

c. Parliament should:

allocate funds to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to facilitate the Child and Family Protection Unit of Uganda Police Force, and to make it more effective, and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to fully implement all the strategies to end child trafficking and the phenomenon of street children. 

d. 	All Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) dealing with street children should: 

Involve local communities and male parents or caregivers in developing and implementing strategies to combat child trafficking and address the challenge of street children. 
Adopt a rights-based approach to dealing with street children.
iii. 	Develop and implement strategies that include dealing with street children with disabilities;
iv. 	Review the Withdrawal and Prevention of Street Children Strategy of 2OO8.

e) 	The ministries under the Inter-Ministerial Taskforce on Street Children should strengthen collaboration with local authorities in Karamoja and urban centres to ensure that there are coordinated efforts in rescuing children, following proper procedure.

Mr Speaker, we reviewed the legal framework for trafficking in persons in Uganda as well as the domestic legislations such as the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Children Act, Cap. 59, the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Act, 2OO9, the Employment Act, 2OO6, the Local Governments Act, Cap. 243 and the Education Act, 2OO8. 

The international legislations we reviewed were the Universal Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR), the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child (ACRWC), the International Labour Organisation (ILO) (Worst forms of Labour Convention) (No. 182).

Observations

The committee observes that Uganda has a formidable legal framework for the protection of children. While the legal framework is strong, the challenges in the implementation of the law mean that, ultimately, the protection that the law aims to bring about is still elusive. The number of cases related to child protection is ridiculously low - and this is to say nothing about the numbers of convictions. 

This is indicative of the wider problem within the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) generally. These problems include the poor remuneration for police officers, corruption and understaffing of, especially the police and Judiciary and, of course, Mr Speaker, the non-operationalisation of the National Children Authority.

The committee further observes that the lega1 provisions, for example, under the Local Governments Act, are not implemented due to inadequate financing. While the Local Governments Act provides that matters of welfare, probation and street children are the responsibility of local governments, the meagre resources allocated by local governments for these services mean that there is very little that can be done.

We also note that while the vice-chairpersons of village and parish executive committees are responsible for the welfare of children, the provision has not been implemented, partly because the local governments are not aware of this legal provision or its implementation.

Lastly, while the Local Governments Act empowers local governments to legislate by-laws and ordinances, this power has not been well exercised in relation to preventing the phenomenon of street children in Uganda. The committee found that only Napak District, at that time, had enacted an ordinance preventing the trafficking of children.

Our recommendations are that;

a) 	The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Ministry of Internal Affairs should fill the staffing gaps for prosecutors, state attorneys and judicial officers and police personnel, respectively, especially in areas where higher numbers of trafficking are, such as Karamoja.

b) 	The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should provide tailor-made training for all stakeholders, including police personnel, judicial officers, prosecutors, probation and social welfare officers dealing with children and/or trafficked persons.

c) 	The Ministry of Local Government should induct all local council executives and continuously sensitise them about their responsibilities contained in the law.

d) 	Local governments should make adequate budget allocations for matters relating to the welfare of the children.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the problem of street children is intricately linked to trafficking in persons and abuse of human rights, including sexual exploitation and forced labour. The vast majority of street children come from Karamoja, but every region in Uganda is represented among the street children.

Mr Speaker, in every urban centre, the bigger number of street children is of the indigenous tribes and Karamoja makes the second. Even in Kampala here, actually, when you see people with dark skin, you think they are from Karamoja, yet they are also from central.

Mr Speaker, sadly, there are no reliable statistics to provide a basis for a long-term solution. Many of the children transition into adulthood and even have children of their own while on the street. We have even started registering adults on the streets – parents following children to the streets. Instead of street children, now we have even adults. The very presence of people living on the street is in itself a huge indictment against the conscience of Government and all Ugandans.

Failure to concretely address the challenge of street children will significantly impair the attainment of the country's set goals in the National Development Plan III and hamstring the aspirations set by the Agenda 2O3O and numerous Sustainable Development Goals, because these require us to take care of our most vulnerable in society, living no one behind. It is critical to address the reasons that force children onto the streets, which require proper planning and implementation and, of course, addressing the challenges of urbanisation.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to respond to the plight of Karamojong children enslaved in street begging and child labour be adopted by the House and that this report, too, be adopted by the honourable House. (Applause)

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson, for the detailed report. Colleagues, the issues are very clear. I will still have other items. We are going to have a limited debate of 10 minutes only on this matter.

6.13
MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in secondment of the motion by the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. However, I want to submit with a very heavy heart because you will notice from this report that one of the core challenges we have as a country is the excesses of policies, yet with inadequacies of actions. 

Going by this report, you notice that we have seven policy documents for action, including the Street Children Action Plan of 2018, the Withdrawal and Prevention of Street Children Strategy of 2018 and the Inter-Ministerial Task Force on Street Children. On top of all these, we have six pieces of domestic legislation and four international legislative commitments – all on the issue of street children. However, what has happened? Instead, we have had an escalation in the challenge of street children. 

It is no longer a Kampala problem or a Karamoja problem. In all these cities, including Gulu, there is a crisis of street children. With these formidable and progressive recommendations, Mr Speaker, I want Government to assure us on the time-bound strategies to sustainably eradicate this challenge. We already have all the requisite laws to enable us handle this challenge. Thank you.

6.14
MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogoola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the chairperson and the team for doing a good job. 

We definitely know that Government ably stated it yesterday that it is financially constrained. That, though, does not mean that it should not carry out its functions as a Government. We have money on the programme of mindset change. I want Government to update us on its implementation.

Secondly, Parish Development Model: I think Karamoja should be taken as one of those areas that should receive 100 per cent of the money for Parish Development Model. Others can wait, but Karamoja should be given 100 per cent, whether Government has money or not.

When it comes to construction of Gender-Based Violence shelters. We should help the civil society. This has been started by the UN Women, but the shrinking civic space is limiting the civil society from helping Government in some of these activities. Government should help the civil society to fight Gender-Based Violence.

Mr Speaker, on law enforcement, we should look into digitalisation of systems. Information and Communication Technology is given a little budget. Let us facilitate ICT to have some of these systems digitalised, such that we can enforce the law. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, I do not know if you have set to two minutes. We can start with Hon. Omara. (Laughter)

6.16
MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for a very detailed and well researched report.

Mr Speaker, child abuse and the form of slavery that we have seen in the report has been exacerbated by the hostile environment in Karamoja, mainly created by insecurity and famine. I am pleased that His Excellency, the President has taken up this responsibility himself, especially on regional strategic security. I know that recruits have been passed out and I believe that on matters of security, it has been contained. 

However, famine has been a major issue. According to the report the returnees are normally just dropped in Karamoja and they come back. The issue is; how do we sustainably keep them there? I think that the answer is food.

I also believe that we can do this: We can provide enough food in Karamoja and I am always discussing this matter with my friend, Hon. Aleper. I believe that Karamoja should be given a kind of Marshall Plan, where income generation activities are really well planted in Karamoja. 

I have been informed as well, that the cultural practices of young men marrying women – raiding; they have to raid and then they can marry. So, I think through mindset change, there must be an investment in Karamoja to transform them away from that cultural practice which causes insecurity in Karamoja.

Lastly, the child traffickers must be – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

6.18
MR DENES SEKABIRA (NUP, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members of Parliament from Karamoja, I will pick three of you; so you sort yourselves. You can caucus -(Laughter) – three of you to represent because you need support from other MPs. Napak will get.

MR SEKABIRA: I have learned to that Karamoja Subregion has seven districts –(Interjections)- nine; with a population between 760,000 to 800,000, according to the 2022 Uganda Bureau of Statistics report –(Interjections)- according to UBOS; you can do a Google search. 

Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please continue.

MR SEKABIRA: Mr Speaker, 61 per cent of the people in Karamoja are malnourished and I think - unless we set the standards of living in Karamoja Subregion, we cannot do away with these street children because they come this side to search for better standards of living and food. I think this place was greatly affected by civil wars and climate change. 

In my own understanding, I would ask Government to, in a way of affirmative action, put up infrastructure because the place does not have enough roads, hospitals and schools, yet it is mineral-rich. I would, therefore, think Government should zero on this - put electricity. Many people want to go to Karamoja and invest. Actually, the best place for a businessperson to invest is where there is a lot of land, a lot of cheap capital and cheap labour, but I do not think anyone would want to risk to go to a community where there are uncontrolled guns and there is no infrastructure.

I would, therefore, urge Government to work on that and then, we shall do away with street children. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.20
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam – I mean – Thank you very much, Mr Speaker –(Laughter)- Mr Speaker, I am sorry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The women are in charge –(Laughter)- so men, you must accept. If they call you “madam”, accept it graciously. (Laughter)

MS ALYEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the chairperson of the Committee on Gender for this wonderful report. Before the children that are on the streets or are brought on the streets come there, they are already vulnerable. So, when they come on the streets, they become more vulnerable. They are subjected to harsh conditions; there is no food. Diseases are there; they are getting HIV/AIDS. They are getting COVID-19 and many other infections.

Mr Speaker, these children do not come on their own; there are human beings that transport these children, right from their homes. (Applause) They do not just walk; they are there. When they come here, they grow on the streets and begin producing more street children. So, the number keeps on increasing.

I would like to propose an attack on the people who bring these children on the streets. (Applause) We may or may not be knowing where they are, but we have intelligence personnel that can identify where these children on the streets come from, where they sleep and where they take the money because it has already become a business to some people. They are making money from these street children. Mr Speaker, can I allow information, Mr Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have concluded.

6.22
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson for this report. However, I want to emphasise that street children issue is not a question of Karamoja, but it is a national issue. Therefore, as national leaders, it is important that we address the question of street children.

The committee clearly points out that the desk that handles children issues at police stations is either a desk hidden in a corner, under a tree or a dilapidated uniport somewhere. The committee clearly states that the ministry, especially this department in the Ministry of Internal Affairs, should be funded to handle children issues. 

It goes further to indicate that the vice-chairpersons are in charge of children affairs. In all our constituencies, when you go to LCIs and tell them that they are supposed to handle issues regarding children affairs, the vice-chairpersons are not aware. So, the committee clearly indicates that the Ministry of Local Government should educate our people to know that they handle serious issues regarding children. 

Mr Speaker, the Kobulin Youth Skills Training Centre that is supposed to receive these children is also unfriendly and this also makes the children to eventually run back to the street. We need to do something and the Ministry of Gender should develop a proactive process to make sure this place is properly facilitated. I thank you.

6.24
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One thing that cannot be disputed is that the committee has done a very thorough job and I want to appreciate that effort. I would like to say that most of the time government does development across the country in a similar way as though the rest of the country is on the same footing. 

Otherwise, we are talking about Karamoja, which is actually lagging behind in terms of development. And it is at that point that I would like to say that there is need to emphasise affirmative action in most of these areas that are still lagging behind; Karamoja and the eastern regions, which have been identified to be the poorest regions in the country. 

Specifically, about this matter, if you realise, in the streets now, we do not only have children, mothers, youth, mainly girls and children; you will not see youth who are boys, but perhaps young men. So, they are largely women. Therefore, we are not only speaking about street children, but about women, generally speaking. That is the biggest picture that I see, in terms of those who come from Karamoja.

Therefore, there is need to emphasise this. So, I suggest that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which is in charge of the youth and women affairs, should develop a strategic plan about resettling these people, especially the women and the children.  We talk about –(Member timed out.)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. I am seeing members of the committee standing up. Please if you know your member of the committee, restrain yourself. 

6.26
MR RWEMULIKYA IBANDA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. I also would like to add my voice -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Also if you have already spoken, please have peace. 

MR RWEMULIKYA: I would like to add my voice to thank the committee for that wonderful job done. Indeed, the issue of street children is becoming a very big problem in this country. I think that government should double its efforts; one, because they are pull factors that bring these children to the Kampala streets.

In Karamoja, when you interact with most of them - sometimes I take time to interact with them - they talk about hunger, and that is the fact. They say it is hunger that brings them to Kampala streets. So, I wish Government would prioritise the issue of food security in the Karamoja region. 

Mr Speaker, if you go to Cairo, for instance, you find that people do not even mind about your seasons or rain because they use irrigation. Karamoja has a lot of land. Why doesn’t the Ministry of Agriculture intensify the use of irrigation in that area so that people have food? That would be the easiest solution to this problem. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to think that there are people who bring these street children to Kampala. When these people are gotten out of the streets, don't they get questions like who brings you? Government can track and see who these people who bring these children to Kampala are; it is very easy. 

The issue is when they get this information, how does Government use it to prevent the reoccurrence of these children being brought to the Kampala streets. So, I wish that Government should double check itself because these are children of this country and need to –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us hear from the honourable member in the yellow shirt – but wait, aren’t you a Member of the committee? Yes, you are and so, no please sit down. Let us hear from the hon. Nancy Acora.

6.29
MS NANCY ACORA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that regarding the issues of the street children in Uganda, we have been hearing in the corridors that there are some people who keep bringing them to the streets especially from Karamoja to make money for them. 

How I wish the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development takes actions on those people. I am saying this because when you try to dig out facts about that, you might realise that these people are known. They are the big wigs in this country. Why can't the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development take some serious action against them? Why do they bring children to suffer on the streets? There are others who are even having children yet they are also children. 

Therefore, it is my humble appeal to the minister to take serious actions on this. The fact that these children are always taken back to Karamoja, but find themselves back on the streets of Kampala is quite alarming and it sends a bad image of the country. 

Government of Uganda has not failed to do what they are supposed to do. Even the leaders in Karamoja - I remember a few months ago, my sister, hon. Faith Nakut raised a motion on how to take these children back to their families. However, these these things have been done repeatedly, these people bring those children back here. They have to be traced and punished so that they know that this is almost like child trafficking. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

6.31
MR BUMALI MPINDI (Independent, PWD Representative): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. This is not the first time that this Parliament is debating a matter relating to street children. Like the colleagues have said here, there are people who bring these children on the streets just to get money from travellers. 


Mr Speaker, what the report is lacking is the recommendation to deal with those people who bring those children on the streets and the penalties to those who give them money. 

I am saying this because when these children are on the streets, they will stop a person like me and I give them money; they will stop someone else and that person will give them money. As a result they collect a lot of money and at the end of the day they look at that as a big business. And that is the reason those who are bringing them on streets enjoy bringing them; it is because they are enjoying the benefits of them being on the streets.

We should come out with a resolution, as Parliament, to spell a punishment to those who give them money. If a street child comes to your window or to you while walking on the street and you give them money, what penalty should you be subjected to? This is because when people stop giving them money, they will fail to get money and eventually they will end up not coming back on the streets. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the chairperson and members of the committee for coming up with a report - (Member timed out.)
 
6.33
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you and I thank the committee for that report presented. Whenever I pass those street children, I am in a contemplative mood. I reflect on what it used to take to raise children. My opinion is that this is a result of a breakdown of the traditional society of Uganda and family settings, where the family and society or community were the supportive system; it is a breakdown in the supportive system to protect the vulnerable. 

Government has structures and it has done research, I suppose, but action is lacking. I would therefore, implore the Minister of Gender to strengthen the probation office. Give them human resource, give them money. 

I am also requesting that you review your partnerships with the church and other civil society. In the past, the church has been a major partner in providing social services and development. Why have you left the church behind? Can you please re-engage it in the first instance in helping with the street children problem? Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. I want to welcome our sister, Hon. Rose Obigah. The other day you may remember when we were talking about her. We were praying for you so we are happy you have come back peacefully.

6.35
Ms Christine nakwang (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today, I do not want to speak as a Karamajong, but as a sympathiser although I come from Karamoja. This issue has been there for some time and I have been in this House in since 2001. We have changed ministers in this ministry, I have also been winning elections and losing and still coming back, but this problem is still here and never ended. 

I was a Member in that committee at some point and we presented a report like this. I want to start by thanking the members of this committee. This report is extremely good. My prayer is that instead of only drumming our hands here, can Government take action - for the first time - on this matter?

On behalf of the Karamoja MPs - I am their Vice-Chairperson - I would like to pledge our total commitment to doing anything it takes for all of us to participate in ensuring that these children go back. 

However, key to remember is that it is important to empower our ministry because the Minister of Karamoja Affairs is permanently in Karamoja and will always supervise whatever is happening.

Secondly, we need to improve on communication, coordination and teamwork. Can I remove this mask? It is distracting me.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, you are about to conclude.

Ms nakwang: We need to improve on communication, coordination and teamwork. We should not leave this to the Ministry of Gender alone. 

Thirdly, sustainability of programmes that the ministry has been carrying on in Karamoja. We need to know how far all these are being managed. 

Fourthly, diversion of the budgets. If there is any budget, which is meant for this programme of returning the children to Karamoja, let nobody quietly divert anything. Thank you. 

6.37
Ms joyce acan (NRM, PWD): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to build on the point my colleague has raised that much as the committee has looked at the interventions of dealing with the traffickers, there was an oversight on dealing with the people who give out hand-outs to these children. The committee does not say anything about it. 

I would propose that sensitisation be put across to make the public aware that giving out hand-outs to these children is what is encouraging them to come back to the streets. Moreover whatever they get, they divide with the traffickers. If people stop giving them hand-outs, that means the traffickers also lose out. As such, they will be discouraged from coming back to the streets. 

What about the people who give them shelter? I have been made aware that down there in Kisenyi, there are people who are giving these children shelter. The children are put in one place; in a group. They are told to reach a target of a certain amount of money that they are supposed to return with at night. The LCIs can trace those people who are helping these children and giving them shelter to give them a penalty. Thank you.

6.39
CAPT (RTD) dononzio kahonda (NRM, Ruhinda South County, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report, but there are two salient issues. First is the issue of security. I was a member of the General Court Martial for three terms. I want to inform the House that most of these people, especially when they grow up, end up committing those serious crimes and end up in prisons. Therefore, if we do not address the issue of these streets children, the security of this country is at stake. 

Second is the issue of these young ladies who get pregnant at eight or 10 years and the country is keeping quiet. We need to come up with a strong remedy. We have a Minister of Internal Affairs, a Minister of Security, Minister of Gender and Minister of Health. You have an inter-ministerial committee on these issues. Why don't you handle this matter expeditiously and with serious concern?

The third one is the issue of budget. When the Ministry of Gender is presenting a budget, issues of gender-based violence aregiven less attention. I implore this House that those issues should be addressed if we are to address the issue of Karamoja, which requires a multi-sectoral approach it. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Colleagues, if you know you have spoken, I will not pick you.

6.41
Ms faith nakut (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I request for an extra minute since I moved to the motion. There are recommendations that are missing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, two minutes please.

MS NAKUT: There are recommendations that I wish to raise in addition to thanking the committee for an excellent job.

To establish a database, the Ministry of Gender can work with existing LCIs to do a quick register of all children so they can know who is missing.

For the trafficked children of school-going age, the Ministry of Education should gazette a school so that they can be repatriated to a school rather than being dumped in Koblin.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should come up with guidelines for rescue and resettlement. What the development partners are doing now is not guided by anything. That is why you see the children coming back. They need guidelines on how the children can be removed and taken back. 

KCCA signed an MoU with Napak District recently. My recommendation is that let KCCA honour that MoU so that the children who are here in Kampala now can be resettled home peacefully.

The economically vulnerable families whose children are on the streets should be targeted for the upcoming Government programmes.

The traffickers - even institutional traffickers - should be targeted not only the individuals so that they – (Member timed out.)

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. I will break my own rules which I often use because Hon. Obigah has just come; she has been an activist in that area. Despite being in hospital, she came out because of this matter.

6.43
Ms rose obigah (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Office of the Speaker for personally checking on me and to you, my dear friends from NRM to the Opposition. Everyone was concerned and reached out to me. I am forever indebted to you.

I served at a district level as Secretary for Gender and Local Government, Arua. First of all, I want to thank the Committee on Gender where you first designated me then withdrew me to go to Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

Mr Speaker, we felt pain on behalf of the psycho doctors at subcounty and district level. I propose that these people are empowered with motorcycles. They should be given money. These are the people that can reach out to these children, counsel them and counsel parents to honour, respect and value their children. Otherwise, I join the rest in thanking the committee for this report. Thank you for giving me this chance. 

6.44
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (Independent, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know when this report was concluded, but colleagues, remember last week, there was an operation on the streets. They took all the children to buses that were going to Napak. Go outside and see; the children are already back. They are on the streets. That means that there must be an error in the equation. 

Hon. Kahonda has concluded it - the Ministries of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Internal Affairs need to trace the graduates of these street children. When they graduate from the street, where do they go?

Under matters of national importance, the honourable reported that she was attacked in today’s morning jam. Who are the suspects? It should be these street children. I think it is as if we are giving a painkiller, but there is a very big problem. 

Finally, to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, we have seen adverts of lost children running on TVs and newspapers. However, I have never seen you advertising that there are some kids on the street whose parents are not known. Something should be done. Otherwise, we are sitting on a time bomb. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.46
MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for this opportunity to contribute to the debate on the Floor. Before I make my submission, let me first of all thank the committee for the comprehensive report they have shared with us.

Through an economic lens, I see the root cause of the plight of the street children has been child poverty in the sense that the children lack basic needs; food, shelter, and clothing. 

I am glad the National Development Plan III provides, under Programme 15, for regional development. The goal of that programme is to accelerate equitable, regional, economic growth and economic development. For Karamoja in particular, the programme envisages that over the period 2019 to 2024/2025, poverty will be knocked down from 60.8 per cent to about 42.1 per cent. That is the way to go.

The report provides us with piecemeal interventions, but if only we could have a regional programme for Karamoja - and not only Karamoja – but all the other subregions as envisaged in NDP III, our problem of Karamoja street children will be history. Thank you. 

6.48
DR ABRAHAM ISAMAT (NRM, Kapir County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My submission is going to appear like a controversial one. I come from Teso, neighbouring Karamoja. The main issue in Karamoja is insecurity. As we know, security is a multidimensional concept. In Karamoja, when we talk of territorial security, food security, financial security and employment security, there is no guarantee. In a situation like that one, vulnerability is at the peak. We know in the process of looming disaster - when vulnerability meets with a hazard, expect disaster.

Under normal circumstances, no normal human being – be it an adult or a child - can accept to stay in a dangerous environment. Therefore, the adults and children are all vulnerable. The only thing is that the people have to escape here in order to survive. It is a coping mechanism. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, did you set two minutes? I really doubt it. After this, I am going to first pick Karamoja Members of Parliament. 

6.50
MR SOLOMON ALINGA (NRM, T’oo County, Bukwo): Mr Speaker, I was trying to see how far Napak is from here. Napak is almost 500 kilometres from Kampala. That means that these street children do not walk on foot; they are transported. 

Therefore, we should also urge our security agencies to be on standby on the roads so that when they see children being transported, those transporting them are charged with trafficking children. Once we crucify one or two of them, definitely, the others will fear – [Honourable member: “They attack”] If they attack, we shall crucify even one of the security agencies. I mean the law does not discriminate against our people. Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity.

6.51
MR JOHN BOSCO NGOYA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join the rest in thanking Hon. Flavia and team who – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is honourable. 

MR NGOYA: Thank you, for the correction. Allow me to thank Hon. Flavia and the committee that interacted with us; both at Parliament and Napak. I see that the issues, particularly when they were in Napak with the LC1s of Napak, have been captured within this report.  

I would also like to thank the people that are dealing with these street children - Amos Locebo is up here together with John Lokuta. Those are daring in terms of the conditions of talking to these particular kids while they are here. 

I did second the motion the last time. Our wish then was that Government strengthens collaboration with the local authorities in the Karamoja region and the urban centres to ensure that there are coordinated efforts in rescuing children, following proper procedures. 

The street children, we are talking about, and those in transit, are trafficked by criminal gangs. I am glad that Members have continuously talked about these criminal gangs that are being left to do their own work. There should be a clear strategy that focuses on supporting child victims of trafficking so that they do not end up in this vicious cycle. 

On 29 July 2022, 259 children were rounded up and taken to Kobulin by KCCA, oblivious of the anger and the insecurity. Just imagine you are taking children back to a very bad situation. We only had to rely on NGOs for support to be able to take care of them. Government said that it was going to take food through the Office of the Prime Minister, but it did not do so. 

As we talk –(Member timed out.) 

6.53
MR FRANCIS ADOME (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all thank the committee for raising pertinent issues in regard to the street kids. It is true that we have been raising some of these challenges that have led to the influx of the kids on the streets of Kampala.

Mr Speaker, it is very clear that most of these kids end up here because of the inadequate social services within Karamoja region. 

We have a ministry that is tasked with a mandate to initiate, design and implement affirmative action within the region. However, it is very unfortunate that our ministry is just a coordination ministry; they do not even have a budget. 

Therefore, how do we expect them to create programmes that will support our community, especially the youth? If you travel to Karamoja, all Government-owned schools that were, especially built in the ‘60s, are still operating with the same facilities. These children do not even have the capacity to keep in schools because there are no facilities; there are no laboratories and dormitories. So, they end up on the streets. 

These children are on the streets not necessarily because of insecurity, but because they are looking for better opportunities, especially to survive in terms of better life. So, they try to look for chances. However, it is unfortunate that we have been reluctant on this matter. 

It is my prayer that Government will put a lot of emphasis on this, especially on supporting our people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.55
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my sister, the chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and her team, for a very good report. Maybe in future, my chairperson should not think every dark person is from Karamoja -(Interjection)– yes. 

Mr Speaker, the problem of street children has been a long-standing problem. I want Government to take this very seriously, because supposing these children were rebels, you would see how we would be jumping all over the place, getting directives – it is really a challenge. 

We need to focus on a particular area where these children are coming from. I also know that when, for example, you have a jigger in the toe, you do not look for it all over the body. We know that most of these children are from Napak; why don't we take a deliberate effort and put money – Shs 135 billion? Instead of buying food, why don't we rescue our children off the streets? 

Mr Speaker, it is really a big shame. We are now going for the Parish Development Model and it is targeting 39 per cent of the people who are in subsistence economy. I know the majority are from Karamoja. Why don't we take a deliberate effort and put more money for services in Karamoja so that, for once, we get rid of these challenges that we continue to face? 

Otherwise, I want to thank the committee for the very good report. Colleagues -(Member timed out.)

6.57
MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson and the committee for this report. Mine is a recommendation, in addition to what she said. 

I request the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAIF) to give Karamoja priority in the beautiful projects the minister talked about under MAIF, for example, water bowsers. This is because I have been to Karamoja and I know that place is so dry. To introduce agriculture, you have to do a lot. 

So on this, I want to emphasise programmes for food production in that area because that, probably, will reduce because they probably come this way to look for food. When you see them standing there, they still want food; when I give them money or water, the end result is that they need food. 

Therefore, I request the minister to help –(Interjection)– I take your information, Hon. Flavia.

MS FLAVIA KALULE: Thank you, honourable for giving way. The information I want to share with the august House is that as long as we continue addressing the on-top conditions without addressing the underlying conditions of hunger and insecurity, Karamoja street children problem will always be there. 

I am well aware because I worked in the Karamoja region for close to five years under FOWODE. There are markets for children in Karamoja – in Napak: Lokopo, Lopei and Lorengcora. That side has markets for children; that is human trafficking. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

6.59
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Allow me to also add my voice to appreciate the leadership of the committee and the entire team for the report.

Mr Speaker, as leaders and as a country, it is a very big shame for us who have continued to see these young Ugandans on the streets of Kampala. 

It should be our responsibility, as a country, to understand that the children that call “Karamojong street children” have a right to belong, associate, shelter, education and health care. What kind of morals are we expecting to see in the street children? 

Government has institutions and structures in this country; why can't we take a step to make sure that we do the needful to ensure that these children get the best? They are the generation you are going to see tomorrow, but what are we doing as a country to ensure that they get the best like the rest of the children do?

I, therefore, implore Government and all the concerned institutions to make sure that they take affirmative action to address this issue as soon as possible. Thank you very much. 

7.01
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson for the report. The issues of Karamoja, especially with regard to street children, have been on this Floor of Parliament for long. We know that these children, much as they are vulnerable, come from families. We have talked about the traffickers and where they end, but what about those parents? (Applause)

Have we taken part of our time to investigate the role of parents, particularly in terms of giving away their children? 

I understand schools have been built, but they are empty. Don’t we have ordinances at the local level to ensure that we deal with those parents who release their children to come to the streets? 

The traffickers do not just go and grab; I understand the parents are also engaged in selling them. 

Therefore, I want to urge leaders from Karamoja, that instead of coming here, let us engage the Ministry of Labour, Gender and Social Development and the local governments to come up with ordinances and laws that are going to hold parents accountable for their children. 

Mr Speaker, we are talking of affirmative action. This is going to make us vulnerable. Let me give you an example. Recently, OPM supplied goats to Karamoja. I have people there who are saying that the goats they gave them are being sold at Shs 20,000. 

Imagine Government is investing in giving them more goats, but they are selling them. The bicycles for LCs I are being sold at Shs 150,000. I have information from there. 

Mr Speaker, the report talks of Minister of Internal Affairs to deploy police. Members –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you know you added yourself time. Colleagues, we have another item where those of you who have not spoken are going to speak.

7.03
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was a regular visitor to some districts in Karamoja when I was the Minister of State for Health. I went up to the manyatas. Specifically, I will speak about Napak. 

Mr Speaker, the challenge of the street children will not be addressed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development alone. It requires various sectors, but specifically when I was in Napak, with the then Woman Member Parliament, the people in the manyattas told us: “You are having good life in Kampala. When our children get there, they send us some money. You, who wants to stop us, are you going to give us the money?” 

This shows you that there is some financial benefit that these parents are getting from these children. And that must be stopped because I look at that as violence against children; using children to get money using whatever means. 

Mr Speaker, HIV/AIDS was below one per cent in Karamoja Subregion. Prostitution was unknown to the children of Karamoja. Today, you find Karamojong girls who are prostitutes, which was not there before. So, what is the way forward? 

First, there is vast land in Karamoja. Unless Government deliberately extends the irrigation scheme to Karamoja so that these people can engage in agriculture, we shall continue seeing street children moving to all these cities that we have created, not only in Kampala.

Secondly, I want to request Government; if you put up a boarding school and there is food for these children, these children will be in those schools –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude, UWOPA. But we want a report on the work you are doing on such matters, not only submitting on the Floor.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. We have a very important meeting that we are going for, to borrow from the other countries. I think I talked to you this morning about it. 

The issue of boarding schools and having food in the schools will take these children to those schools. When I was in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, we again went to Karamoja and talked to the people of Karamoja to encourage their children to be in school. This is what they told us: “If we take these children to school, first of all, there is no food. Secondly, who is going to look after our cattle?” 

So, the people of Karamoja rely more on cattle, majorly as a source of income. I want to appeal to the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Government as a whole that we need to have the irrigation scheme and Government needs to be committed to the plight of the children in this country. We have the national policy for children, but not much is being done. The funding in dealing with the issues of the children is not adequate. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.06
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Karamoja issues and the street children, and the starvation, is a scar on the conscience of humanity. 

My Kenyan friend at one time asked me when the First Lady had just been appointed Minister in charge of Karamoja Affairs after the earlier appointment had been turned down by Hon. Butime and I supported it. I said, “Yeah, this time round, this appointment and this person will nip the bad situation in the bud.” Because I expected the First Lady to use her clout as First Lady to turn around Karamoja. It did not happen. The root cause of all these is that the biting poverty has never improved even when she left because they are now even wallowing in the worst ever poverty.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, well, you might not be satisfied with what the First Lady did. But she did her best. If there is anyone who brought the plight of Karamoja to the international community and pushed for – It was under the First Lady’s time that even the Office of Minister for Karamoja was upgraded. So, that should be enough. She did have best.

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, I have been misconstrued. I was not lambasting her for failing. Maybe, let me join colleagues to also appreciate her and recognise –(Laughter) 

However, on a serious note, most of the children on the streets, I am reliably informed, they mysteriously disappear. And we should take interest in that because they could be victims of radicalisation. Maybe those recruits in ADF are from Kampala streets. In an age, where we are grappling with the challenges of terrorism and people are recruiting, streets of Kampala could be a target and a source for recruitment into these radical forces. 

I would like to give more information about parents participating. I do not remember when, but I remember the number of children that were intercepted in a bus: they were 113 and even six parents were amongst them. They were arrested, but eventually, they were let loose. 

Incidentally, Members of Parliament from Karamoja will tell you that there are road blocks all over. As buses move and by the time they get to Mbale, Iganga and Kampala, the road blocks that have security agencies, they extort money from those people that traffic these children. 

But I remember very well when the minister of state – in 2018/2019 even that budget – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of state for which ministry?

MR NAMBESHE: Minister of State for Labour, Gender and Social Development, but in charge of youth and children, Hon. Florence Nakiwala Kiyingi. She aggressively mobilised and we actually allocated to her ministry Shs 5.8 billion that time. (Interjection) Yes, and it was particularly targeting removing children from the streets and rehabilitating them. There was a proposal to construct specialised infrastructural development facilities in two places, Kobulin and Masulita.

There was also a component of counselling and even psychosocial support. And this allocation should have continued since then. Has this Karamoja issue become a cash cow? 

Mr Speaker, are you aware that even KCCA has made attempts - Shs 3 billion was released after they actually enacted an ordinance on child protection in 2019. But even with all these monies being released into liberating the children, men and women in Karamoja, Karamoja continues to get worse; something must be going amiss. 

We could be treating only symptoms. I concur with my sister, the chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs; because of the poverty, parents collude with traffickers. And parents so to speak, are the –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Acting LOP, conclude.

MR NAMBESHE: I will conclude, Mr Speaker, by also going back to what Kampala has noticed, using CCTV cameras. They have information about the spots, where all these children operate and stay. Even the traffickers who get money from them in the evening; I mean those people who keep them in those shelters. 

So, it is possible to trace and get these traffickers and even those people that are actually colluding to traffic these children and keep them here in Katwe and other places. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, acting LOP. Colleagues, acting LOP has really raised very important issues, and so have all of you.  

I do not know; what is the problem, honourable minister? 

7.13
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We take note of the findings of the committee, recommendations and the submissions from Members. 

Mr Speaker, we are on the same page on this matter; both Government and Members of Parliament. We are all together. Government is interested in addressing this problem. The issue of traffickers and perpetrators; the issue of parental connivance and manipulation by traffickers - these are people in our communities. The parents are in our communities in Karamoja. 

Surely, we should agree that if we do not work together, Government cannot fly from here to look for a parent in the village who is conniving to bring their children to the street. We must work together if we are to solve this problem. 

And I want my colleagues from Karamoja to agree that they should come to our office and we put our heads together to address the root cause of this problem because the root cause is back home. 

We are ready to work together on the socio-economic drivers of this problem, and you have articulated them. The Minister of State for Youth and Children Affairs will give the detailed plan that the ministry has. Issues of security, law and order and their implications to the problem are being addressed.

I assure you that we shall engage and seek a comprehensive solution through an Inter-ministerial Committee of Gender, Internal Affairs, Karamoja Affairs, Security, Local Government and Ministry for Kampala, to focus on traffickers and those who connive to bring the children on the streets.

I thank you and request that the Minister of State for Youth and Children Affairs gives some key highlights. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, but we do not have much time and so, kindly take note; maximum, five minutes. 

7.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Sarah Nyirabashitsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee members for the elaborate report, and of course, not forgetting the mover of the motion, hon. Nakut. 

Mr Speaker, as a ministry, we have a comprehensive strategic plan on how to trace, rehabilitate and resettle these street children. I love the way each time the issues of street children has come up, everybody has come out in arms. 

 We would do much if the funds were available because this strategic plan is there and I love what my colleague, the LoP has said. My predecessor had tabled a very good plan, but out of the Shs 5 billion she requested for, only one billion shillings was released. And since that time, we have not received any other funds.
 
This financial year, in our budget we have Shs 140 million for the whole financial year. This Quarter, they have released only Shs 10 million. As I speak now – and I like the way you have said it - there are children who were collected and taken to Kobulin; we have 216 children that we are being fed and rehabilitated within that Shs 10 million. Remember that this Kobulin Youth Institute was meant to train the youth. So, we are over-constrained and of course, the youth have nowhere to train from.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the street children - yes, you are talking about the traffickers - but I would like to thank the police in Karamoja because they have tried. The last time I was there, two months ago, they had arrested 20 traffickers, and they had been paraded them in court. That shows they are working. 

The whole problem however, goes back to the parents. If we do not address the issue of parents – the report said that we are supposed to disseminate the parenting guidelines, which we have done in Napak and Amudat, but I think the whole issue is around mindset. 

They know that if they come to Kampala, there is some little money they are going to get and at home things will improve. So, the best way, much as we are thinking of putting there a lot of money; talking about the problems they have, but that may not work before we deal with the issue of mindset.

Mr Speaker, as I speak now, we do not have only children. You have seen even the women are on the streets. What is funny is that the men are sending the women to collect the money. Every month, the woman has to send home some money. So, you can see that the whole problem is around mindset; we need to address that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as Government, you know the problem. In fact, we have also contributed to the knowledge you had, but it seems Government does not want to address this concern because how do you give Shs 10 million to address such a concern? Ten million in a whole Quarter? We did our work as Parliament of appropriating.
 
MS NYIRABASHITSI: Mr Speaker, yes the economy is not doing well, but even in appropriation that is what you gave us. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shs 10 million?

MS NYIRABASHITSI: You appropriated Shs 120 million for the whole financial year yet I remember we had requested for Shs 5 billion for us to able to do something; to construct Kobulin, because they are in temporary shelters as of now. There is no fence. That is why, at times, we take them there and if they get an opportunity, they escape. 

Mr Speaker, the whole thing is that if we address the issue of finance, of mindset, and of course the issue of the traffickers, I think with our comprehensive strategic plan in place, we will be able to address all the issues that have been raised, working together with the relevant ministries. Thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister for Karamoja Affairs, you want to add something without necessarily repeating what she has said?

7.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (KARAMOJA AFFAIRS) (Ms Agnes Nandutu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank the chairperson of the committee and the members, for coming up with these recommendations.

What I want to say is that the issue of mindset, though she has talked about it, is very important in Karamoja. In the Office of the Prime Minister, under the leadership of Rt hon. Robinah Nabbanja, we are coming up with a strategic plan for food production in Karamaja, working together with sector ministries of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Water and Environment. We want to ensure that Karamoja becomes the food basket for this country because the land is fertile. 

The only thing is to encourage the people of Karamoja not only to focus on the cows, but to also think about agriculture for food security. So, I want to implore Members of Parliament from Karamoja to join hands and preach the gospel on agriculture in Karamoja. The mindset change in Karamoja has to be emphasized. 

Like hon. Nyakikongoro said, we recently supplied goats in Karamoja, but the people would cut the ear tags off. However, you would find a goat in the market with no ears tags because they have been cut off in order to sell the goat. (Laughter) It is so embarrassing and if we do not emphasize mindset change, whatever we shall take to Karamoja shall be put to waste. 

I want to ask Members of Parliament to support the programs that are taken to Karamoja for us to transform the region, Mr Speaker. Otherwise, as Ministry for Karamoja Affairs, we are very committed to working together with the leaders, with the budget given to us from Government, to ensure that we turn around Karamoja. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you need to get time in Cabinet to discuss the issue of street children in Karamoja. When we keep discussing security and hunger - You need one day to push so that you have enough time for the issue of street children in Cabinet so that you go deep and beyond. This is so that they appreciate why you need this money. Colleagues, we have discussed this for long, allow me to put a question.

I now put a question that the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to respond to the plight of Karimojong children enslaved in street begging and child labour be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I also put a question to the motion - because this is a report - for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to respond to the plight of Karimojong children enslaved in street begging and child labour.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker, on the issue of the report, one of the issues raised by the committee relates to ordinances in these districts. There was an issue that only one district has an ordinance to do with children. I want to observe - now that my brother, Hon. Nobert Mao, is in that ministry - that one of the challenges is that these districts are making ordinances. They are submitted to the Office of the Solicitor-General because these ordinances must be approved before they are implemented. Unfortunately, they take years in the Office of the Solicitor-General. 

One of the issues that must be addressed is the Ministry of Justice to fasten the process of clearing these ordinances so that they are taken back and implemented. The habit of keeping them on their tables is something that is also affecting the implementation and also the effectiveness of these ordinances on ground. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, treat Hon. Mao very well; he is a mugole. (Laughter)

7.26
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Norbert Mao): Mr Speaker, I was last heard in this House in 2006. Forgive me if I am unaccustomed to the etiquette and decorum of this august House.

In response to the important question raised by Hon. Asuman Basalirwa, I want to inform the House that I have held meetings with all the key people in the ministry. Yesterday, I chaired my first top management committee meeting which was attended by the Attorney-General, the Permanent Secretary and all the directors. 

The way forward in this matter is for us to ask those districts that have sent drafts, proposals or principles requiring legislation to the ministry and the ministry has not acted – Please, I request that in addition to me promising to inquire as to the backlog in the ministry, please ask them to alert me; to write to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs so that we can act. We are working very well with the Attorney-General to ensure speedy responses to these kinds of issues. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. minister. I would suggest that you link up with your colleague from the local government so that he can write to all CAOs who have such pending proposals to link up with your office. Thank you.

Colleagues, there is an item which was supposed to be dealt with this week. You are going into a traffic jam so we better sit here and handle Government business. Unfortunately, you do not have lead cars so instead of being stuck in the jam, let us be stuck here and we handle this item.

I had promised a debate on the report of the Human Rights Committee so I want to give Members time so that we can have a debate. The debate resumes now.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My procedural matter is that our interest is to solve the matter in Karamoja. The first Minister of Karamoja was the first lady and she is a mother. This is an issue that is touching children and so on. It doesn’t do any harm – because in the world where we are, you press a button that will help you - to have the ministers and the MPs from Karamoja region to convene a meeting with the first lady and the way forward discuss thoroughly. This is so that by the time we go into these formal things, they have got assistance from the first lady who is a mother and who was the first minister and maybe gotten a solution to this. This is so that next time instead of lamenting, there is a way forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Honourable. This is noting for the ministers; it is advice to the ministers. The Chairperson, Human Rights Committee is here so colleagues, I open the debate now. Those who are ready to submit -

7.31
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members of Parliament must be alert all the time.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report on human rights violations in the country for the period indicated is very timely. I just want to make two observations.

One, this country is not short -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sorry, we can have some spacing. The front Hon. Fox Odoi, you are separating people who have come from one camp. So - 

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Regarding the issue of human rights violations in this country for this period and also generally, I want to make two comments. One, this country is not short of an elaborate legal regime regarding violations of human rights and the punishment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, Members are submitting. Now you are -

MR BASALIRWA: The challenge we have relates to what we call impunity. I will speak a little bit authoritatively on this matter because I have been on all sides of this issue; I have been a victim of human rights violations, I have been a political prisoner, I have also represented Ugandans who have been victims of human rights violations. The challenge that we need to address, as a country, are the different agencies and individuals who, with the presence of an -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the President of a party; I will give you an extra -

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you. Agencies and individuals, in the presence of an abundant legal regime, continue to violate human rights. What are we going to do, Mr Speaker? 

You have the Human Rights (Enforcement) Act. This Parliament did enact a Human Rights (Enforcement) Act. We have so many laws, but the issue of human rights violations continues; arrests, detention without trial. You have people being picked in the wee hours of the night; not even LCIs are being informed. I want us, as a country, to focus on why there is continuous violation of human rights and yet, we have an elaborate legal regime. Where is the problem and how do we deal with it?  

Incidentally, Mr Speaker, going through the report of my learned brother, Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo, the issue of impunity does not come out clearly –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is a report of the committee.

MR BASALIRWA: …headed by my –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a report of the committee. 

MR BASALIRWA: The report of the committee, headed by my senior learned brother, Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo - I know he will not take offence - does not bring out the issue of impunity and for me, as a country, that is where our focus should be; the impunity by the different individuals.

You go to a police station, cite a provision of the law, but the police officer is not bothered. You go to the military to access a detainee, they will tell you “orders from above do not allow you to access this facility.” How are we going to move as a country? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

7.33
MR ROBERT SSEKITOLEEKO (NUP, Bamunanika County, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report on human rights had a recommendation to punish an individual who has committed an act or violation of human rights. However, in Uganda, when you observe, we just talk about something. I just need to be updated on that very person; whether there is a precedent of that kind, where we have somebody who has been taken to court over the same or over that.

Secondly, we have a challenge of Ugandan youths who are supposed to be in the working age bracket, who are in jail over reasons you cannot give. This is the time, I think, a combination of Government entities, in addition to this House, comes up with efforts and forges a way forward, instead of lamenting over this. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

7.36
MS SHARIFA AATE-SHABAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to emphasise and ask the committee to add on something because they said the law enforcers should always wear their name tags and identify themselves. The committee missed to write in the report that they should also carry with them an appropriate arrest warrant or search warrant. 

Mr Speaker, I discovered that most of these security personnel that move, violate human rights of especially foreigners. They come to these Congolese and other foreigners’ houses and search them in and out, even without any search warrant. I wonder what kind of security we have in this country. 

I have witnessed this myself, Mr Speaker - I was in a restaurant when a security personnel entered and even made me sit down and face the sun. So, I really wonder what they were doing there at that time. They had no search warrant; they had no right whatsoever to even make me - I had to go and get my ID so that they could let me go. So, I do not know whether these guys patrolling themselves as security personnel have forgotten our fundamental rights as human beings. 

As Ugandans, sincerely, Mr Speaker, I suggest the committee adds that in their report. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, give two minutes.

7.37
MR ACROBERT KIIZA (Independent, Bughendera County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. First of all, I appreciate the committee and the chairperson for this wonderful report. Much as it has taken time, we still have the contents of the report in our heads. 

Mr Speaker, Article 28 of the Constitution is very clear. If I can recall, there are key words quoted in the Constitution in this very article – “fair and speedy public hearing”.

Since November 2016, our King, the Omusinga wa Rwenzururu and his subjects are still incarcerated in prisons and yet the law is very clear that bail is allowed. These people who are in jail have children. They have women, who are wives, who need support, but they are being denied all these rights. 

Mr Speaker, the recommendation of the committee is that the victims of violation of human rights be compensated. I add my voice to request this august House to approve that compensation for these people be granted so that the children of these –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

7.40
MR SIRAJI EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Committee on Human Rights for the elaborate report they have presented to this Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda has got all the laws that can make people of Uganda enjoy all their rights. It is just a matter of implementation. You find that a person who is supposed to implement a law, abandons it or goes against the law because of selfish interest and wanting to get something out of the it in order to benefit his or her interest. 

In that regard, I want to suggest that if any person, who is in a position of authority and is supposed to implement a law goes against it, that person should be brought to book so that a lesson is learned. If that is not done, then those who are supposed to implement the law will go against it. That is my submission. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. 

7.41
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to address myself to two issues. First of all, I want to thank the committee for the report that they have given to the House to adopt.

Mr Speaker, I read the report, but the issue about land grabbing, which violates people’s rights to own land is not being spoken about loudly in the report. I think we should consider this. Many times, Members have raised issues about land grabbers and the people who do that, are those who are well placed with finance, authority and all those sorts of things. Yet, the people suffering a lot in the hands of land grabbers are our own people, whose rights are not being honoured. 

Nobody has taken time to record and find out data on how many people have been suffering in the hands of land grabbers. I think the committee should also go deeper into that matter, regarding land grabbing. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we are here as Members of Parliament and have our Rules of Procedure, but it does not sound good if Members of Parliament are being handled in a way that portrays that the person’s right is not being protected and, above all, Parliament not taking very serious note to follow it up.

Rule 224 of the Rules or Procedure states how a Member of Parliament can be handled. In a situation where somebody is either moving for the duty of oversight or whatever and then –(Inaudible)- pick you, yet the person in a way –(Inaudible)- your duty -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The problem is that you are giving yourself time instead of asking for more from me. Therefore, the microphone will keep switching off. Conclude. 

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The point I am talking about is about being a Member of Parliament. When you leave this Parliament, you will remain a senior person. Wherever you go, you cannot change; you will remain a senior person in this country, to the extent that even the privilege that we get when we are Members of Parliament should be extended, especially if somebody – maybe in a way somebody can get you on allegations of that kind, which is not even proven, then in a way somebody picks you and dumps you and in the end, you stay there, yet a case may not even be registered properly against you and trial will not go in a fast way. 

Mr Speaker, I feel these are human rights violations that the House should also have to take a keen and strong interest in it. Some few days ago, when we were in this House, one of our Members said that violations occurred during by-elections, which in a way was not sounding well. 

Mr Speaker, human rights violations remain human rights violations. We have to stop impunity. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kagwera. I am giving first priority to colleagues who have not spoken today. Committee members, please, forget. Yes. 

7.45
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, the issue of human rights in this country is a very big one. People have talked about impunity and this engulfs everything we are talking about. Specific actions taken on people who violate human rights are not clear. Someone would be arrested, perhaps over violating the human rights of someone, but later, this person is out of prison without any serious action taken. 

Government should account for every individual – citizen or non-citizen – living in this country. It is becoming a habit that the disappearances which were becoming a bit of the past, are emerging. 

As Parliament, we need to stand firm and say no to this action because today it is me, the following day it is you, Mr Speaker. The moment you don't speak the same language with Government – we must be very clear – you get problems. This is not correct because having divergent views really shows a civilised society. 

Mr Speaker, vehicles that do not have number plates in a civilised society today – someone drives a vehicle and picks someone! No, it is not correct. 

My colleague has talked about impunity over land matters. Actually, this one, I think, should have a day of its own for debate because, indeed, people are suffering. Who are making people suffer? The rich people in high positions, including army officers. I remember when we were here in the Ninth Parliament, people came and gave the list on this Floor Parliament – you can visit the Hansard and see – but no action is taken.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable.

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of human rights must be addressed in this country because; what else are we doing? We can talk about roads and factories, but the right to live is the first human right. If we do not uphold this, then, we are finished. We cannot talk about any other thing. Thank you. 

7.48
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, the committee, for the report. Most of the Members are discussing about impunity, but remember there are very many human rights violations; forced labour, discrimination and others. 

First of all, we have to address the causes. Therefore, there must be Government structures, which will address the issues that come along with the violations. We have to address the economic factors which bring the violations. We also have psychological factors. 

We may forget that the most violated human right is the right to food. How many times have we addressed food insecurity? We have just been speaking about food insecurity in Karamoja, but we have food insecurity even in other parts of this country. 

Therefore, I would like to propose that let us first address the causes of these violations and that is when we can end some of these. We also have to follow the Constitution. I think the Constitution guides us very well on some of these human rights violations. Thank you so much. 

7.49
MR PAUL AKAMBA (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a very elaborate report. I would like to submit that the levels at which human rights are violated in this country is really worrying. 

Mr Speaker, it is so alarming to a level that you find suspects who have spent over three weeks incarcerated in police cells. At times, as a lawyer, you are even denied access to these suspects. You wonder: are we in a country with the rule of law? 

People are being arrested by unknown security operatives. It worries, more especially us practising law. We find it so challenging. When a report of this nature is brought to the Floor of Parliament, I would like to urge the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, who is still energetic in the office, to take up this matter seriously. 

I know that whatever is addressed in this report, the honourable minister is well aware - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, conclude.

MR AKAMBA: I would like to urge the honourable minister to take up this issue seriously because Ugandans are suffering. Their rights are being violated with impunity; people who violate these rights are untouchable. Even when the law says, for instance, when it comes to torture, that such culprits can be charged – I think under section 5 of the anti-torture Act. This has not been implemented seriously. 

7.53
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The gross human rights violation in this country, like the Hon. Akamba has already alluded to, has reached the peak. The culture of impunity is equally skyrocketing. All these excesses are being committed or occasioned to the wananchi by the state. 

Mr Speaker, if you are to look at those that own numberless vehicles, they are the powerful - either they are soldiers - if you go to water bodies, those who now own them are armed and in uniform. Majority of the land grabbers are very high ranking people –(Interruption)

Mr oseku: Mr Speaker, with due respect to my friend, the LOP of today, he said that there are people who own the water bodies. However, we have been told over and over again that Government is policing the water in order to improve on the fishing habits and also allow the fish to breed, multiply and grow so that we harvest and earn from them.
Is it, therefore, in order for the LOP to say that there are unknown people who are very powerful and owning the lakes and yet we know that there is a Fisheries Protection Unit operating on the lakes?

The Deputy Speaker: The lakes are owned by the people of Uganda. We know that.

Mr nambeshe: I have taken the free lecture from my friend, but he knows the truth. Mr Speaker, when it comes to bail, for instance, it is enshrined in the Constitution - Article 23, which he has alluded to. It states that if someone is arrested or detained in respect to any criminal offence, that person has an entitlement to apply to the courts of Judicature to be granted bail. However, we have seen people who have been granted bail re-arrested by men and women in civilian clothing.

These are excesses that are being visited upon Ugandans by the State. I am of the view that this Committee on Human Rights should be transformed into an accountability committee, whose leadership should be by the Opposition that is mandated by the Constitution to keep Government excesses in check. (Applause)

The Deputy Speaker: But honourable colleague, if there is anyone who has checked excesses of Government in the 11th Parliament, it is the NRM side. I want to tell you this; the reports we have had have strongly checked Government. Our colleagues have done a tremendous job. On issues of accountability, our colleagues have supported you. 

Now, if it is taken as if they do not support you, you are going to lose support; so trust them. The chairman and colleagues have done a great job. How I weigh that is that when I have such an important accountability report that does not have any minority report, signed by your own Opposition members, it means you have won on many aspects. Your people have cooperated with us to bring out salient issues. (Applause)

Therefore, there are issues which are for the whole House - not issues of the Opposition alone. Issues of human rights are for all of us. Whoever has that obligation should do it diligently without any fear or favour. I know you appreciate them. You are a gentleman. (Laughter)

Mr nambeshe: Mr Speaker, I am always respectful of your views. This one is one of them although I highly doubt whether our colleagues on the other side of the political divide –

The Deputy Speaker: So, would you have done better?

Mr nambeshe: Yes, we would, indeed. We are lacking in the aspect. We are bulldogs here, but lacking the teeth to bite. On many occasions we have missed out in action. 

Therefore, my considered view and request to your office is that let us give due consideration to transforming this committee into an accountability committee so that those of us that are mandated by the law to keep Government in check, shall do it without fear or favour. Thank you. (Applause)

7.58
The minister of justice and constitutional affairs (Mr Nobert Mao): Mr Speaker, I want to acknowledge the great work of the Committee on Human Rights.

One of the first assignments that was handed over to me, was to appear before the Committee on Human Rights to respond to the report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. I responded in detail and gave a seven-point action plan. 

On the 12th of August this year, the Prime Minister wrote to me. I believe she also wrote to the relevant ministries, including the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Uganda Prisons Service and all the other agencies; requiring us to extract recommendations from this important report that are relevant to our ministries so that we can prepare a comprehensive plan. 

Permit me just to give an outline: The approach that we seek to take is what we call, “a whole-of-Government approach.” I do not think we should put a wall between any ministry vis-à-vis another. We should not put a wall between any security organ vis-à-vis another. If there is an indictment, then it is the whole Government. Therefore, together with the Attorney-General, who also appeared before this committee, we are adopting that approach. 

We note all the recommendations. From the summary of the report, particularly the very strong recommendations of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, we did not wait for this report to come here. We immediately went and held a meeting with the Principal Judge, the Attorney-General and talked about a fair trial, which is nothing if it is not a speedy one. 

As you have read in the media and as you may know, there have been additional recruitments in the Judiciary. We expect that there will be no more excuse of backlogs. 
We talked about these endless adjournments that Members have complained about. We have also - particularly myself, I have received visits from various concerned persons. I will note here the mother and wife of our honourable colleague, Hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya, the mother and father of hon. Allan Ssewanyana. I have also received reports from other groups complaining about the delayed trials. All these issues were raised in the Uganda Human Rights Commission Report. 

The other aspects of the report concern the conduct of KCCA, the Uganda Wildlife Authority, and of course, the unfortunate incident of November 2016, which, in the report, is referred to as “the Kasese Massacre.” 

We have read, with interest, the perspectives of civil society organisations. Mr Speaker, let me note that we are trying to improve relations between civil society organisations, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and also the rest of Government. 

We have noted the positions presented by political parties. We have also noted reports on violations by those who are not necessarily at the national level, but at the local level, namely RDCS, DISOs and so on. 

However, running all through this report, Mr Speaker, is the question of torture. Article 24 of the Constitution expressly prohibits torture and it states thus:

“No person shall be subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment.” 
We are concerned about illegally, detained, brutalised and tortured suspects being brought to courts of law. 

It is not a good spectacle when somebody is brought for trial while limping, with obvious injuries and in great pain. Therefore, it is right and befitting to condemn the abuse of judicial processes that emanate from the abuse of suspects’ constitutional rights. 

The Uganda Law Society has been emphatic in denouncing the abuse of human rights, particularly of those facing criminal prosecutions. The lawyers have sufficient judicial authorities to guide them. They know these authorities. The courts know that as they exercise their discretion to halt the prosecutions that have been tainted with evident cases of torture in human and other forms of degrading treatment, they can rely on a number of established court cases, not only in the High Court, but also in higher courts. For instance, in the case of Uganda v. Robert Sekabira, Justice Ralph Ochan said: 

“We cannot stand by and watch prosecutions mounted and conducted in the midst of such flagrant, egregious and mollified violations of the Constitution and must act to protect the constitutional rights of the petitioners, in particular, and the citizens of Uganda in general, as well as the role of rule of law in Uganda by ordering all the tainted proceedings against the petitioners to stop forthwith and directing the respective courts to discharge the petitioners.” 

In a higher court, in the Constitutional Court, in the case of Kizza Besigye v. Attorney-General, the Constitutional Court laid down the law, which should guide all the courts that are dealing with suspects who are brought for trial while limping. The court said: 

“This court cannot sanction any continued prosecution of the petitioners where during the proceedings, the human rights of the petitioners have been violated to the extent described above. No matter how strong the evidence against them may be, no fair trial can be achieved and subsequent trial would be a waste of time and an abuse of the court process.” 

In other words, Mr Speaker, where there is torture, the criminal charges should be dismissed and the accused persons discharged. (Applause) This is the law as laid down by the Judiciary and that is the law in Uganda. Philosophically, as Edmund Burke wrote: “Law and arbitrary power are in eternal enmity.” 

Finally, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Mr Speaker, we belong to the same party – (Laughter) - Before the minister closes -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that an official notice?

MR KIBALYA: Mr Speaker, as the minister concludes, I am seeking clarification on three things. The first is on the witness protection law. 

Two, I would like him to also talk about the torture that is inflicted on journalists. During those occasions, you see journalists suffering and many of them have been causalities of torture. 

Lastly, there is that lawlessness during elections. We witnessed elections in Kenya, but we did not see it. However, in Uganda, it is a disaster. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you can use the remaining two minutes because I do not want this to open up into another session.

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, I stand to be guided by you. The particular issues raised on witness protection are very important because judges need safe witnesses. Some of those may require further directions by the Chief Justice so it is simply a question of bringing rules really –(Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Chairman. I am sorry, I mean “the honourable minister.” “Chairman Mao” keeps lingering in our heads. 

Honourable minister, the information I would like to give is that in the 10th Parliament, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, where I belonged then and where I still belong, did carry out work related to witness protection and maybe, as the line minister now, you could take interest in what we did in the 10th Parliament. 

As a matter of fact, there was an attempt to have a very elaborate law on witness protection. The current Deputy Attorney-General, hon. Jackson Kafuuzi, was championing that process. I just want to give you information that perhaps you could engage hon. Jackson Kafuuzi and the records of the 10th Parliament to have an elaborate law on witness protection processed, which is very necessary, as you have submitted. I thank you.

MR MAO: Thank you, honourable Member from Bugiri Municipality. Like I said, eventually when all government departments have responded to this report in detail, the Leader of Government Business will have to come here and make a lengthy, elaborate statement on what Government's plan is. 

I am only standing here to respond briefly to this report as part of the debate, as we consider this important report, but let me state that some of the issues are deeper. 

Hon. Asuman Basalirwa talked about impunity. Well, impunity is basically abuse of power. When you have power, you should use it for good ends. When you use it for bad ends, you are abusing it. Therefore, it is the duty of this Parliament, as we strive to build democracy, to deal with the elephant in the room, which we call untamed power. How do we tame power? That is the question we have to answer together because we are in the process of democratising. 

There are specific actions that I have proposed and pledged to promote. For instance, in Cabinet there is a proposal for a Cabinet Standing Committee on Human Rights, which will be a kind of clearinghouse where the ministers talk to each other.

Issues like those of Kasese and other parts of Uganda where there have been gross violations of human rights that have never been faced squarely - This country needs healing and this is one of the things that the Ministry of Justice will be proposing and which I am very much interested in.

More importantly, if we are going to treat the root causes of abuse of power, we will have to go even beyond these recommendations. We must talk to citizens outside; we must deal with the grievances of various sections of Ugandans and it will not just be politicians to talk. We will be coming up with proposals about a national dialogue. That is when we can have the kind of Uganda that we want. 

The proposals I have talked about, Mr Speaker, are simply to deal with, you could say, the bleeding wounds. There are some wounds that are not bleeding. We have the bleeding wounds; torture, those who have spent a long time in jail; longer than they would have been there if they had been sentenced. 

I therefore want to pledge, Mr Speaker, that we will support the Leader of Government Business in the House alongside the other ministries so that Government comes up with a comprehensive statement on the state of human rights in Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. It is our requirement under rule 220 that you bring an action-taken report, which is that comprehensive statement. 

I do not know how much time you think - or maybe you cannot commit on behalf of the Leader of Government Business, but on issues of human rights, you are our focal minister. We cannot go to the Leader of Government Business. 

MR MAO: Well, Mr Speaker, was only informing the House that the Leader of Government Business wrote to me and also to other ministries seeking to own that comprehensive statement. However, we will be the support cast and yes, I accept to be the focal point person. 

Allow me to consult with the Right Honourable Prime Minister so that she can give the timeframe herself, but we will do our work. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable, we will give you three months, which I think is appropriate. 

MR MAO: It is more than enough. Thank you, sir. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Human Rights on the status of human rights and human rights violations in the country – Procedure?

MR BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker, the Minister for Gender is saying she is tired; she rarely comes here. Be that as it may –(Interjection)– I withdraw the statement. 

Mr Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is, we usually have discussions on human rights violations in this House and some of those issues touch on the UPDF. We have representatives of UPDF here, but they rarely say a word. Each time we talk about human rights violations, the UPDF is a factor, but they do not make any comment and yet they are here. 

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for us, as a Parliament, to continue talking about violations perpetrated by the UPDF and yet UPDF has representatives here and they continue being quiet? Is it procedurally right? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. To begin with, on the Committee of Human Rights, Hon. Brig. Charity represents the UPDF, her views are captured and she signed the report.

Secondly Hon. Asuman and colleagues, we shall not make a Member pay for issues of a constituency. If I am in Bugiri Municipality and I am robbed, will I call Hon. Asuman to come and explain why I was robbed in Bugiri? (Laughter) No, he is just representing a constituency. 

Therefore, we cannot make MPs here start explaining issues of constituencies. Otherwise, we would have really gone beyond what we should be doing. 

Therefore, colleagues, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Human Rights on the status of human rights and human rights violations in the country from January 2020 to-date be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you have three months, as per rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure, to bring an action-taken report. If you bring it earlier, the better. 

Thank you, colleagues, for being here for this long. Today, we have really covered a lot. In addition, on Thursdays we usually focus on Members’ issues. 

Hon. Amos is suggesting that there is still jam so we should continue, but I am constrained to accept his proposal. The House is adjourned until Tuesday next week at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 8.19 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 August 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 