

Wednesday, 26 August 2020

Parliament met at 3.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS


The oaths were administered to:

    1. Ms Sarah Kanyike

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kanyike, I welcome you to the 10th Parliament of Uganda. You are arriving at the tail-end but you have about nine months before the next Parliament. Nevertheless, you are welcome. The docket has been empty and so, you have a pile of work to do. 

We are sitting here because of the COVID-19 situation; we are not in our Chamber. You will sit on my right, which is the Government side. This is the Opposition side. We have the Independents in that area and the rest of the NRM Members and the UPDF sit in this area.

I would like to give you your instruments of office: First, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to help you do you your work; and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, which will enable you to bring your motions here and do any other work that is relevant to your sector. Welcome and good luck. (Applause)  (Members rose_) 

Do you want to welcome her? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Okay. Some words of welcome from the Members; hon. Muruli-Mukasa will speak for the Government and hon. Basalirwa will speak for the Opposition.

3.31
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We would like to congratulate hon. Sarah Kanyike upon her appointment and approval and for having taken the oaths in Parliament today. We welcome her. 

As the Opposition, we are prepared to work with her. Since she is a former member of the Opposition, we have all the confidence that she will execute her assignment with diligence, commitment and professionalism. 

At a personal level, I had the opportunity to work with Hajat Sarah Kanyike in KCCA when I was the chairperson of the evaluation court. I have all the conviction that she will execute the mandate given to her. 

We call upon her to remember to serve her country first; the country should be first, other interests notwithstanding. Have your country first. When you put the country first, you are going to find your work very easy. I am very sure that the team this side is ready to cooperate with you. We welcome you. (Applause)

3.33
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli-Mukasa): Madam Speaker, I also follow suit to welcome our new minister, hon. Sarah Kanyike. You are welcome to this Parliament. I would also like to congratulate you upon this very important task that has been entrusted to you.

Your coming here is very important. As you know, there are very many Ugandans – I think above 40 million – and out of that number, Uganda has found merit in you and given you the responsibility of being minister for the elderly in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We have confidence that you will truly serve this country with one heart, according to the oaths. I hope nothing will go amiss. We wish you the best of luck.

Certainly, as you have heard from the other side, you are going to get cooperation from everybody. You will also get cooperation from the ministry and from the Government. We have high hopes that you will execute your duties very well and to the best of your abilities. You are welcome. (Applause)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have just one issue to communicate. I received a letter from what is called the “Kanungu Orphans Group.” Somehow, it did not reach me in time. It was written in February 2020 but reached me very recently. This is a group of orphans whose parents perished in the Kibwetere incident in Kanungu in March 2000. 

The group indicates that they have been denied access to the site where their parents were buried and that despite several investigations, no report has been provided to them. 

This matter has been discussed severally on the Floor of this Parliament. On 23 July, 2018, the House recommended that the Government studies the matter and advises on how to support the affected persons. We tasked the Prime Minister to provide an official report from the Government about this investigation.

I have subsequently written - on 2 September 2019 and 17 February 2020 - on the same issue. In both letters, I requested the Prime Minister, among others, to meet the group and discuss the issue of their compensation. They claim that the President gave them assurance on compensation on 6 February 2016 at Kanungu Playground.

I, therefore, direct that in accordance with Rule 217 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the Prime Minister presents to this House an action-taken report on the matter within a fortnight so that we can close this communication. Otherwise, I do not know what to tell them yet they keep on writing. The Prime Minister has two weeks to present the report on the Kibwetere investigations. Thank you.

Now, honourable members, there are some matters of national concern – there are only two, which qualify. On the one of Cheptegei, we already agreed yesterday that a motion will be moved in this House. So, I invite hon. Latif Sebaggala to make a presentation for two minutes. 

3.37
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we went into the lockdown, a section of Ugandans, especially teachers working with private schools, were greatly affected. Up to now, they are still under lockdown yet there is no special arrangement made to cater for them right from primary up to tertiary institutions’ level. These teachers are living under very difficult situations and the Government has not come out with a special package for them. 

Recently, His Excellency the President pledged Shs 2 billion and the Government also pledged another Shs 20 billion for the teachers’ SACCOs in private schools. However, up to now, there is no clear criteria through which this money is going to benefit these teachers. The teachers in Government schools are being paid their salaries yet teachers in private schools are suffering. What is the arrangement for that Shs 20 billion in regard to the teachers in private schools? 

We know it is just a drop in the sea but even then, we have not been given any clarification either from the Ministry of Education and Sports or the Microfinance Support Centre. We have no information about how these teachers are going to access these funds – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way. Before I give information, allow me to congratulate you for having emerged a winner in the last elections in the party. (Applause) It has really proved to Ugandans and the world that no one should ever continue playing and joking with you. (Laughter) It is an indication that in any of the elections that will come, anybody that will dare compete with you will be ‘strangled’ properly by you. (Laughter) I congratulate you, Madam Speaker.

The information I would like to give to the House is that in my district of Amuru, teachers were told to form groups. A group called for 30 people and each teacher is supposed to pay Shs 10,000 as membership fee; that will amount to Shs 300,000 from that group. However, many teachers are wondering why Government is asking for the Shs 10,000 from each of them.

Madam Speaker, we are wondering how teachers are supposed to access this money. They are asking for money from the private school teachers yet those teachers are trying their level best to access that money from the Government. In fact, it is not clear. We implore Government to come out very clearly on this issue. Thank you.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank hon. Latif Sebaggala, the MP for Kawempe Division North, for giving way. First, allow me to also add my voice to the voice of hon. Gilbert Olanya in congratulating you upon the resounding victory in the NRM party elections as the Second National Vice-Chairperson. I also relay the message from the people of Kampala; they were with you and they were asking for the vote to be opened up to all the people so that they could express their satisfaction for the job well done. That is the message they asked me relay to you; it is a direct message. 

Madam Speaker, it is not only about the private school teachers; even in Government schools, mainly in the primary section, they have been hiring teachers on special contracts at lower levels such as kindergarten. An example is Nakasero Primary School here in Kampala Central. The other examples are Nakivubo Blue Primary School, Old Kampala and others. Even Government schools recruit teachers to provide support services.

However, teachers notwithstanding, over three million people are out of employment today; bar attendants - to mention but a few - whose jobs were closed incommunicado. They do not know when they will return to work. The tourism sector and those who were importing used clothes can no longer sell because they were told to move out of the markets. 

Madam Speaker, we had proposed - and you had proposed – that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister comes and addresses this august House on the stimulus that the Government is proposing on economic recovery.

Secondly, we are still awaiting the amendment on the National Social Security Fund Bill so that we come up with a comprehensive amendment that can help people salvage themselves from this economic quagmire in which they are.

Therefore, I would like to thank my honourable colleague for having presented on behalf of the teachers but also on behalf of the wider community that have lost their livelihood due to unemployment. We need to come up with a tangible solution. Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, honourable colleagues, for that information. Madam Speaker, the teaching fraternity is suffering and I know that more often than not, Government comes up with very good programmes but they are not implemented.

We were told that there is a stimulus package at Uganda Development Bank for our brothers and sisters in business. However, up to now, there is no clear indication on how they can access that money. 

When it comes to teachers, especially in private schools, we need to do something urgently. Ever since we entered into lockdown, they are not earning anything. Some of these teachers have resorted to making chapatis and vending tomatoes, which is really very degrading as far as their status is concerned.

It is my humble prayer, Madam Speaker, that the Government comes up with clarification on how this Shs 20 billion is going to be distributed to the many private schools and how teachers are going to access these funds. 

Also, I would like to say that this is just peanuts; we need a bigger programme for the teaching fraternity in this country because Shs 20 billion is too little. We demand that they increase this amount to at least Shs 100 billion as a start. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is very unfortunate that the Government has abdicated its responsibility to the people. First, we were told that Bank of Uganda had issued an instrument to the banks to freeze interest rates. We asked the minister to bring the instrument but he has never come back.

The minister also told us that he has a stimulus package. When we asked for details of how to access it, he also disappeared. We were told that there is money for the teachers. When we asked how the teachers can access it and who is eligible, again they disappeared. When we talk about the rent – Therefore, Government has really abdicated on its responsibility.

Senior minister, hon. Muruli-Mukasa, what do we do? You have heard; what do we do about this?

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Madam Speaker, I quite agree with hon. Latif Sebaggala that the situation of teachers, particularly the private teachers, is indeed dire. We have private teachers even in our constituencies and we interact with them. We are privy to their situation.

However, Madam Speaker, I have been made aware that indeed, the Ministry of Education and Sports, together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are having discussions to come out with the best modalities of how private school teachers will access the Shs 20 billion, which has been promised.

All I can say is that in a very short time, they will come out with the best guidelines and these will be known to the rest of the country. Certainly, the teachers will be able to access this money that has been promised to them and to their SACCO.

I can confidently say that certainly within two weeks, these guidelines will be out and that issue will become history, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, Uganda is not going away. We shall be here in two weeks to see whether indeed this has been done. However, just bear in mind that people have been hurting since March up to now. Let us have hon. Safia Nalule.

3.49
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, PWDs Representative, National): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your victory. This is not your victory alone; it is a victory for the women of Uganda and it is a victory for the Parliament of Uganda. It was in this very room that we came up to this podium to canvass support for you. I thank God that He heard our prayers.

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate my minister and my former Speaker at Kampala City Council, hon. Sarah Kanyike. 

Madam Speaker, the matter of national importance I am rising on is about the motorcycles, which were promised by His Excellency the President to the two district councillors representing persons with disabilities in the country.

This promise is more than 10 years old. We had succeeded in getting this promise into the Budget in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Indeed, when we were celebrating the International Day of Persons with Disabilities in Nakaseke, His Excellency the President was represented by the Vice President and he pledged that the budget for these motorcycles was within the national budget for the financial year. However, since then, we do not see anything. 

Madam Speaker, the district councillors representing persons with disabilities have the biggest constituencies, unlike any other councillor. They have a constituency – an entire district, like the chairman of the district. These members of Parliament have a national constituency and I think we tested it when we were looking for votes for CEC.

Therefore, because of the difficulties they have in moving, carrying out oversight and collecting views from their members, His Excellency the President accepted their request to provide them with motorcycles.

Therefore, I would like to request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and tell this House and the entire population of six million persons with disabilities in Uganda when these motorcycles will be procured.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Of course, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come and explain. Hon. Kanyike, this is your first assignment to follow up with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to find out what has happened to these motorcycles and ensure that he comes back to report to this House. 

Ten years is a long time for this pledge, we need to get it out of the way. Therefore, both the finance ministry and the minister for PWDs should come back together to respond to this issue after a fortnight. 

3.52
mr elijah okupa (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like my other colleagues have stated, I would like to congratulate you. The people of Teso voted overwhelmingly for you, to show the solidarity and support that you give to this country and the people of Teso.

I rise on a matter of public importance. In today’s newspapers, and also in yesterday’s news, there was breaking story about how another company - Hoima Limited - is being given land of Bugoma Forest, which is 22,000 square miles. It is said that the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) people are behind its giveaway. For how long shall we keep saying, “Can we preserve forests?” 

Bugoma Forest was gazetted as a forest reserve in 1932. The people of Uganda and Bunyoro have kept this forest. There are threats of climate change but now some Ugandans have decided to take it upon themselves to start parcelling out this land. Just a month ago, you heard from hon. Nantaba here regarding forests. Can’t people get land elsewhere to grow sugarcane?

Madam Speaker, it is just because a number of colleagues are going for primaries, but we would have sought for a select committee to establish what the problem is. However, within this time, the Prime Minister should come and explain to Ugandans what is happening. Who are these people grabbing the forest reserve? That place offers protection. It is home to wildlife like the chimpanzees in that area, unless we are going to ignore this.

Secondly, still regarding the issues of land, when hon. Anite, the Minister of State for Investment, made an alarm that there are mafias who want to grab the Uganda Telecommunication Limited (UTL) assets, people thought that it was a joke. We have seen how a company called M&R Properties Limited has parcelled out over 10 acres of prime land in Kololo, which belong to UTL. Today, we have read in the papers and got information that that company has decided to parcel out that land. How did that company take the land? Who owns M&R Properties Limited? We cannot just watch the mafias take over land. Hon. Anite had warned and now we are seeing it happen. No wonder, that is why they were fighting her at that time in the ministry when they were saying, “Can we solve the issue of UTL?”

Those are the two issues, which I think Parliament must take up. They should either be sent to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) or before that, the minister should come and give a statement on what is happening. Who are these people who are grabbing land? Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, in this country when you speak the truth, people fight you and they do it hard. First, concerning Bugoma Forest, the matter has been in the public domain for a long time. We demand an explanation from the Minister of Water and Environment; tell us what is happening.

When I was reading the papers, I saw pictures of huge tractors on 21 square miles. Really! Life is okay, everybody is happy and Government is content and cannot even complain. Similarly, on the issue of the land for Uganda Telecommunications Limited, an alarm was raised more than two years ago about this land. 

Can we direct the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development to come here at the earliest opportunity. I know that we have the primaries but I am hoping that after then, maybe we can sit until Independence Day before we break off, so that some of this work can be done.

Therefore, I am giving the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development a fortnight to respond to this issue of Kololo land. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is also alerted to ensure that nothing is happening. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS [SDR] 72.7 MILLION [EQUIVALENT TO USD 99.8 MILLION] ADDITIONAL FUNDING FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION [IDA] OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE COMPETITIVENESS AND ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT [CEDP-AF]

The Speaker: Honourable members, as you are aware, we received this report and debated it. Yesterday, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities came and responded to some issues. However, in the report of the Committee on National Economy, we were told that the money, which was allocated for the Private Sector Foundation, had not been utilised in the former loan. Therefore, we wanted to know why we should continue giving money to a sector where people cannot access it. 

We asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and explain but he was not here yesterday. We asked the ministers to come today but still they have not. I do not know whether the Minister of Public Service knows where they are.

3.58
The minister OF public service (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, the ministers in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, unfortunately, are not here due to a number of pressing commitments. 

I would beg for your indulgence that this matter be deferred so that it can substantively be attended to at least in two weeks’ time.

The Speaker: The House has done its part; what we need are the answers. A decision on this matter is deferred.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LABOUR DISPUTES (ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.00
The Minister of state for disability and elderly affairs (Ms Sarah Kanyike): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the second time.

The Speaker: Is the motion supported? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is supported by two colleagues. Can you justify?

Ms kanyike: Madam Speaker, the following is the justification for the same:

The Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 seeks to amend provisions of the principal Act that constrain the expeditious resolution of labour disputes and also compromise the independence and effectiveness of the Industrial Court.

Permit me to highlight some of the challenges identified during the implementation of the principal Act.

1. 	To realise quorum, under the principal Act the Chief Judge and the judge who are both at the level of High Court judges must sit together to hear a matter. This delays disposal of labour disputes that can be disposed of by the Industrial Court.

2. 	The current role limits the tenure of office of the judges to five years. This is contrary to Article 144(1)(b) of the Constitution and it undermines security of tenure, independence of judges and the benefits that accrue from long tenure on the bench.

3. 	The current law makes the decisions of the judge of the Industrial Court subordinate to those of the Chief Judge, which is a recipe for delayed disposal of cases and case backlog in the Industrial Court. 

4. 	The current law does not provide for powers of the Industrial Court regarding summoning and issuance of orders to witnesses. 

5. 	The current law does not provide procedures for disciplining and removal of Industrial Court panellists. 

6. 	The principal Act does not provide for an official seal of the court. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, in view of the above, the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) (Amendment) Bill, 2019, therefore, seeks to address the gaps highlighted by -– 

1. 	Providing for the official seal of the Industrial Court; 
2. 	Amending the composition of the Industrial Court to ensure that a judge can hear a matter independently; 
3. 	Providing for the powers of the Industrial Court, including summoning and issuance of orders to witnesses; 
4. 	Aligning the terms and conditions of appointment of the Head Judge, Deputy Head Judge and other judges of the Industrial Court to those of the judges of the High Court; and 
5. 	Providing for appointment of a registrar, deputy registrar and assistant registrar and other related matters. 

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, for the submission. Can I now invite the chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to present our report. 

4.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Alex Ndeezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I present the report, I beg you to allow me formally congratulate you upon your victory at the recently concluded NRM Central Executive Committee elections. The victory of our leader is our victory; the victory of our Speaker is our victory. 

Your victory is a clear indication that the people of Kamuli voted wisely. Since this election was national, your victory is also an indication that the people of Uganda love you. We wish you all the best at the NRM Central Executive Committee and also hope that the people of Kamuli will return you to the next Parliament so that you can continue to serve them. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR NDEEZI: Allow me to also welcome our new Minister of State for the Elderly and Disability. The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development has been lamenting over the lack of a substantive minister responsible for disability and the elderly. Through you, we convey our appreciation to the appointing authority. Hon. Sarah Kanyike, we wish you all the best and we promise to work with you to ensure that you realise your mandate.

Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Labour Disputes (Arbitration Settlement) (Amendment) Bill, 2019. The Bill has been shared with all Members on their gadgets and I hope we are all moving together. 

The Bill was read for the first time on Tuesday, 1 October 2019 and referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for consideration, in accordance with Rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The Industrial Court was established under the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act of 2006. It replaced the Industrial Court previously established in 1964 under the provisions of the Trade Disputes Act.

The Industrial Court became operational in 2014 after the appointment of the judges and the 15 members of the panel. Five of the members are nominated by the Federation of Uganda Employers to represent the employers and five are nominated by the Federation of Labour Unions to represent workers. 

The Industrial Court has a tripartite composition, with the Executive prerogative over labour placing it under the docket of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; a judicial mandate to resolve disputes with concurrent jurisdiction to that of the High Court; and representation of employers and workers.

During the course of dispensing the mandate granted to the justices of the Industrial Court, Justice Asaph Ruhinda and Justice Linda Tumusiime became aware that their tenure of service was not in line with the tenure of service of the other judges of the High Court as provided for under the law. 

With this background, the two judges petitioned the Constitutional Court on grounds that they are judges of the courts of judicature in accordance with Article 129 (1) of the Constitution. Further to that, section 10 of the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act, 2006, in so far as it limits their tenure of office to five years, is therefore inconsistent with certain provisions of the Constitution. The Industrial Court ruled in their favour. 

It is, therefore, vital to amend the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act, 2006 in order to comply with the orders and declarations that were made in this case. 

Object of the Bill 

Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is:

1. 	To provide for the official seal of the Industrial Court;
2. 	To amend the composition of the Industrial Court;
3. 	To provide for the powers of the High Court;
4. 	To provide for the terms and conditions of the appointment of the Head Judge, Deputy Head Judge and the judges of the Industrial Court to be similar to those of the judges of the High Court;
5. 	To provide for the appointment of the registrar, deputy registrar and for other related matters.

Methodology

In the course of consideration of this Bill, the committee interacted with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development -  

THE SPEAKER: The Members can read that.  

MR NDEEZI: We interacted with the Industrial Court, Uganda Law Society, Federation of Uganda Employers, National Organisation of Trade Unions (NOTU), the Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions (COFTU), and the Judicial Service Commission.

The committee also reviewed relevant documentation, which included the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act, 2006; the Employment Act, 2006; the Judicature Act; the Contracts Act, 2010; the Companies Act, 2012; and the judgement that I already referred to.   

Observations and Recommendations 

Compliance of the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act with the Provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995

During the interactions of the committee with the mentioned stakeholders, the committee observed that several sections of the Act were inconsistent with the Constitution. Among those sections are section 10 (3), which is inconsistent with the Constitution of Uganda as it limits the tenure of judges to five years.

The committee observed that whereas section 10 (3) of the Act limits the tenure of service for the judges to five years, the Constitution leaves it open until a judge attains the age of 60 years.

The committee further took cognisance of the decision of the Constitutional Court in the case of Justice Asaph Ruhinda Ntegye and Justice Linda L. Tumusiime Mugisha v Attorney-General in Constitutional Petition No.33 of 2016. In the ruling it was held that judges of the Industrial Court are judges of the courts of judicature and as such should have similar tenure of service.

The committee recommends that the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Act, 2006 be amended to harmonise the provisions that contravene the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Arbitration of Labour Disputes by Federation of Uganda Employers and National Organisation of Trade Unions

During the committee's interaction with NOTU, we were informed that there was a backlog of cases in the Industrial Court arising from a limited number of labour officers in the country, inadequate panel members of the Industrial Court and the failure to give opportunity to the Federation of Labour Unions to arbitrate some low-scale cases before they are referred to the labour officers.

The committee observed that the Industrial Court faces a challenge of case backlog, in spite of the fact that it was initially created for the purpose of reducing case backlog in labour-related disputes brought before the High Court.

The committee recommends that the composition of the Industrial Court be increased to the proposed 20 members, to allow efficiency and effectiveness. This will eliminate delays and reduce on the backlog. 

The committee also recommends that Government increases funding to the Industrial Court, so that it can create more regional circuits, as an administrative solution to case backlog in the court.

Official Seal of the Industrial Court

The committee reviewed section 44 of the Judicature Act and noted that the official seals of other courts of judicature indicated that responsibility for the custody of the seal of the Supreme Court was with the Chief Justice, the seal of the Court of Appeal with the Deputy Chief Justice, and the seal of the High Court with the Principal Judge. Therefore, it would contravene the practice of other courts of judicature to place the custody of the seal with the Chief Registrar of the Court as is indicated in clause 2 of the Bill.

The committee recommends that clause 2 of the Bill be amended to conform to the provisions of section 44 of the Judicature Act by mandating the Chief Judge to be in custody of the seal of the court.

Composition of the Industrial Court

The committee was informed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the judges of the Industrial Court that currently, the Industrial Court is composed of five members - a chief judge, a judge, an independent member, a representative of employers, and a representative of employees. This makes work very hectic, leading case backlog.

The amendment proposed under clause 4 will increase membership of the court to 20 members so that at any one time, the Chief Judge will be in a position to constitute five panels, each having four members - a judge, an independent member, a representative of employers and a representative of employees. This will improve efficiency and effectiveness of the court as each judge will head a panel, which will be able to hear and decide on cases independently.

The committee recommends that the composition of the Industrial Court be increased as provided for in the Bill.

Term of Service of Members of the Industrial Court

During the meetings, a number of stakeholders, such as Uganda Law Society, informed the committee of the shortage of labour expertise in the country. Uganda Law Society proposed that the term of office of members of the Industrial Court be increased from three to five years.

The committee recommends that the term of office of members of the Industrial Court be increased from three to five years, and the should be eligible for re-appointment. 

The committee further recommends that in reference to section 41, the minister is authorised to determine the pay of the members of the Industrial Court. Since panellists sit for long hours and carry out a lot of research, the minister should consider their payment on a retainer basis and give them reasonable allowances.

Removal of the Position of the Deputy Head Judge from the Composition of the Industrial Court

The committee, having reviewed the Constitution and other laws, took cognizance of the fact that there is no parallel position of Deputy Chief Judge in any of the courts of judicature of Uganda. The committee accordingly noted that this position is redundant and unnecessary. It should, therefore, not form part of the structure and composition of the Industrial Court. The committee, however, noted that the Head Judge should have the discretion to assign his or her administrative functions to another Judge of the Industrial Court. 

The committee recommends that the position of Deputy Head Judge is removed from the composition of the Industrial Court so as to conform to the existing court structures.

The committee accordingly recommends that the number of judges be increased from three to four, exclusive of the Head Judge, resulting from the removal of the position of Deputy Head Judge.

Clause 4: Power to Co-opt a Member of the Industrial Court to a Sitting Where Another Member Ceases to be a Member or is Unable to Attend a Sitting
On this, the committee was informed by most of the stakeholders that the Industrial Court presently suffers from chronic case backlog, caused by the limited flexibility of the court to expedite case hearings.

The committee observed that authorising the Head Judge to re-assign a case to another judge, and authorising the presiding judge to co-opt another member of the Industrial Court in a matter before the court, would ensure an expedient administration of justice, thus reducing on the court's case backlog.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Head Judge should have the powers to reassign a matter before court to another judge of the Industrial Court if the circumstances are such that the judge previously assigned to hear the matter is unable to attend to the matter or ceases to be a judge of the Industrial Court. 

The committee also recommends that a presiding judge should, in consultation with the head judge, have the power to co-opt another member of the Industrial Court to hear the matter before court until its determination.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the function and purpose of the Industrial Court cannot be overstated. As a court of first instance for labour disputes, workers and employers are heavily reliant on its efficiency for their own justice. The Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) (Amendment) Bill, 2019, therefore, seeks to ensure compliance of the provisions of the Act with the Constitution of Uganda as well as enhancing the functionality of the Industrial Court.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Bill entitled, “The Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be passed into law. 

The committee has generated a number of amendments, which we shall move at an appropriate time. I beg to lay on the Table this report together –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you did not touch clause 7 on the appointment of the Registrar of the Industrial Court. You also did not touch clause 9. I do not know whether it was an accident. See paragraph 5.8 – I saw some recommendations there.

MR NDEEZI: Madam Speaker, I was not reading verbatim because I thought Members had copies. Let me read it.

Clause 7; Appointment of the Registrar of the Industrial Court 

While meeting with the Judicial Service Commission, the committee was informed that the procedure for appointment of the Registrar of the Industrial Court should be similar to the procedure for the appointment of the Registrar of the High Court as envisaged under Article 145(2) of the Constitution, which empowers the President with the authority to appoint the Chief Registrar and Registrars of the High Court on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission.

The committee observed that clause 7 seeks to amend section 12 (1) to authorise the Judicial Service Commission to appoint a registrar, deputy registrar and assistant registrar yet the Constitution clearly mandates the President to carry out such appointments on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission.

The committee, therefore, recommends that clause 7 of the Bill, which seeks to amend section 12 (1) of the principle Act, be amended to comply with Article 145(2) of the Constitution. We also have an amendment to this recommendation, which will bring forward the normal procedure whereby all judges must be vetted by Parliament before they are appointed by the President.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR NDEEZI: The committee observed that clause 9, which seeks to insert a new section 14(6) in the principle Act contravenes the principle of corporate governance that separates the person of a corporate body from its principals and employees. The new section 14(6) empowers the Industrial Court to force every partner, director or other principal officer of a body corporate to comply with the order directed to a body corporate. 

The committee noted that it is a well-established principle in corporate governance that a company is a separate entity from its employees and principals with established exceptions to that rule as established under The Companies Act, 2012 and case law. We also have an amendment, which seeks to remove this provision.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table this report and the minutes of the meetings together with the presentations generated during consultations.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, you have heard the motion for second reading and you have also heard the report. You can make comments for three minutes each.

4.28
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to congratulate you upon your victory and wish you well in your service to the NRM party. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, there are three issues that I would like to seek clarification on from the minister and where possible, the chairperson. First of all, we are going to provide that the judges of the Industrial Court shall be at the same level as the judges of the High Court. In terms of professional development of the judges of the High Court, there are different divisions: Civil Division, Family Division and Commercial Division and the judges are transferable so that they can develop professionally. 

However, under the Industrial Court, you are going to fix these judges and limit them to hearing industrial cases only. How will that play out, given that they cannot be removed once they are appointed to the position of judge of the Industrial Court, which is different from the judges appointed under the High Court?

Secondly, if you look at the tenure and benefits that we have provided – recently, we amended the Administration of the Judiciary Act and I do not see in this Bill reference that is directly providing for these judges of the Industrial Court to be administered by the Administration of the Judiciary Act. I think it would be important, at some point, to have cross-referencing so that it avoids conflict in the implementation of the law.

Lastly – (Member timed out.)

MS LUCY AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate you. Our dance here was not in vain. We shall continue from there and I wish you well.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I am not here to debate but to give information regarding this Bill because I am a former member of the committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you not there anymore?

MS LUCY AKELLO: I am not there anymore.

THE SPEAKER: Were you there when they were doing this?

MS LUCY AKELLO: I was there but I just want to give information. I am not debating.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Madam Minister, you are most welcome and I think you have started on a very good note since we are discussing this Bill. 

The information I would like to give is in regard to funding for the Industrial Court. During the time that I was on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, every time these people appeared before the committee, the biggest issue they kept raising – and it never improved year in, year out – was the issue of the funding that comes to them to enable them to do their work. 

Another issue that keeps coming up is recruitment of the labour officers, which is a very big challenge. This issue has also been re-echoed by the chairperson of the committee. 

Therefore, as the Members debate this report, I wanted to give this key information and I hope it will be cured in this Bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Any other comment?

4.32
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I congratulate you on the recent victory. All the glory be to God.

In this report –

THE SPEAKER: Are you not a member of the committee?

DR LYOMOKI: I am not, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

DR LYOMOKI: There was a recommendation in the report to the effect that there was need to increase funding to the court and also increase the number of panellists. There was also an observation about the case backlog. 

However, when it comes to what to be done in terms of the amendments to the clauses, I do not see anything to resolve that mischief. The biggest challenge that the Industrial Court has is case backlog and the fact that the court does not administer justice the way industrial courts are supposed to. 

There is a procedure that is always used in the industrial courts, where you do not go into a lot of legal technicalities. However, the complaint about this current court is that it starts working almost like a High Court. I had expected that in the amendment, there would be an issue that would relate to resolving that mischief of case backlog. 

There is more case backlog than if work had gone to the other courts. That is really our problem. Cases go there and they stay for five or 10 years without being resolved and workers think that may be the Industrial Court is not doing its work. That was my challenge and I do not see any recommendation or proposal in terms of amendment in the committee’s report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lyomoki, you are raising a rather fundamental issue, saying that the manner in which the hearings are conducted causes a backlog: is that what you are saying?

DR LYOMOKI: Yes and also the issue of funding because they do not sit many times and do not have circuits in the whole country like the other courts do. There are many cases but few sittings. Therefore, the cases continue to pile without being resolved.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, are you in a position to respond to the issues raised?

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (ELDERLY AND THE DISABLED) (Ms Sarah Kanyike): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for its detailed report and the important issues raised by the honourable colleagues on the principles of the Bill. The ministry is eager to have this Bill passed as soon as possible. However, as you are aware, I assumed office today. 

I, therefore, would like to request for time to consult my technical officers before I can comment on some of the issues raised and ably proceed in the Committee of the whole House. Accordingly, I request that the discussion of the report and consideration of the Bill in the Committee of the whole House be deferred to next week. I so beg, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I think it would be unfair to insist that the minister, who has taken oaths today, responds. However, she has done well. (Applause) When she was moving for second reading, she did it quite well. I think she needs time to study the rationale of the Bill and get further advice. Therefore, further debate on this matter is deferred until the next convenient sitting. Thank you. I also thank the committee for the work on this matter. Let us go to the next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Is there anyone to move the motion?

4.37
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli-Mukasa): I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker. In the absence of the minister for the sector, I beg that this issue be deferred for about two weeks so that it can be ably handled when the minister and the rest of the Front Bench is around.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the Government wants to take the workers for a ride for too long. The minister is saying the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is absent but the minister who presented the previous Bill we have been discussing is the same minister.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable member, please, be fair. Hon. Kanyike took the oaths today. She ably moved a motion for second reading of the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 but you are aware of the controversies involved in the NSSF Bill. There is a battle between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development over this issue.

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Speaker, the point I am making is that this matter has been on the Order Paper for a long time and there has been a lot of pressure from the workers on this matter, to the extent that even as I talk right now, the members of Parliament representing workers have resolved to even start camping in this place to push for this Bill because the Government is playing hide-and-seek. 

The Bill has been put on the Order Paper for several months and we have even gone beyond the time allotted for this Bill. The procedure provides that a Bill should come to the House within 40 days. We have been having this matter and the minister just comes and says this Bill should be deferred for the next two weeks when the workers have been waiting for this Bill. I think it is being unfair. 

What I would think is that the minister should be ordered to come tomorrow. If not, I should be allowed to proceed according to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to invoke the rule, which gives us permission to proceed with this Bill without the report.

THE SPEAKER: Our report is ready but who is going to respond to the issues raised? That is what we want. I think hon. Ndeezi is ready.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the committee, I would like to confirm that our report is very ready and we are ready to present it.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like to plead with my colleague, hon. Dr Lyomoki. Of course, it is very unfortunate and disheartening that this is taking very long. However, he also knows the intricacies in this Bill. We need here the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We also need most of our colleagues of this House who have the technical and professional knowledge and you know they are out for primaries. 

The primaries will be concluded on 4 September 2020 and I think that is why hon. Muruli-Mukasa talked about the two weeks. I would like to plead with you that we are with you but can we have both of these people here – the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development – such that we are able to conclude this issue properly, for the workers’ benefit? 

We know how the workers are suffering. We are with you but I want to plead with you, while agreeing with the minister and the Speaker that because of these intricacies – you see, even the Head of State is involved in this issue. We have been reading about the meetings. We really need to have everybody on board. Let us not give room for anyone to come and start blaming you or Parliament for hurrying this very important Bill, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I entirely agree that it is important that we have the minister here. However, as you have noticed, we are really blessed to have the chairperson of our committee here and he is ready to present the report.

If it is acceptable, let us receive only the report from the chairperson of the committee and then, we defer any other comment on it so that Members can then process it. Next time, we will be here and we might not have the opportunity to have the chairperson here.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report follows the motion for second reading, in which the minister or ministers – there are two ministers involved – may have to justify the proposals in the Bill. 

Look, honourable members, just like you are, I am also anxious to get this Bill out of the way. It is my office that gets the petitions; it is my office that receives the letters of complaint. That is why it has been on the Order Paper; I want it out of the way.

Therefore, Minister of Public Service, since you are in charge of the Government side today, the first convenient sitting after the primaries, we must have this matter handled. Ensure that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development are both here. We shall ensure that the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic is also here because there is serious controversy in this Bill and we must handle it once, conclusively and effectively.

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for the guidance. What I had in mind was to move a simple motion, like the new minister has moved and to allow the report. We could then leave the rest for the next two weeks.

I am raising this because this Bill has a lot of issues. There are many people and many hitmen who are trying all possible things to stop this Bill. I know that on the Order Paper, usually, we have many issues that are brought. You might find that we will come here in two weeks and then, this Bill is far and you take a long time and all that –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am in charge of the Order Paper. I am the one who has put it on all this time. It is my responsibility to ensure that as soon as we return, this will be done.

You are aware about the controversies between the two ministries; the House has to resolve them and the ministers must both be here.

THE SPEAKER: Members, House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(House rose at 4.46 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 27 August 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 




