Friday, 31 August 2012

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting. You will recall that yesterday I informed you about the passing away of Justice Joseph Nyamihana Mulenga and about the arrangements to pay respect and tribute to him in Parliament. This is the sixth time we are gathering here this year to pay tribute to a fallen distinguished Ugandan. This is a great loss and should be a source of concern to all of us. 

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to extend, once again, our heartfelt condolences to the widow, children, friends and relatives in the Kigezi community and the entire nation upon the loss of this great Ugandan, especially while serving as the Justice of the Supreme Court of Uganda, where he served for over a decade. His service to the African Court of Justice on Human and People’s Rights will be greatly missed. 

Justice Mulenga served Uganda with great humour, honour and distinction. He left a mark as the first Attorney-General in the NRM Government, in the Constituent Assembly and in the courts of Uganda. His contribution to the enrichment of jurisprudence and constitutionalism will forever be written in the annals of the history of Uganda. 

For purposes of the record, the widow and children of our fallen colleagues are here seated at the treasury bench, right behind me. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace, and we pray that his family may be able to bear this great loss and to gain comfort that it is the Creator who has called him home.

Honourable members, we have some messages for the family. We have one from the East African Legislative Assembly addressed to the family; it is signed by hon. Bernard Mulengani, chairperson of the EALA-Uganda Chapter. There is also one message from WEB Associates and Solicitors addressed to the family, and it is signed by Lydia Wanyoto Mutende.

Honourable members, I have a special message from the Uganda Law Society, which I will read in full. It is addressed to the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, the family of the late Justice Mulenga, Members of Parliament, the legal fraternity and fellow mourners:

“Condolence Message on the Death of hon. Justice Joseph Mulenga 

It is with deep sorrow that the Uganda Law Society has learnt of the death of hon. Justice Joseph Mulenga who diligently served as President of the Uganda Law Society from 1973-1978, greatly contributing to the growth of the profession in Uganda at a time when the country and the profession were going through extremely difficult political times.
 
The late Justice was our Sir Thomas More – a forester in the thicket of law. With outstanding courage, he defended cases of treason suspects in times when it was itself treasonable to act as a lawyer. 

As lawyers, we remember Justice Mulenga for reminding us about the difference between the rules of law and the rule by law. The late Justice has been exemplary and highly respected and valued by the Uganda Law Society. His knowledge and use of the law was admirable. 

As a fraternity we have lost a father, an elder who has been a source of wisdom and guidance. On behalf of the legal fraternity in this country, the Uganda Law Society wishes to express its utmost sympathy to the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, the family of the late and the entire nation on this sad occasion. 

Be not grieved above measure for your deceased loved ones; they are not dead but have only finished the journey which is necessary for everyone of us today. It is our prayer that the good Lord will comfort and give you strength during this trying time. May our beloved judge’s soul rest in eternal peace.” 
It is signed by James Mukasa Sebugenyi, President of the Uganda Law Society.  

(Entrance of the late Justice Joseph Nyamihana Mulenga)

National Anthem (One Verse)

Laying of wreaths 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE JUSTICE JOSEPH NYAMIHANA MULENGA

2.44
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I rise under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Justice Joseph Nyamihana Mulenga.

“WHEREAS the late Justice Joseph Nyamihana Mulenga was born in 1938 in the former Kigezi District, South Western Uganda;

AND WHEREAS in his early childhood he attended his primary school at Mutolere Primary School as well as Sooko Primary School, both of which are located in South Western Uganda; he went on to attend St Mary’s College Rushoroza, St Leo’s College Virika as well as St Mary’s College Kisubi where he obtained a higher secondary school certificate in 1960;

AND WHEREAS the late Justice Nyamihana Mulenga’s tireless quest for knowledge saw him join the prestigious University of London, graduating with a Bachelor of Laws degree in 1965, and he was later called to the English Bar as a barrister-at-law by the Middle Temple Inn, having successfully completed the bar professional training course in 1966;

NOTING THAT the late Justice Mulenga has a career in legal practice that spanned three decades, starting in public service in the Department of Public Prosecutions where he served as a resident state attorney for the eastern region, and finally as a senior state attorney;

FURTHER NOTING that after decades of able and noble service in public service, the late Justice Joseph Nyamihana Mulenga went into private practice, founding the law firm Mulenga and Kalemera Advocates, which became one of the most prestigious firms in Uganda, and he remained the managing partner until his elevation to the Bench;

APPRECIATING THAT the late Justice Mulenga served in a number of capacities both in the legal profession and in the political arena where he served as counsel to a number of commissions of inquiry, President of Uganda Law Society in 1973-1979, member of the Judicial Service Commission, member of the Law Council, Chairman of the disciplinary committee of the Law Council, member of the Law Development Centre management committee, National Deputy Chairman of the Democratic Party(DP), member of the African Bar Association, Africa’s representative to the Commonwealth Bar Association, Chairman of Professional Centre of Uganda, Chairman of the Judicial Integrity Committee, Member of the East African Court of Justice as well as a consultant with Kampala Associated Advocates;

COGNISANT of the fact that the late Justice Mulenga served his beloved country in different capacities first as a Minister of Justice and Attorney-General as well as briefly as the Minister of Regional Cooperation between 1986 and 1989;

AWARE THAT as a Cabinet minister, he was a member of the National Resistance Council, a body which had quasi-legislative powers, and in 1994 he was elected as a delegate to the Constituent Assembly, which debated and promulgated the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and where, in the Constituent Assembly, the late Justice Mulenga served as the Chairman of Select Committee II, responsible for the chapters entrenching the principles of separation of powers in the Constitution;

APPRECIATING THAT the late Justice Mulenga was appointed to the Bench in 1995, serving in different capacities but most importantly as a Justice of the Supreme Court, a position he held until he retired in 2008 and during which tenure he was an advocate for human rights especially freedom of expression;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
1. 	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, friends and the nation as a whole upon the loss of this illustrious son of Uganda;

2. 	That it takes cognisant of the distinguished service rendered and the contribution made by the last Justice Joseph Nyamihana Mulenga in the legal fraternity by enriching Uganda’s jurisprudence, and in the academic arena and civil service both at local and international levels;
  
3. 	That the almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants the last Justice Joseph Nyamihana Mulenga eternal peace. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the honourable Leader of the Opposition. Do you want to speak to your motion, Rt hon. Prime Minister?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Uganda and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family of the late Justice Mulenga, to the Ugandan legal fraternity and to all the people of Uganda on the passing of the late Justice Joseph Nyamihana Mulenga. It is a very sad experience for Uganda to lose one of its most proficient and prolific custodians of the law. 

At the time of his death, the late Justice Mulenga was serving as a Judge of the African Court of Human and Peoples’ Rights, which he joined for a six-year term starting in 2008. He has ended a lifelong legal career, which he started when he graduated with a Bachelor of Laws degree from the University of London in 1965. 

The late Justice Mulenga joined the Uganda legal fraternity as a state attorney at a time when Uganda’s judicial system was metamorphosing itself from the colonial judicial system to an independent Uganda judicial system. At that time, Uganda had very few qualified advocates because the judicial system had for sometime been a replica of the English judicature or judicial legal system. These few local officers had tremendous work of domesticating the laws and the mentality of the people of Uganda who still harboured colonial nostalgia. 

During the 1970s and the early parts of the 1980s, the Uganda judicial system went through the greatest test under the rule of Idi Amin. This was a time when the self acclaimed Field Marshal was the law and the law was him. At this time, the late Justice Mulenga was President of the Uganda Law Society, a member of the Judicial Service Commission and a member of the Uganda Law Council. It is evident, therefore, that the late Justice Mulenga was at that time in direct aim, and he was a direct target of the Field Marshal’s line of fire. However, because of his candid methods of work, he survived that very trying moment and was later to rise in the profession as we have specified. 

Those who worked with Justice Mulenga both in the academic institutions like the Law Development Centre and the legal practice bear witness that the late Justice Mulenga was a person of a unique character. My only relationship with him began when I graduated from law school and was appointed a Pupil State Attorney before I did the bar course. In a short time, I was made the acting secretary of the Uganda Law Council, of which he was a member. I also became the secretary of the disciplinary committee of the Uganda law council, of which he was chairman. I therefore had many years of a close working relationship with him at a time when Uganda was lawless. 

I am happy to put on record that although the Advocates Act had been passed in 1970, the operationalisation of many of its provisions, particularly relating to the discipline of legal practitioners, had not been done until that time. I can affirm that the late Justice Mulenga did it with firmness but with a human face. He always worked as a partner. He always worked for consensus with colleagues but he would never be carried away by majority opinions. He was a cool headed person with a strong character. Indeed, I would say that the level of discipline which we see in the legal profession today has its roots in the work of the late Justice Mulenga.

Those who had the opportunity of rubbing shoulders with him, or at least have read his judgements of whatever he has written professionally, will agree that we have lost one of the smartest heads which ever rested on human shoulders. This is my assessment of him. I, therefore, would like to pay tribute to him for the role he played in the legal profession. His work has touched many lives. His work has shaped the destiny of Uganda. 

Later on, he became a legislator by virtue of being a minister in Government from 1986 onwards. In 1994, he was elected to the Constituent Assembly where he made substantial contributions to the formulation of the present day Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which is acclaimed the world over as a very good Constitution. He also became a judge of the Supreme Court. Therefore, his work, his efforts have touched the lives of many people in Uganda. It is a great honour for me, therefore, to present this motion for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to him. I think he was the personification of grace and goodness yet as I said earlier, firm in his conviction and in his work. He used his life to serve humanity. 

I would like to use this opportunity to pay tribute to the judges and other judicial officers of Uganda for the sacrifice they make. We all know their conditions of service. We have been talking about their level of remuneration. Many of them, as you may know, would be better off in private practice because it is much more lucrative. I think the life there is much easier. So for them like Justice Mulenga to have foregone that opportunity to live a better life, it was a sacrifice they made for Uganda. 

As we know, the rule of law is a measure of society’s civilization. If you want to know the level of civilization of any society, measure the extent to which the rule of law applies. I would like to use this opportunity today to pay tribute to the living judges, as I pay tribute to our comrade who has passed away, for the great sacrifice they are doing. They are sacrificing for the rule of law, and therefore, for the entrenchment of civilization in our society. 

The late Justice Mulenga was a family man. He has left a widow, Stella, and his children are: Patrick Gihana Mulenga, Linda Gihana Mulenga, Justine Munana, Maureen Rutabyama Mulenga, Laura Walusimbi, Josephine Kaheru, Henrietta Mulora, Joseph Mulenga, Maria Kampiire, Loretta Lubandi and Natasha Karugaba. He is survived by three sisters, Kate Tibamanya, Mary Bikako and Ursula Gasasira. He is also survived by nephews, Lt Gen. Kale Kayihura and Dr Jeffrey Kabagambe as well as seven grandchildren. 

I would like to say, on behalf of the family, that they are very grateful for the support the community has given them, the Government and all of you, Members, who have been with them at their home to share their grief. Those who have contributed whatever you contributed to help them cope with this great loss, they are very grateful indeed. I think I could, for once in this Parliament, quote the Bible in the book of 2 Timothy 4:7-8: “I have fought a good fight; I have finished my course; I have kept the faith. And now the price awaits me, the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge will give me on the day of His return.” 

I am sure that where Justice Mulenga has gone, in case there is no justice there, he will be a judge because he has all the qualities to be a judge. His has been a life of fairness, a life that will not accept anything other than fairness. He has gone to be with his ancestors and we are all heading there; our time will come but his is now. That is the choice of the Almighty. 

The Government of Uganda, in recognition of his work, has therefore decided to accord him an official burial. We have paid tribute to him here in Parliament. From here, the body will be taken to his residence at Kimera Road, Ntinda. A requiem mass will be held at Mbuya Catholic Parish tomorrow, Saturday. On Sunday, the body of the late Justice Mulenga will be rested at his ancestral home in Mutolere, Kisoro. 

He was a blessing to us all as a nation and he was a blessing to his family. We commend the soul of the late Justice Joseph Mulenga to the Lord, the merciful and Supreme Judge. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, we need to congratulate the hon. Prime Minister upon his maiden citing of the Bible in the House. (Laughter) However, for purposes of the integrity of the Hansard, I would like the citation verified so that it is accurate because he seems to have doubts about his citation. We just want to be sure that our records will reflect the true position of the Bible. 

3.09
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I stand here to second a motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Justice Joseph Mulenga on this day, 31 August 2012. 

On behalf of the Opposition and the people of Uganda, we sincerely console the bereaved family. Today, it saddens most of us that Parliament is yet assembled to pay tribute to yet another of our own fallen elders who made a great contribution to building Uganda as a nation. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I must confess that I did not know the late Joseph Mulenga in depth. However, his role as the Attorney-General, member of the commission of inquiry into human rights violations, as well as member of the Constituent Assembly who chaired the committee that drafted the chapters on the three arms of Government, speaks volumes on the role he played as a legislator. 

Justice Joseph Mulenga was very instrumental in the struggle for building a strong Opposition, which we believe every ruling party should embrace. He said that the ruling party will always be helped by the Opposition because it will ask them to account and hence they would do their best. For us from Eastern Uganda, we are privileged because he worked there as a state attorney and rose up to a senior state attorney. So, we believe he made great contribution in the East. 

Most of you will agree with me that as a Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice Mulenga played a great role in the administration of justice. I want to particularly quote something. I remember his words of wisdom when giving his judgement to support the annulling of elections in the 2001 presidential election petition. He said: “To my mind, the first and main consideration was the importance of and public interest in the case. Here I mean, public interest in the sense that a country needs to ensure that the election of its President is a free choice of the citizens made in accordance with the Constitution and the laws enacted to regulate that election.” Many of you will agree again that during the 2001 elections, people were killed, people were maimed, people went into exile and people were intimidated. It was a crime to talk about Dr Kiiza Besigye and it was a crime to talk about Reform Agenda. However, he stood by his ruling and mentioned those important words. 

We, of course, know the reaction and wrath that was received from the President, and it should have greatly affected the 2006 judgement. However, he also rightly observed that there was non-compliance with the provisions of the Constitution and the relevant Acts in the 2006 presidential elections. Of course, you know want took place in 2006. I request colleagues and the people of Uganda to read the book by Prof. Kanyeihamba, which clearly talks about the elections of 2006.

Mr Speaker and members, in paying tribute to our fallen Justice, I wish to remind my colleagues of the interview the late Mulenga held on 3 February 2009 with Rosebell Kagumire of the Independent. In that interview he asked Parliament to reformulate the law regarding annulment of elections based on irregularities to read that, “irregularities are sufficient ground for annulling an election if the irregularities are substantial”, instead of saying, “irregularities constitute a ground for annulling an election if they affected the result of the election in a substantial manner”. A thief is a thief, whether of a chicken or of a cow; it is not that the chicken thief is not a thief. This is what would ensure that whoever governs Uganda is elected in accordance with the Constitution of Uganda. 

We, in the Opposition, plead with all of you who hold responsibilities to the public to do what is just. Do not abuse your offices as one day you will account to God when you die. Since this is one-way traffic which Justice Joseph Mulenga has taken, I am sure all of us are going to follow him one day, but it is important that we are just when we are still on this earth. The family will miss him, the people of Uganda will miss him, and I believe that anybody who likes justice will miss Justice Joseph Mulenga.

Again, on behalf of the Opposition and the people of Uganda, I wish to state that we wish a safe journey for Justice Joseph Mulenga, and we ask God to have mercy on him. I have not been able to quote the Bible because I never came ready, but I know one thing, may his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you, the Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, in the Distinguished Strangers Gallery, I have noticed the presence of the following people, and those who I am not able to recognise from this far, my apologies but I am sure I will be advised shortly: 

We are joined by hon. Beatrice Byenkya Nyakaisiki, hon. John Kawanga, hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere, Mr Adrian Sibo, hon. Al-Haji Ali Kirunda Kivejinja, hon. John Ntimba, hon. Zachary Olum, hon. Robert Kitariko, hon. Anthony Butele, hon. Lydia Wanyoto Mutende, Mr Joseph Matsiko – he has stepped out - and hon. Elly Karuhanga. I will be advised on the other members who are in the gallery. Please join me in welcoming the distinguished people there.

We have also just received another condolence message addressed to the family of the late Justice Mulenga by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. It is signed by Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire, Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. We shall pass this to the family. 

We shall limit our contributions to three minutes – (Interjections) - Five? Five minutes, okay. The rule of the majority shall carry; it is five minutes. However, the rule of the majority will be taken by the Speaker also, and so I will take it to four minutes. Let us start with the Member for Mawokota – (Interjections) – Mawogola.

3.19
MR SAM KUTESA (NRM, Mawogola County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Mawokota is a bit nearer than Ssembabule to Kampala and it is actually represented by a lady, which I have yet to be.

Mr Speaker, I am greatly honoured to be paying tribute to Mr Joseph Nyamihana Mulenga, a great friend, a role model for many and an outstanding icon in the legal profession in Uganda.  I first met Joe, as we all fondly knew him, in 1972. I was then a law student at Makerere University and he had just left Government service and started a law firm known as Ibingira & Mulenga Company Advocates at Globe Chambers on Jinja Road. He was then representing a relative of mine in a law case and I went to see him with my relative while I was still a student at Makerere University Law School. I was greatly fascinated by this gentleman. It was actually my first time to go to somebody’s law chambers to hear a client being interviewed. I was so touched by his method of interviewing his client, who was my relative. Many lawyers will not be very honest to their clients but he told my relative that he had a very bad case but he would do his best to save him. My other contact with law was through books and law classes.

When I finished law school, I did part of my clerkship while I was at the Law Development Centre with that firm, Ibingira & Mulenga Company Advocates. I found him a fascinating person in character and also as a professional. He was something to behold when he was dealing with you as a young lawyer, but even more so when he was arguing a case before any court of law. 

After my clerkship with him and after being called to the Bar, I did not stay very long in Uganda because those were Amin’s days. I had to run away into exile and I returned in 1979. So I did not see much of him between 1975 and 1979. When I returned in 1979, we got together; he was a member of a group of lawyers, some of whom had returned from studies in the UK and others from Dar es Salaam University. These were the likes of Fredrick Ssempebwa, Jonathan Kateera, Christopher Kasibayo, Mr Akankwasa, Joseph Byamugisha who is here, John Katende and our very own Edward Ssekandi and Benjamin Odoki. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two more minutes.

MR KUTESA: Oh, my God!! I had just started; I am on 1979. (Laughter)  I will skip that, but I must say that this was a group of lawyers that was fascinating to follow in their footsteps. 

When I came back in 1980, apart from meeting him as an old friend, I remember vividly on 19 April 1980, together with many others, we met in Rubaga to revive the Democratic Party. Those people whose names you read, except Kirunda Kivejinja, are not there by mistake - (Laughter) - right from John Kawanga, Tarsis Kabwegyere, Adrian Sibo, John Ntimba, Zackary Olum, Robert Kitariko - this young lady was not there but I think the way she is seated, - (Laughter)- she probably bore similar sentiments. Joseph Mulenga was one of those who revived the Democratic Party with us.

In 1980, he ran for a constituency in Kisoro, and for lack of better words, he did not make it to Parliament - just for lack of a better word, and for being civil here. Joseph Mulenga, however, continued to practice law. He formed a law firm, Mulenga & Kalemera Advocates, which I joined in 1980. I became a Member of Parliament for Mbarara North, and those days I used to sit exactly where Ken Lukyamuzi is sitting now. So, it is never too late to come to this side. (Laughter)

I want to say a few words about Joseph Mulenga as a person, because I came to know him both professionally and as a friend. If you became a friend of Joe, you would be a friend to the end. Joseph loved his family. He loved his children. The girls – (Member timed out).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what I am going to do is to stop the debate at 5.00p.m. and allow members to debate freely and make as many contributions as they want; but we close at 5.00p.m.

MR KUTESA: He was a dedicated man to his family, to his late wife Elsa and to Stella, who has looked after him till the very end. 

Joe Mulenga loved his profession and was a great lawyer and judge. As the Prime Minister has stated, he served in many capacities in the legal profession, ending up, as he has been, a Judge of the African Court of Peoples and Human Rights. I was very delighted as Minister of Foreign Affairs to propose and campaign for Joseph Mulenga for this post because I knew that Uganda was giving its very best. 

Joe Mulenga had endearing characteristics. One of them was search for the truth. The second was his belief in the supremacy of the rule of law. The third was a strong belief in peaceful resolution of conflicts. He had, as I said, an abiding love for his family, and I must add his faith. He was a very strong believer in his faith of the Catholic Church. All these attributes were always expressed with humility and a cool and collected temperament that was always disarming to both friends and foes alike. Joseph belonged to a category of a few who have brought honour, grace and respect to the Bar and the Bench of Uganda and beyond. 

He also used to have some humour – maybe I should recite one of the jokes he once told me about a fellow lawyer who later became a judge, like he did. He told me that at one time in the UK, there were two lawyers who hated each other with a passion. Unfortunately for one of the lawyers, his opponent became a judge and it became his duty to appear before him. So, he tried all sorts of ways to disqualify that judge because whenever he spoke before him, the judge wrote nothing, meaning he was not recording whatever he was saying. He brought up so many reasons asking the judge to disqualify himself because of their history but the judge would not because he wanted to sit in that case and finally pass a judgement against his opponent. 

So, this lawyer, with his wit, wanted to cite an authority. On the page where this authority was, he placed a bedbug and he referred to that case. He said, my lord, it is on page such and such, and he took it to him. This judge said, “You see, that is why you lose cases; look, you have bedbugs in your law books.” This lawyer, with his humour, said, “My lord, it is not the first time that a bedbug has moved from the Bar to the Bench.” (Laughter) Such was his humour, and I am delighted that we are paying him respect here in this House. 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Government of Uganda and this Parliament for honouring one of our greatest. May God give him eternal peace. Thank you. (Applause)

3.33
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion moved by the Leader of Government Business for this Parliament to pay special tribute to the late Justice Joseph Mulenga Nyamihana. 

First, as Secretary-General of the Democratic Party, the oldest party in this country, I convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family, his judicial and legal fraternity and the entire nation. The DP received the sad news of the sudden death of Justice Joseph Mulenga with profound shock. He has passed on at a time when the party needed him most for his vast experience, now that he had retired from the judicial service. 

The late Justice Joseph Mulenga, as the Leader of Government Business has told us, attended St Mary’s College Rushoroza in Kabale where he met another young man then, hon. Bob Kitariko, who has been referred to as seated there - I can see he is wiping his eyes. Bob Kitariko was the head prefect of that college and he assisted the late. As you know, as a new student you tend to be bullied by others. Bob Kitariko protected him and indeed he used to refer to him as his mentor. 

Later on when he finished his A’ Levels at St Mary’s College Kisubi, he was to benefit from the 300 scholarships that the late Benedicto Kiwanuka, the then leader of the Democratic Party and chief minister of this country, awarded to the children of this country for further studies. This is now a challenge to the ruling party. In 1961/62 when the Democratic Party received these scholarships, a committee was set up to distribute these scholarships evenly to all the children of Uganda. This committee was in fact chaired by the late Prof. Yusuf Lule. The Opposition side, which was UPC then, was represented by Mathias Ngobi; the Democratic Party was represented by Anselm Musoke and the three religious groups in Uganda each had a representative. The Anglicans had the secretary of Anglican schools, the Muslims had the secretary of Muslim schools and the Catholics had a representative.

Today, we hear of scholarships in State House but nobody knows who the members of this committee are. Nobody knows who the beneficiaries of these scholarships are. The man lying here before us was a beneficiary; he was a member of this House and a beneficiary. I saw the Deputy Speaker of the Luganda Lukiiko, hon. Dr Ssemajege, who was also one of the beneficiaries, and many others. 

Mr Speaker, allow me say that in 1961 when those scholarships were given, the northern region got 53 scholarships, the western region got 62, the eastern region got 60, Buganda got 114 and the Asians got 13. Today, when I ask State House to enumerate or give us that kind of tabulation, I do not think we can have it. 

Mr Speaker, he went to the United Kingdom and he undertook the Bachelor of Laws at London University and was later on called to the English Bar as a barrister-at-law by the Middle Temple in 1966. When he came back, he served this country in various capacities until 1980; as you have heard, he contested on the Democratic Party ticket in Kisoro against Philemon Mateke of the Uganda Peoples Congress. He helped to build the Democratic Party in that region and indeed up to today, I think hon. Buchanayandi can bear witness on the role that the late Justice Mulenga played in spreading the gospel of the Democratic Party in that region. 

When Adoko Nekyon went into exile after the 1980 elections, he had been elected national vice chairman of DP. The late Justice Mulenga was elected to the same position under Mzee Boniface Byanyima in 1983 until 1986 when he was appointed to the first NRM Government as Minister of Justice and Attorney-General. Mr Speaker, it is important to note that the late Mulenga sought permission from his party to take on this responsibility, which his party willingly gave. The first thing he did was to appoint a commission of inquiry into the violations of human rights in Uganda from October 1962 to 26 January 1986, headed by the late Justice Arthur Oder, and the current Vice-President of this country, Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, was the Lead Counsel of the commission. Later, he was appointed Minister of Regional Cooperation again seeking permission from his party to take on that responsibility. You can see how loyal he was to his party. 

He loved to serve his country. You can imagine for someone who had been the Minister of Justice, Attorney-General and the Minister for Regional Cooperation, in 1994 before he joined the CA he served as a councillor for Nakawa Division in Kampala City Council. How many ministers seated at the front row here can accept that? You can see his humility and humbleness in leaving a ministerial job and going down to the local council to serve the Kampala City Council. I think it is indeed true that we should pay respect to this great friend. (Applause)

As said before, he was a councillor in Nakawa Division. In 1994, the Democratic Party elected him together with hon. Bob Kitariko as special representatives of the party to the Constituent Assembly that drafted and debated the 1995 Constitution. The late Mulenga chaired the legal and constitutional affairs committee that drafted chapters 6 to 8, which dealt with the Executive, the Judiciary and the Legislature. Those of you who read our Constitution today can imagine the brilliance of the people, especially the chairperson – (Interjections) - Patrick Amama Mbabazi is telling me that he was part of it but well, it was chaired by the late Justice Mulenga. (Laughter)

In 1997, he was appointed Judge of the Supreme Court where, again, according to the NEC minutes which I have, he was cleared by the party to take that position until he retired. He was loyal to his party. 
In April 1991, when Democratic Party leaders like Zachary Olum, who is here, Bob Kitariho and the late Ojok Mulozi were arrested by this government on flimsy treason charges, it was the late Justice Mulenga assisted by the late Henry Kayondo and Justice Remy Kasule that assisted those people I have mentioned. He represented them on pro bono basis until they were released. This is the gentleman lying before us. 

He represented DP. When the NRM came, they had a 10-point programme and the Democratic Party appointed him to represent DP in negotiations with the NRM. The NRM was represented by hon. Eriya Kategaya. He represented the Democratic Party on negotiations with the NRM on democracy and on whether the 10-point programme was in conformity with DP’s ideals and principles. The NRM side was headed by Kategaya. They disagreed, and that is when DP went to court in the famous case, P.K Ssemwogrere, Zachary Olum vs. the Attorney-General, in which it was ruled that the NRM was not a system of political parties. It was a one party state, hence the pluralism today. 

The late Justice Mulenga was a brilliant lawyer and a decision maker. I am sorry that my friend, hon. Kutesa, has left but he would bear witness to this; the late was a brilliant lawyer and a decision maker. He loved his party, his country and above all, mankind. He feared his Creator; that is why he never missed his Sunday services either at Christ the King or our Lady of Africa in Mbuya. Those of us who used to attend Christ the King or Mbuya would definitely not miss the late Justice Mulenga. 

As we fare thee well, as you go to meet your Creator and political ancestors like the late Benedicto Kiwanuka, Gasper Oda, Alex Latim, Gino Obonyo, Martin Okello, Sebastian Ssebugwawo, Bernard Buzabo, Francis Kasura, Bakamuturaki and others who shed their blood for democracy, rule of law, justice and truth, pray that your country Uganda remains committed to the ideals and principles you cherished. Justice Mulenga, your legacy will remain our courage. Your lesson to us will be truth, nothing else but the truth. Your weapon of love, we shall emulate. Your life will be a monument, for you now belong to mankind. May your soul rest in eternal peace.   

3.46
MRS VICTORIA BUSINGE-RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kabarole District and on my own behalf, I also convey our condolences to the bereaved family, to our brother and sister, Sarah Mateke and Kamara, to the St Leo’s College fraternity, to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, the nation and the judges’ fraternity.

Mr Speaker, St Leo’s College is well known for producing excellent leaders in this country, the likes of the late Mulenga, Judge Vincent Kagaba and His Excellency the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame. These pillars have been doing a great job and have left a legacy, which we always refer the on-going students to emulate. That is why in this Parliament, people like Stephen Basaliza Omudumizi, Henry Basaliza, Stephen Kagwera and so forth have come up because of the legacy St Leo’s College has created.

We have lost a man who, together with other OBs, has been doing a lot to support the school in terms of giving text books, renovation, counselling and guidance, and in totality mentoring our young stars. We shall miss you. If he was around and with all the good work he has done, I am sure he would have said, “I have run my race, I have completed my work, miss me but let me go.” May you rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we will take the example of the honourable member from Kabarole; otherwise, I will be forced to draw the sword on time because the last members have not been very careful with the usage of time.

3.48
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business for bringing out this motion. As he rightly puts it, it is not usual that he even cites the Bible in his presentations. I can only say that Canon Jacqueline Mbabazi has a list of work to do. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you have some fair knowledge of the Bible? 

MR KATUNTU: Yes I do, and at an appropriate time, I will cite some provisions to assist the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

Mr Speaker, when people pass on, sometimes you fail to get the words that can describe these people. I have seen many people who have died and I have attended many functions where people just talk generally. It is different for hon. Justice Mulenga. 

For anybody who knew who Justice Joseph Mulenga was, they will tell you that he epitomises the finest of the legal profession. That he could rise from a Pupil State Attorney to the position of Attorney-General is a dream for any lawyer. That he could rise from an ordinary member of Uganda Law Society to be the president and captain of Uganda Law Society is the dream of any lawyer. That he could rise from being a judge up to the Supreme Court of a country is a dream of any lawyer. That he could go to the continent and become judge at the African Court on Human and People’s Rights is a dream of any lawyer. That he could be one of the finest legal practitioners in the country is the dream of any lawyer. There is nothing which Justice Mulenga has not been in the legal fraternity. He has lived it all.

When I was starting my career, there were around five law firms in this country, which any young man or woman would aspire to work for. There was, Kateera, Kagumire; Katende, Sempebwa; Mulenga, Kalemera; Aigihugu and Kayondo. They were the only firms worth working for. There weren’t many, and all of us at that time when we were leaving the Law Development Centre could move to these five law firms to see whether we could have an opportunity. That is the time I came into contact with Justice Mulenga at his chambers at Buganda Road.

One thing, which I vividly remember, is that he had this authoritative voice, quite an intimidating deep voice. He sat there and interviewed me and eventually he gave me a position as a student on internship. However, when I left, I passed by the office of my then Member of Parliament, the late James Mwandha. The late Mwandha said, “Yes, Mr Joseph Mulenga is one of the best lawyers, but I think you better work for a law firm where you will get closer supervision.” That is how I ended up in another law firm on Kitgum House. The rest is history.

When politicians become judges, they have this conflict or fight in their minds as to where their loyalty should be, either to the oath they take or to the political biases they have. Justice Mulenga did one thing, which some of us are proud of, and that is, he exhibited professionalism. If you are talking about a judge, you must know that there are many categories of judges, and I must say for some of them when you read their judgements, you wonder which law school they went to.

You would read Justice Mulenga’s judgements and see what we call a judge of jurisprudence, setting precedents for the workforce to follow and putting the law in context. You see, if you are a judge of the Supreme Court, you are not a judge of facts; you are supposed to be setting standards such that the judges of the lower courts follow.

In his famous case of Andrew Mwenda, Charles Onyango Obbo against the Attorney-General, Constitutional Civil Appeal No. 2 of 2002, I will quote a few extracts to show you what judge Justice Mulenga was; he said: “From the foregoing different definitions, it is evident that the right to freedom of expression extends to holding, receiving and imparting all forms of opinion, ideas and information. It is not confined to categories such as correct opinions, sound ideas or truthful information. Subject to the limitation under Article 43, a person’s expression or statement is not precluded from the constitutional protection simply because it is thought by another or others to be false, erroneous, controversial, or even unpleasant. Everyone is free to express his or her views. Indeed, the protection is most relevant and required when a person’s views are opposed or objected to by society or any part thereof as false or wrong. I think, with due respect to the Learned Justice Berko J.A, he misconstrued what was in issue...” and he continues. 

You see the quality of argument that you cannot find with some of these -(Laughter)- I can go on, Mr Speaker. “The liberty cannot be denied to some ideas and saved for others. The reason is plain enough; no man; no committee; and surely no Government has the infinite wisdom and disinterestedness accurately and unselfishly to separate what is true from what is debatable and both from what is false.” That is Justice Mulenga; and you can go on and on. That is the man lying here, in the coffin. 

Some people die and there is no legacy they are leaving behind. It is right here in black and white. The entire country and generations to come; lawyers to be born are going to be reading about one of the wonderful judges this country will ever produce. (Applause)    

I know everybody wants to make a contribution because Justice Mulenga has not been like any other around. Justice Mulenga, you fought a good fight. God be with you until we meet. Thank you. (Applause)    

3.58
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker, honourable members and the bereaved family. It is my honour to pay tribute to the late Justice Mulenga who hails from my constituency. Bufumbira East, Kisoro and Uganda at large, have lost a great man whose replacement may not be an easy task. Honourable members, the fact that Government of Uganda has failed to replace some of the judges in the Supreme Court - because the bench is now half - is evidence that replacing such judges of the late Mulenga’s calibre is not easy. 

We, the people from Kisoro, knew him as a peacemaker and when people had issues, they would go to his office or home and he would give them wise counsel even without paying. He was never discriminatory; he would deal with the elders; and he would deal with the young ones. Some of us used to interact with him even when we were much younger. So, we knew him as a great man.
 
The late Mulenga did not only believe in fairness and justice, but also practiced fairness and justice, and he was very principled. That is why honourable members have mentioned that even when he was appointed to different positions, he never left what he believed in - the Democratic Party. So, it shows that he was really principled and a nationalist because if he had contested in Kisoro as a Mufumbira – he also contested in Kampala and won. That in itself shows that he was really a nationalist and when he went to serve at the Africa continent level, it showed that he was a Pan-Africanist.
 
He contributed so much to the development of Kisoro District because Kisoro was under Kabale for a long time, and he is among the people who we would say liberated the Bafumbira from the Bakiga in Kabale -(Laughter)- the freedom we got can be attributed to many people, including the late Mulenga. We look at that as a source of inspiration. 

He inspired young people to join the legal profession and a number of Bafumbira and Bakiga, including my Prime Minister, could have been beneficiaries from his lifestyle as a lawyer or professional. I know a number of lawyers look for money and that is why Government is finding it very difficult to employ judges. Some lawyers are more interested in money than professionalism or national service. So, even when some lawyers are considered, they turn down the offer because they are looking at the money they are making in their private firms, which the late Justice Mulenga didn’t look at. 

I would like to call upon the government that since he served selflessly, and being selfless doesn’t mean that the judges in Uganda and other civil servants should not be fully remunerated or facilitated to do their work faithfully and with minimal corruption, because corruption is now everywhere. The judges should be paid adequately. 

It is very shameful to see that the CEO of Kampala City Council Authority is earning over Shs 40 million which can pay about eight judges, and yet, what they decide is actually law. So, it is also maybe erroneous for Members of Parliament to earn much more than judges because they also participate in making laws. We believe that these lessons should not only be here when people have died, but should be looked at even when they are still alive. 

We, from Kisoro, know that we have lost a very brilliant man and we shall never forget his contribution; and it is not only the people of Kisoro, but Uganda and the world over that will miss him. May the Lord rest his soul in eternal peace. 

4.03
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to pay tribute to Justice Mulenga on behalf of the Conservative Party and the people of Rubaga South. 

I would like to first of all mention one important thing; I came to know Justice Mulenga way back in 1983 when he was representing the Democratic Party in the interparty cooperation spirit. One prediction he made to me that later turned out to be right is that: “You young man, you should become a Member of Parliament.” And indeed, I became a Member of Parliament.  (Laughter) So, I would like to pay tribute to him because he used to give me courage in the company of the then Secretary-General of the Democratic Party, Mr Robert Kitariko. 

I would like to characterise the late Justice Mulenga in three dimensions. One, is that of politics, the second one is as a litigant and the third as a Supreme Court Judge. In the first category of politics, he was a unique person. Justice Mulenga was a unifying force of the Opposition and we benefitted a lot from his analysis of issues. 

He was also a very strong believer in Government by discussion. When he took up an argument in an assembly where we had to get marks, we were assured that the marks would come. And he contributed a lot to the success of the Opposition.
  
In courts of law, he was a spectacular litigant. He did a lot to ensure that there was press freedom. And it is on record that he defended treason suspects like the late Vincent Nyanzi and the late Prof. Kyesimira, an economist, without any costs. So, we would like to pay tribute to him. 

I have taken trouble to analyse the role of Justice Mulenga from a very specific point of law in regard to his contribution as a Judge of the Supreme Court in Besigye v. Museveni and the Electoral Commission case in 2001. According to him, court could be convinced that the vote-rigging in 2001 could have affected the final results of the Presidential elections. As a Justice of the Supreme Court, his analysis of issues could only be related to Lord Denning of London in the case of Central London Properties Ltd v. High Trees House Ltd. (Laughter)

In proving his side of dissent, Justice Mulenga referred to the English case when he was giving his analysis in the case of Besigye v. Museveni, and the Electoral Commission 2001. He proved his side of the story by referring to a very famous case of Barter v. Barter – a marriage dispute case of prominence in the House of Lords, where the Judges agreed that proving a case beyond reasonable doubt can be done through court expression and even statutory expression, and not necessarily only through the proof that the evidence adduced must be substantial enough to overwhelm the given result. That gained him a lot of intellectual prominence in terms of assessment of issues of judicial formation.

In that assessment of his case, which portrayed him as habing a dissenting opinion, Justice Mulenga quoted Lord Bucknell who said this – in the case of Barter v. Barter: “I do not understand how court can be satisfied that a charge has been proved if at the end of the case it has a reasonable doubt in the mind whether the case has been proved to be satisfied and at the same time to have a reasonable doubt seems to me to be an impossible state of mind.” In a nutshell, Justice Mulenga was simply saying, that when you are charged, that is one reasonable ground which later on can make you guilty of the offence. Museveni was charged because there was evidence of vote-rigging and the consequence should not have been mountainous. 

So, finally, Mr Speaker, what am I talking about? (Laughter) I would like to finally pay tribute to Justice Mulenga for his vision about politics, about law and about litigation. In summary, I knew him as a man of passion; a man of sentiment; a man of conviction; and a man of joy. Thank you. (Applause)

4.10
Mr Tress Bucyanayandi (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, honourable members and the family of the late Justice Mulenga, as an individual, I feel extremely sad at the loss of a friend and a contemporary. We started together when we were both pupils at Mutolere Primary School in the early 1940s under the guidance of Sister Zacharia, a famous teacher - Kimerana, and a distinguished teacher, Dominic Bukolwe. 

As we progressively moved on through secondary school to the higher levels at St Leo’s, Justice Mulenga started distinguishing himself as an extremely brilliant man who deserved and mated the admiration of the Brothers of Christian Instruction. He left me at St Leo’s and moved to St Mary’s College Kisubi for HSC. Clearly at that level, he distinguished himself as a scholar and won a scholarship to go and study in the UK. So, we parted ways temporarily as I headed for the Americas for my own studies.

Having said that, I want to associate myself with the positive attributes mentioned about Justice Mulenga. I will point out only four areas of additional attributes. First of all, he was a very principled man. At the time he stood for elections in the 1970s, politics in Kisoro was extremely difficult. I am not sure what probability he had, but suffice it to say that on a balance of probability, he had done extremely well. I can assure this House that people liked him then and they still like him now. So, anybody in his family who would like to succeed him still has a frame of reference because he left a good name. That is a fact.

The second thing is that he was extremely developmental and liked his district. I spent long hours with him – here, locally at home or even when we travelled outside together – and the latest was when we were both in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt under the African Peer Review Mechanism. We had a long chat about the development of our own district and his participation in development issues. Those of you who will have the opportunity to go to Kisoro will see evidence of this when you visit his home. He has a beautiful country home, dairy cattle and developed coffee for export to the markets in the USA. That was him.

Thirdly, he is a man liked by his people in Kisoro. Every time he had holidays, he travelled home and stayed in his community. He came around and shared whatever he had – food, drink and so forth. Maybe that is why he has remained popular up to this moment.

Lastly, as someone else has said, he has remained a committed Christian, a devout and fair man, and I appreciate the fact that at the time he died, he was able to get his last sacraments. We Christians believe that there is life after death and that what has happened is simply a transformation from this body to the next. At that point, I wish his soul to rest in eternal peace.

4.14
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I rise to support a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Mulenga. I got to know Justice Mulenga as a young man and I have grown to see him at work. Therefore, I would have a lot to talk about him, but given the time, I will try to summarise. 

I think Justice Mulenga is one of the Ugandans that one would call the most decent that Uganda has had. He was very decent; he is a man who loved peace and harmony. Whenever I had a chat with him, he reflected how Uganda would be peaceful and how we would be in harmony. He hated violence and defeat, and loved justice. Maybe this, as many people have talked, thrived from his background in terms of religion and the party he subscribes to. He loved fairness and never wanted people to take advantage of others. He was a good listener and listened to both the old and young. And he loved to chat with and advise us who were a little younger. 

How I wish, that those who are governing today, and those who aspire to govern tomorrow, would emulate such important characteristics that this man had and exhibited when he was still living. 

He was never arrogant. If you talked to Justice Mulenga, you would never detect any form of arrogance. He was a very clever man and normally clever people tend to exhibit arrogance, but he was a man who was cool-hearted; a man who would want even to detect whether you have understood what you are talking about.

I remember at one time in the Seventh Parliament, seated just at the back here, a friend of mine was being appointed an Attorney-General and I was trying to compare him with Justice Mulenga, and if he would match what Justice Mulenga would be. I even had to go to court for that matter to challenge that appointment. Well, forgive me if I had taken a different direction; but I think he was a very intelligent man. The lawyers have testified and I wish that when we are appointing Judges to these benches, the appointment suits what type of man that should sit on those benches.

Lastly, on behalf of the people of Rukiga, we wish Justice Mulenga a peaceful rest. We send our sympathies to the family, the relatives and people of Kisoro. The people of Rukiga are with you. May his soul rest in peace.

4.18
MS RUTH NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, on behalf of the people of Kiboga and on my own behalf, I would like to pay tribute to our friend, the late Justice Joseph Mulenga. 

I got to know the late in 1994 when we met in the Constituent Assembly where we were both members of the Constituent Assembly. I was representing Kiboga District. Young and fresh as I was from the university, I joined the late Justice Joseph Mulenga’s committee because I wanted to deeply understand how Government works. You have been told that he was the chairperson of the committee which was handling the Judiciary, Cabinet and the Legislature - the three arms of Government. So, I decided to join this committee and it was in his committee where I got to interact closely with the late Justice Joseph Mulenga.

We were a few of us, young people, who did not know much about national politics. It was, Nsangi Mary Kakembo who was my O.G., Beatrice Byenkya Nyakaisiki, who is in the Gallery, Tumwine Polly, hon. Alex Byarugaba, we had Miria Matembe and myself. We would meet at lunch time at a certain  joint - eating place - and I want to inform you colleagues that the late Justice Mulenga, with his deep and soft voice, had a sense of humour whereby he would crack a joke and all of you laugh without him laughing. 

He gave professional guidance to many of us who were strategising to continue with the national politics having gotten the opportunity where the NRC then enacted laws which could help young people to join national politics. That is the time when we had the youth councils, the women councils and the People with Disabilities Act enacted in this Parliament. So, we would look to people like the late Justice Mulenga for advice and I want to assure you that he was not mean. Like hon. Jack Sabiiti has said, he would listen to the young; and to the old; and it is a few of us who were in that Constituent Assembly who are remaining in the Parliament here: the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Second Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Kajura; Ndugu Rugunda; His Excellency the Vice President, Ssekandi and I think hon. Dombo. We are very few who are still continuing -(Interjections)- and hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

I want to really give a testimony that we benefitted from the wisdom of the late Justice Mulenga. He mentored us and up to now, we are still following his path. It is sad that we are standing here to say farewell to him, but at the same time, we should not forget to thank the Almighty God who gave Justice Mulenga the talent which he used to make the kind of contribution he has made.

Let us celebrate the 74 years which he has immensely utilised, and I am sure that many of us will continue emulating him. Let us celebrate the children he has left behind. Let us celebrate the friends he has made, and let us also thank his parents because I am sure the parents contributed tremendously to the achievement that the late Justice Mulenga has made. May we pray that the Almighty God sustains the bereaved family and rests his soul in eternal peace. Thank you.

4.24
MS CHRISTINE HELLEN AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Teso and specifically Kumi District, I stand here to pay tribute to the late Justice Joseph Mulenga. I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for moving the motion and the Leader of the Opposition for supporting it. 

Uganda has lost yet another of her great sons whose legacy in the legal profession and humble nature should be a precedent for all of us and his colleagues in the legal profession to emulate. 

The late Justice Joseph Mulenga was a peacemaker. I remember when he was Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; during the days of the peace mission, he addressed so many Teso rebels who were remanded in Luzira. For him he was advocating for peace and forgiveness. When the message about his death was announced by the print media a number of people from Teso called to pay their condolences to this great son.

As we mourn him, I was very happy to see that the casket in which his remains are has four guardian angels taking care of him. I do not know who made the choice of that casket, but I was emotionally moved as a Catholic and the late Mulenga was a practicing Catholic and he indeed lived to the sacrament of the holy Catholic Church.

Many of us will agree that the late Justice Joseph Mulenga was humble in lifestyle, but full of wisdom and understanding. This was illustrated in his professional performance and his service track record. The late Mulenga was one of the polished, honest, accomplished and distinguished lawyers and judges this country has had. Many colleagues have talked about him and he lived a legacy that most of us will remember. 

The late Mulenga was a friend to the media. He always said that the media do not write wrong things if you do not say what they write. I remember he was always advocating for legislation that supports the print media and I know the people in the media fraternity will miss him as their ally.

It must not go without recognition that he served this country in the legal profession for long - 47 years - attaining the position of the Judge of the Supreme Court of Uganda and Africa, a member of the Human Rights Court in East Africa, and a President of the East African Court of Justice, just to mention a few. 

The late, whose body lies here - we salute him for what he did to this country. When he was in NRC, he worked with my late husband, the late Dr Aporu, and during those days, the ten point programme was very crucial and even the Members of the Frontbench had to officially make everybody know who their spouse was. I was a very young spouse of a minister, but I got known to people like Gen Moses Ali, the Second Deputy Prime Minister and even colleagues seated up there; Prof. Kabwegyere, hon. K.K. Kirunda - and they used to come to our home to “Window one”. “Window one” meant sucking “Ajono” and they had to visit -(Laughter)- So, it was a Cabinet that the late Justice Mulenga served and the spouses had a privilege to interact.

I remember very well the wife of the late Justice Joseph Mulenga who is here. We need to pray for her; we need to give them encouragement during this time of demise and we pray that the Almighty God sustains the bereaved family. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.30
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you as the leadership of this Parliament for accepting to give us this chance to pay our last respects to a national hero in my opinion. 

I would like to thank the movers of the motion. A lot has been said about Justice Mulenga. From the time that the media reported his death, I have had opportunity to meet my constituents, meet lawyers and meet contemporaries in the legal fraternity. In my opinion and from the teachings that I have heard, in death we must learn lessons. 

I would like to share my own thought process. At my age then, Justice Mulenga had already started contributing to this country and contributing positively to the lives of others. Are we at this age, the young people of this country, matching what he did then? If not, then to what percentage do we mark ourselves to what he was then? 

I have had the chance of talking to some very distinguished lawyers in this country. I cannot boast like very many other speakers that I met him, I had experience with him, but from what they tell you about him, we realise that we still have a very long way to go. 

He has conscripted his name in golden letters in the history of Uganda. I have googled the name Justice Mulenga. Those of you who are in my age bracket will understand what Google is; Google is for the future. They have enumerated his achievements in the sectors of law, in the sectors of fight for freedom of speech, in his contribution to the Democratic Party and democracy in this country, and his contribution in the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution. I will not delve into that, but it hurts me that today as we celebrate his life - to me it is a celebration because of what he has contributed. 

As we mourn, this country today does not have a complete cancer unit, and that is why the Justice had to be flown out of the country. We always come to this House and lament on these issues. I would like to urge my colleagues that this is the budgeting process, why can’t we equip Mulago Hospital to fight cancer and to fight kidney diseases? Why do we have to fly out Ugandans of such high repute? That means if you are not a Justice Mulenga or his equivalent, you will die in Tororo Hospital as a non-entity who will never appear on Google.

I would like to take this opportunity to support this motion that has been moved. While I move and pass on my heartfelt condolences on behalf of the people of Tororo Municipality and on my behalf, I would like to conclude by urging honourable members here; hon. Kwizera touched on the matter. The remuneration that we are giving the Justices of this country leaves a lot to be desired. I would urge this House, the committee requisite, the honourable members seated on the front bench, that if we find our remuneration wanting, how do we expect a Judge who judges us because our political petitions go in front of these judges, and you have heard how noble, humble and honest this gentleman has been; and he has groomed many others that are still there. You expect them to dispense impartial justice; justice without favouring the system; justice without favouring the individual; without getting a kick back. Yesterday, I was watching the news and there is an Anti-Corruption Coalition which has come up with a report. It said the judicial system is the second most prone to corruption after our Police Force in this country -(Interjections)- in East Africa; the reason being the pay which you give these people. You can only expect utmost honesty, impartiality and dispensation of justice if at all you pay them well. You pay them peanuts and you expect to get chocolates out of there? I think even the Bible is very clear. You actually reap what you sow.

While we pray to the Almighty that Justice Mulenga’s soul rests in eternal peace, I would like to urge my honourable colleagues to please pick the lessons which I have been thinking about in the past few days. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.38
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance to pay tribute to the fallen hero, Justice Nyamihana Mulenga. On behalf of the old boys of St. Leo’s College, where I am the president of the Old Boys’ association, we convey our condolences to the family and to the entire nation. I can see a number of Old Boys here: Hon. Tinkasiimire, hon. Elijah Okupa, hon. Tress Buchanayandi and the rest.

Many things have been said about our fallen hero. I would like to observe that he leaves a challenge with us. Someone coming from Kisoro, Mutolere Primary School, but later ending up in Kisubi; it is not a simple journey, but that was determination. 

Rising from being a state attorney to a Minister of Justice of this country was not a simple journey. I would like to observe that all this is because of determination and integrity. I implore my colleagues and the rest of the country that one can rise to these levels with integrity, live with it there and die with it like Justice Mulenga has shown. 

Humility has been talked about; it’s very important and this is what most of us lack today. Humility is lacking in this country and we need to have it. 

Imbalance in education; he came from Kisoro up to Kisubi. But how many children right now can come from Kisoro whether genius or not and reach Kisubi, and later rise to such a position? This leaves a lot to be desired. Someone talked about the scholarships. This is true that today in this country, many of the scholarships go to the well-to-do. There is a lot of imbalance and we urge Government to look into this.

Corruption is my last point. My colleagues have talked about it, especially hon. Sanjay Tanna. I agree with the previous speakers that we need to remunerate our civil servants including the judges very well. But this should not be a reason for being corrupt because in this country, it is common knowledge that people who are highly paid are among those who are very corrupt. We have had cases in this Parliament. (Laughter) So, it cannot be a reason completely that the moment you are highly paid, you are not going to be corrupt. 

Being corrupt is almost an inborn thing. Actually, it is a curse. You have put it right. So, when there is a curse in that direction, whether you get Shs 200 million per month, this person will be corrupt. However, I agree with my brothers and sisters that we need to pay our people handsomely.

Let me rest my case here and I pray to God to receive him with open hands. Thank you very much.

4.41
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): I want to thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. On my own behalf and on behalf of the people from Bunyoro and all the Bafuruki who live in Bunyoro, to pay our last tribute to Justice Mulenga. I came to know about Justice Mulenga in 2001 through a phone call, when I was a student at Makerere University doing a Masters in Public Administration. He had seen my picture in The Monitor demonstrating against the removal of a democratically-elected chairman then, Lulemera. He told me, “Fight on, you have a good cause and should you be arrested, you have received my phone call. Give it to any of your relatives, you will be helped.” For sure, he said many words. What I can vividly remember among them was an encouragement that, “To co-exist, you must exist. You did not commit a sin for your parents to migrate to Bunyoro. You only happen to be a Ugandan born in Bunyoro, and your rights are covered under Article 27. You can move anywhere, stay anywhere and you must fight for it.” 

Later on, I came to learn that he was actually related to Kale Kayihura, who is my very good friend. (Laughter) When I went to Law School, I was always interested in reading his holdings together with those of Justice Kanyeihamba and Katutsi. You see the brains of a judge – I think it was my good friends, Katuntu, who said he was a distinguished Justice. For those who have read law, his judgements are similar to those of Lord Denning. Now, Uganda has lost a Lord Denning. We are only lucky that he was a Justice of a court of record and you can have reference to his judgements. 

For sure, personally, I will dearly miss you because you did not stop at that call of saying, “Fight on,” you told me to leave my job in Tororo and join politics. You said that, “It is only the educated to help the uneducated, and at your level, I am sure you have the courage and what it takes to save and emancipate your people.” I am glad today that my people in Bunyoro are happy. We are steadily reaching the same footing on the advice of Justice Mulenga. 

I had a good job in Tororo. I would have continued enjoying the comfort of that job without the counsel of Justice Mulenga. You may say, even in the House, I equally have the comfort of a good job; but he drew my attention to the fact that there are many people outside there who left Kisoro or Kabale with nothing. They are in Bunyoro and they need a point of reference. I am happy that I adhered to his advice. 

But it is sad for me that at this stage, when I am in the House, we have not put in place legislations and facilities in this country that can help the people suffering from the disease that has killed him. I pray to this Government to reconsider its priorities. If we can buy state-of-the-art jets; those that can shoot at so many thousand miles, then let us also consider having a hospital that is the best in the world to treat this disease that has killed Mulenga. I would have enjoyed more days of his counsel –(Member time out.)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please wind up. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I would like to say, that unlike other lawyers, when you read his rulings, he did not emphasise the law; he emphasised justice. I am certain that many Ugandans are looking for justice from the judicial system. Let us pray that those who are trying to amend the Constitution will always remember that it had a good brain of a distinguished Judge, Justice Mulenga. When he has said it; what else can you add? Again, Ugandans, let us regain our conscience and lead the life and leave the legacy he has left. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the time I had assigned for this debate has only 13 minutes left. There are many Members who want to make their contribution. So, I think I am going to have to change the rules now to be able to accommodate the numbers that are standing. We will be using two minutes each. Let me start with the honourable member for Kisoro District, then Oyam North, Bungokho South in Mbale, then I will see how to come to this side. 

4.50
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by the hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to the late Justice Joseph Mulenga. I represent the people of Kisoro in this House. Kisoro District has lost a very intelligent man; a man of integrity; a man who came from a UPE School, that is Mutolere and Sooko primary schools, and reached where he has reached. I do not know whether in the UPE schools that we have now, we can get a person coming from Sooko or Mutolere to reach where he had reached. 

He lived a very useful life and as a Christian, he stood for the truth. As a professional, he moved from one step to another with dignity and he did not compromise his ethics. In politics, he was very exemplary. I am here to testify because he contested with my father in 1980, and I did not have any problem with him when I stood for this position. Instead, he encouraged me to continue standing. If it had been another person, he would continue with the grudges up to the last minute. So, I really appreciate him for being exemplary. 

I still want to talk about the salaries of the Judges. Surely, if you see the lives they lead, these are not people that are going to see anywhere anytime; these are people who are locked up in their homes; they cannot sit anywhere anyhow. Therefore, I feel, Government should consider them and increase their salaries. I request my colleagues to fight for these Judges. I would not want to talk much. 

The people of Kisoro are going to miss him and if you ever interacted with him – at least I ever interacted with him, about five years ago. He met me in my office when I was still working in local government. I even told him I was planning to contest as Member of Parliament and he encouraged me. He said, “Go on and contest; you are still young. Do not think of going to stand when you are old, you will not manage to climb the hills”. So, I thank him for that. 

And for the young lawyers today, I wish they could emulate the character of the late Justice Mulenga. He was a very soft-spoken man and he would speak the truth. May his soul rest in peace. 

4.53
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): In as much as many have spoken volumes about the great things Justice Joseph Mulenga said and did while he lived, I too have a few comments to make about Justice Mulenga. 

Mr Speaker, it is sad that in the last three months, we have lost so many great souls in this country. But today, we have particularly witnessed the demise of one of the greatest legal and political minds in this country. I do not claim to have closely associated with the Justice Mulenga while he lived. But I would like to testify that because of my interest in following up political events in this country, Justice Mulenga was one of those great nationals that could not escape your attention. And I dare say, today, we are left with very few of those.

Justice Mulenga as a politician was a distinguished but very clear-thinking politician. He belonged to the Democratic Party, and as a young man, I was born and bred in the moles of UPC. But I never failed to respect Justice Mulenga. I never failed to see in Justice Mulenga –(Member timed out.)

4.55
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to associate myself with the motion on the Floor. The late Joseph Mulenga came into my life in 1980, when I was the organising secretary for the Democratic Party in Makerere University. He was among the few, including people like hon. Sam Kutesa, who contested in Mbarara North Constituency against His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni today. People like hon. Zackary Olum, who was the youth organiser at the party headquarters; and a person like Robert Kitariko, who was the secretary-general of the party. 

The late Justice Joseph Mulenga was a very humble man who associated with everybody; young, old, educated and alike. I last met him this year in June, when we caught up at Nairobi Airport; I was coming from Dar-es-Salaam and he was coming from Arusha. We travelled together, sat close to each other and chatted.

The gap that the late Justice Mulenga has left by way of his political and judicial service work is going to be a challenge to many of us. It is not until yesterday that I got to know that my senior ancestor, Lt Gen. Kale Kayihura is a nephew to the late Justice Joseph Mulenga. The life that Justice Mulenga lived, and the type of work that my senior ancestor from Northcote Hall is doing as the leader of the Uganda Police are at variance. You cannot believe that the IGP was brought up by Justice Mulenga. (Laughter) (Member timed out.)

4.58
MR MICHEAL WERIHKE KAFABUSA (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Mr Speaker, I would like to join my colleagues who have spoken before me in supporting the motion moved in paying tribute to the late Justice Joseph Mulenga. 

Personally, I came to know the late Joseph Mulenga through my late uncle, Solomon Mutenyo, who was a very strong DP man in Mbale District. As a young man, I did observe the late Justice Joseph Mulenga as a person who was humble and liked; in fact, for the first time, you would just admire who he was as a person. He has been such through his life; a humble person who believes in truth and stands for justice.

I really do admire the attributes that the late Justice Joseph Mulenga had and I think for us as leaders, we should actually pick a leaf to emulate what he has lived through. Because of his humility, hard work and as a person who loved his country, it saw him rise through the ranks as we heard from a pupil, State Attorney to senior State Attorney, and eventually ended up being an Attorney-General. This is a demonstration that when you stand for the truth and commitment to your country, you reap, and this is what we have seen through the late Joseph Mulenga. (Member timed out_)

5.00 	
MR JOHN KAMARA (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): I thank you and because of time, I will directly go to the contributions of the late Mulenga to this country and in Kisoro. It is clear that the late was a staunch DP and was one of those wielding a special post in DP. 

However, this did not prevent him from responding to the call to be a minister in the ruling NRM government. When we look at this, it is a challenge and we must learn from him because if he accepted to come and work with Government, then my brothers and sisters in the Opposition – my brother Kassiano Wadri and others - if called, it does not mean that, for instance, when you are in the Opposition, you must not work with Government and, therefore, reducing the work of Police.

I think that if it were be possible, all my brothers and sisters would join hands and work together like the late joined NRM and started working with this Government. On this note, therefore, I would like to say that the late Mulenga was not working on political party issues, but on national issues, and that is why he accepted to serve this Government.

When we consider what the late did in Kisoro – one time in 1997, when I was in senior six, I attended one of the seminars organised by the late and Dr Philemon Mateke, and remember that these two used to contest together. This is a sign that when we are in politics, we must not become permanent enemies. These people became friends –(Member timed out.)

5.02
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to say that while we send off a great man – I was sharing with my brother, Gen. Kale Kayihura over lunch that when my son died, I learnt something I would like to share with everybody who has lost somebody. During the funeral service, they said, “Celebrating the life…” I stand to say that let us celebrate the life of a great man in the names of Justice Joseph Mulenga who has completed his work.

On record, I have been in this Parliament for the last 26 years, and I have interacted with so many people, but in the records of this Parliament stand the contributions of Justice Joseph Mulenga, which I would invite people to read. In the courts of law, stand his judgments. When I was in the General Court Marshal, he is one of the four senior judges I consulted and he gave me valuable advice on principle. He told me one thing, “Justice is about public interest. Justice is taking a decision in the interest of the public.” I would like people to read his judgments and find that whatever he decided, most of it if not all, will justify that.	 
His role in the Ministry of Justice and Parliament here, as he was a party person like any other - I was very excited to see the stalwarts of DP today with whom we shared during the parliamentary sessions before we divided up and went into multi-party politics - who contributed to Uganda without the divisions that I am seeing today; who committed their lives; and he was one of those you could rely on. (Member timed out.)  	
5.05
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hillary Onek): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing to support the motion and would really like to appreciate all the contributions, the good words and recognition of the good deeds that the late Mulenga did for the country. He was a great patriot, a principled man and a great Ugandan.

He always had quality outputs in whatever he did in his life, some of which have been cited here on the Floor of Parliament. He exhibited leadership not many can measure to. He exhibited great leadership in his public life and also in his private life. For this, I would like to appreciate him.

I would like to ask ourselves, particularly the young leadership in this House, Have we learnt anything from the great lives of these patriots and heroes? Recently, we mourned Lord Adimola. A lot of good words were said. Have we learnt anything from that? Are we keeping Uganda united? Are we managing this country well to the expectations of the likes of our elders who are now departed? I think this is something which the youth must learn. Most of the leadership nowadays – everything is from the mouth and not from the brain or even considering the consequences of whatever comes from their mouths. 

I would like to appreciate the role of the family of the late; among others, Gen. Kale Kayihura, who is working tirelessly to keep this country together. (Applause) Keep this country united! He is fighting anarchy which is coming out from this cheap politics in this country; politics that is trying to fragment and destroy our country. We have obligations –(Member timed out_)

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mr Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I stand here to support the motion and will give a testimony in form of a contribution. 

Justice Mulenga is not here by accident. He is here before us in this august House because of his contribution and upright record. 

I came to know him in 1989. Somebody was trying to cheat me and he engaged him. He sat with my lawyer and they agreed to settle the matter out of court. From that time, I came to know more about Justice Mulenga. He was not interested in his judgement, but he was interested in justice. (Applause)  

I can only quote from Timothy 4:7-8 that, “He had a good race; he covered full distance, and maintained the faith,” and that is why we are here. 

I share the grief with the bereaved family, particularly my long-time friend, Gen. Kale Kayihura. May the Almighty God rest him in perfect peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now ask hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda to sum up the motion in five minutes.

5.09
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion and also convey my deep condolences to the family.

Justice Mulenga was a true person in as far as the Democratic Party is concerned. I wish many other DP members emulated the practice of Ndugu Mulenga. (Applause) He firmly believed in truth and justice and he worked for that. He had integrity. He was dignified. You didn’t have to talk to Mulenga to respect him. His conduct; his posture; his behaviour; conveyed a big message, which would be confirmed when he opened his mouth. So, I hope that the country and the Democratic Party members will emulate this example. 

Mr Speaker, it is very interesting to know that Gen. Kale and Mulenga are intimate relatives. I now fully understand the integrity and patriotism in Gen. Kale. It must have a connection. (Applause)

Mulenga was a diplomat and an ambassador of Uganda. I will just illustrate it by two quotations. The first quotation is a message from the President of the East African Court of Justice, while sending a message to Uganda and to the family about the death of Ndugu Mulenga. He said, and I quote: “Joseph Mulenga was a brilliant, thoughtful, calm, and principled judge. The Republic of Uganda and East African Community have lost a great judge.” So, his reputation was beyond the borders of our country, it was Pan-African. 

The second quotation is from the African Court of Human Rights and Peoples Rights. The message following his death is: “Mulenga’s death is indeed a great loss to the judicial fraternity in Uganda, in the African Court and indeed for the whole continent of Africa.”

So, this is somebody whose conduct was recognised beyond our borders and indeed he leaves a great example for us to emulate, and has done Uganda proud, especially in the international arena. And of course as we heard, he died when he was still a serving judge of the African Court of Human Rights and Peoples Rights. 

Ndugu Mulenga was actually always working for the common good of Uganda. He may have belonged to a party, but whenever the interests of Uganda would clash with any sectarian considerations, the interests of Uganda would become primary, and Mulenga would fight for that. (Applause) And, indeed, he played a critical role in 1986 when the National Resistance Movement took over power and was consolidating national unity. That is when he performed very well as a Cabinet minister, as an Attorney-General and gave excellent guidance amidst a very difficult environment. I am happy that some of his colleagues are seated over there, Ndugu Ntimba, Ndugu K.K., Kitariko has already gone, and a number of others, like Kawanga, are here. I see Ndugu Kyemba over there. They confirm this because they worked with this giant. 

This man’s character –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your time is up. Two minutes for you to close.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me these few minutes to make this case. As I conclude, Mulenga, as somebody from Kisoro and Kigezi, was an example to all of us. He was a rallying point. Whenever there were issues concerning the road to Kisoro or the district for Kisoro, Mulenga would be at the forefront. I must say all of us would support him because he was fighting for a just cause. 

Therefore, Mulenga was not only a big man, but even at a small level, in Kisoro, he was big; at Kigezi level, he was big; at Uganda level, he was big. Now, later this year we are going to have the international convention of the Banya-Kigezi meeting. It is going to be held in Kisoro. I am sorry that Ndugu Mulenga who so strongly supported this cause of ensuring that the Banya-Kigezi in the Diaspora and those in Kigezi, work together for the common good of Kigezi and Uganda, is not going to be able to attend the meeting which is going to be hosted in Kisoro, and he was one of those backers who wanted to see it.

However, without him, I still invite the friends of Kigezi and the Banya-Kigezi to assemble in Kisoro when the notice and date is given so that we also pay respect to Ndugu Mulenga and to appreciate the work that he did for the people of Kisoro and Uganda.

The final comment is that the biggest tribute that is appropriate for Ndugu Mulenga is to be patriots; is to be just; is to take the common interest of Uganda and Africa as being paramount and more important than our narrow, parochial and sectarian considerations. May the Almighty God rest Mulenga’s soul in eternal peace. (Applause)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have another condolence message to the family and it is from hon. Okupa Elijah, Member of Parliament for Kasilo County. I will pass it to the family later. 

In the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery, I still have seen the hon. Henry Kyemba, hon. Annet Mukabera, former MP for Kisoro, and other distinguished Ugandans. You are welcome in joining us in this.

Honourable members, the motion is, that a resolution of this House be passed to pay tribute to the late Justice Joseph Mulenga. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members for your very eloquent speeches and very deep reflections; this was a deep conversation about a life well lived and a service well given to the country.

The National Anthem. (Three verses)

(Exit of the late Justice Joseph Mulenga.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, thank you very much for participating in this sitting and for contributing to the debate. You have greatly honoured the family for the service a distinguished son of this country has given to this country, to the region, the continent and the whole world. 

We are proud that it should be us chosen at this time to give farewell to him in Parliament. Our best wishes to the family, to draw for themselves internally, the strength to deal with this tragedy that has befallen them. 

This brings us to the conclusion of today’s special sitting of this House. The normal sitting of Parliament will resume on Tuesday at 2 O’clock and this special sitting is, therefore, adjourned. 

(The House rose at 5.24 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 4 September 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 

