 


Tuesday, 23 August 2022

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I can see some faces that I had taken long without seeing. 

Colleagues, the whole of last week, the media has been awash with stories of investigations being conducted by one of our committees - COSASE - and I have seen different reactions, some of them from Members of this House, making comments about the committees’ conduct of business in this House that would bring the image of the House into disrepute.

As you all know, we derive our powers from Article 90 of the Constitution and we are supposed to do our work. Also, when you look at rule 208 of our Rules of Procedure and Section 8 of the Parliamentary Powers and Privileges Act, we are supposed to do our work without interference. Of course, we must also do it responsibly.

On some occasions, we might go overboard, but if there is any issue you have with the conduct of business in this House, this House has leadership. You can only address it to the leadership of the House and that leadership is not only the Speaker's office, but you also have different whips; you have the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of Government Business through whom you can register any matter, if you have an issue.

Therefore, I caution those interfering with the way we are doing our work as a House; calling and threatening our Members of Parliament or trying to belittle this House when it is conducting its duty, that, that has to stop. We shall not allow anyone to impute ill motive on this House. (Applause)

I just want to caution you - whether you are on either bench - any day I can be a backbencher and sit with Hon. Macho. Therefore, colleagues, let us work together.

I want to encourage everyone that where you feel any excess in terms of how the committee is conducting its work, kindly raise it with us. I want to thank the Attorney-General; you will not hear him trying to question the integrity of Parliament anywhere. Rather, he calls the presiding officers. When we fail in our duty, then even if someone goes out, it would be understandable. 

Therefore, I urge you colleagues, to protect the image of this Parliament and next time, please do not force us to invoke our Rules of Procedure. We have disciplinary measures that we can take against anyone who tries to question or impute ill motive on the operations of this House.

Colleagues, that is the main issue I wanted to talk about. We have a lot of business, but each one of us has a duty of protecting the image of Parliament, including the leaders, when conducting your business.

Committee members, when in the committees, please behave in a manner that protects the image of Parliament. Where you feel you have an issue, please raise it with us and we shall ensure that each side is heard.

Is there any reaction to my communication? I have seen one of the culprits, Hon. John Musila, rising; so -

2.22
MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo East County, Namisindwa): Mr Speaker, I rise on a self-confession. It is good that you have guided us. I do not question the integrity of this House where I am a Member. I do not question the integrity of the committee of COSASE. It is good that you have said that I am a culprit. 

There are cases when we are made to appear like culprits. I had a Luganda programme on NBS. Equally, I have also read the English postings and I am wondering as to whether that was exactly what I said.

Mr Speaker, I know it hurts. COSASE, in any case, does not consist only of honourable members on your left. The bulk of them are Members on your right, where I belong. I am an ex-officio and if I so wish, I could attend any committee of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, on those grounds, if anybody made such writings, translating them from Luganda into English to appear so slanderous, rebellious and defamatory to the committee, I wish to stand here and apologise, if they hurt the committee members and anybody else. I also call upon colleagues of this House to keep the solidarity and unity of this House. By the way, we could come up and apologise the way I have done - I have led the way. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for being an honourable gentleman. Colleagues, that is how we behave in this House.

2.24
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Niwagaba, I have not allowed you.

MR NIWAGABA: I thought you allowed me -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I have now allowed you.
  
MR NIWAGABA: You pointed at me and I thought that - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have formalised your -

MR NIWAGABA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance you have given, but I would also implore Members to critically examine and appreciate rule 216(2) of our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can read it for them, honourable. 

MR NIWAGABA: Yes. “For the avoidance of doubt, evidence or a document received by a committee shall not be published or otherwise disclosed to any person other than a Member of Parliament until the report of the committee is presented to the House.” 

Honourable colleagues, once a matter is still under investigation before any committee, it is important that we do not go to the media to discuss the matter that is still being discussed. It is only when a report has been presented to the House that each and every one of us is free to go to the media and discuss, and get opinions from everybody. 

However, once the matter is still under investigation, I would implore Members from both sides of the House to try, as much as possible, to restrain themselves from discussing matters that are still pending investigation. That is the counsel I want to give. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, the senior colleague in this House has guided very well. That is why I said we have to behave responsibly. 

Sometimes, we go out after an MDA has appeared before the committee, and then we make very strong statements in the media, which we could not make in the committee. 

Also, on certain occasions, you find that statements are made about people, but in the end, the reports that come thereafter are different. That is why we implore you to focus. As the leadership, we shall also meet the leadership of the committees to handle this issue. 

However, the caution I give is simple: if you are dissatisfied or have any complaints about how the committees of Parliament are doing their work, this House has leadership; so, reach out to them. Do not call Members to the extent of reporting death threats against each other - as if we can turn against each other in this House. Please, let us restrain ourselves. 

Colleagues, this is a matter I do not want to open up. Hon. John Musila has already guided. 

MR ALLAN MAYANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter under rule 220 on action-taken reports. Let me read it:

“A Minister shall submit to Parliament an action-taken report detailing what actions have been taken by the relevant Ministry, following the resolutions or recommendations of Parliament.” 

On 18 May 2022, this august House made resolutions on the report of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on investigations of the unfair terms in the Memorandum of Understanding between Government of Uganda and Vinci Coffee Company Limited. 

The Attorney-General was to table an action-taken report on whether the agreement was null and void. It has been three months so far, but he has never replied. 

Surprisingly, before the Attorney-General reported back to the House, the Managing Director of Uganda Coffee Development Authority – Dr Emmanuel Lyamureme Livingira, on Thursday, 14 July 2022, in the New Vision - a Government newspaper - made an advert of abridged notice of expression of interest under open international bidding, inviting companies to show expression of interest for the provision of transaction advisory services for the establishment of a soluble coffee processing plant in Uganda –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude fast. What is the point of procedure?

MR MAYANJA: Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, for the Attorney-General to:

    1. Table an action-taken report immediately;

    2. Table all existing Public-Private Partnership agreements; and

    3. The Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to present a statement on the terms and conditions in the mentioned advert? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I gave my guidance last week on “point of procedure” because I found out that we are abusing it. I said “point of procedure” should only be limited to the proceedings of the day. 

Honourable colleague, this is a matter for which you would have come to my office as the presiding officer or to your leader - the Leader of the Opposition - and shared with him. It is a matter of the Order Paper. I would put the Attorney-General on the Order Paper so that he brings a report.

Therefore, if you are raising a matter of procedure beyond the items on the Order Paper, you are out of order. Honourable colleague, I have taken your matter. I am going to ensure that indeed, we follow up on it so that what is supposed to be done is done.

2.31
MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance.

On 21 August 2022, a total of 14 people were reported dead in West Nile; six in Arua City; five in Madi-Okollo; and three in Arua District. Other districts like Terego also registered some deaths. Some are still admitted in very critical condition in Arua Regional Referral Hospital and other health facilities, for consuming suspected poisonous locally brewed Waragi branded “City Five”, and uncertified by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS).

UNBS is mandated to determine and approve the quality of what every Ugandan consumes from both our local production plants and imported goods, for the safety of Ugandans. 

A lot of substandard goods are produced locally in this country and sent out in the markets. Some goods are also imported into this country without being checked by the UNBS. 

The UNBS offices in northern Uganda are located only in Gulu and Lira, which are very far from West Nile subregion, yet the absence of their services –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, prayers.

MR ATIMA: My prayer is from this point that I am raising –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Make your prayers.

MR ATIMA: Thank you. My first prayer is that Government, through the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude.

MR ATIMA: Government through the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, should give the UNBS the same attention given to the Ministry of Health because what they determine helps the country in terms of saving lives.

Two, a regional office be opened immediately in the West Nile subregion. This will protect and avert the challenges of losing lives the same way it has happened in West Nile.

Lastly, Government should support the families that have lost their dear ones, and the over 20 admitted in Arua Regional Referral Hospital. I beg to move. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I saw ministers consulting and pointing to the Prime Minister, but I just want to make clarification that I will be disturbing the Prime Minister on Thursdays. On other days, when the ministers are here, they should answer. When you are not here, it is when I refer to you. Honourable minister, I saw burials going on. 

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the Member, for raising this important matter. 

Firstly, we would like to send our condolences to the families that lost the 14 people, and those who are hurting in the hospital right now. When this incident happened, we dispatched a team from UNBS to go and assess the situation. We have picked the samples of the liquid that was taken. In a few days, we shall have the analysis out and know exactly what the content was in that particular liquid that they took. 

We have a plan to avoid dangerous substances and substandard products on the market. The first one, as the honourable member has pointed out, is that we are rolling out regional laboratories. We have set up one in Gulu. We hope that in the next three to four years, we will have covered six other regional laboratories, including one in Arua. 

The second is that we are re-enforcing our vigilance at parish and village levels because, as you realise, these substandard products on the market need vigilance at those levels. We are also going to continue sensitising the public about products on the market. If they do not bear the UNBS mark, please, they should not consume them.

Thirdly, we are –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Thank you, honourable minister. Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the minister's submission, in which they are trying to find the problem that caused the death of our people. 

I have risen on a point of clarification on whether Uganda, as a Government, does not have laboratories with the capacity to find the cause of death of our people - the content of alcohol - within 24 hours. As I speak, there are still people who are sick in the hospitals. At least, the results would have come out by now so that the doctors can find a solution to what they are treating. 

I, therefore, seek clarification on whether we have no capacity, in 24 hours – as a Government, with all the laboratories that we have – to find the real problem. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have two minutes.

MR BAHATI: The Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) is analysing the samples. Also, for those in the hospitals, the analysis is being done in the hospital.
 
Mr Speaker, we are also coming up with the Consumer Protection Bill; it is in the pipeline. We think it will protect the public from these substandard products. 

All in all, we call upon all Ugandans to continue being vigilant when it comes to these substandard products. If a product is on the market, please, check it. We try as much as possible to brand them – for those products that have been approved by UNBS – with a UNBS mark. Please, check them. 

The police has also swung into action. We have arrested those – according to the report – that were manufacturing this dangerous waragi. Their factory has also been closed, as we speak. I thank you, Mr Speak. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: [MEMBER: “Further clarification.”] Colleagues, you do not access a microphone before the Speaker allows you to speak.

Honourable minister, the issue is very simple. Some of these products you are talking about are advertised extensively in the media. For example, we know - and some of them are misleading. Men go and spend the whole day drinking waragi. Then, when they reach home for their marital duties, they go for “Mukama Nayamba”. (Laughter) This is because it is advertised that it helps on the other side of the bargain. Mukama Nayamba, for the sake of Hon. Obua, means “God will help.” (Laughter) 

So, I spend the whole day on Waragi. Then, I have a family to build and I put it in God's hands, instead of delivering, as a man. They advertise it every day. There are many.

I remember in the 10th Parliament, we talked about some of these things. There is a Waragi called “Bajaj”. When someone has a product called “Bajaj”, it means when you take it, you take off like a Bajaj.  (Laughter) And, we allow such an advert!

Honourable minister, we are allowing misleading and uncontrolled adverts. Can't you work out an arrangement with the Uganda Communications Commission to ensure that media houses stop running such misleading adverts? There is a Member from the affected community. He was a member of the UNBS board; Hon. Afidra. You can tell us.

MR AFIDRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the time to speak. I represent the people of Lower Madi. I am grateful to you because my colleague from Arua City ably presented the point of national importance, which I also came with to your office. 

I would like to seek additional clarification: The seven people who died from Lower Madi are those whom we know, but in the past three months, averagely, in one subcounty, we have been burying about four to five people. Most of these deaths are related to alcohol, like you said. 

Now, this raised a matter of concern when on Saturday the 18th, I attended three burials, with all deaths having related causes. I am quite happy that the six deaths in Arua City were reported because they are closer to the hospital; so, there was a faster response in identifying and determining the possible causes of death. 

Honourable minister, could there be some kind of post-mortem examination done on the 13 people and many others that died, because the cause of death may not only be attributed to this alleged alcohol?  All of them have been taken to hospital and most of them have already been buried or are being buried. Could there be some post-mortem examination done on all of the deceased? 

The second one, as I submit -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh no, now you have more or less prayers. 

MR AFIDRA: Mr Speaker, you alluded to the fact that I served on the board of UNBS for a few years, and we are a House of justice. If it is true, as alleged, that these people died because of the liquor, could justice be done to the deceased? I submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any specific product?

MR AFIDRA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Feta?

2.42
MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity. I would also like to thank my colleague, Hon. Atima, for raising this matter. I had also brought this issue to your office, but I found that he had already raised it -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, our rules are very clear: even the carrying into Parliament of simple things such as newspapers is not permitted. I can see a Member trafficking Waragi into Parliament -(Laughter)- something we are not sure has even been checked. Someone can bring a very dangerous substance into this House.

Mr Speaker, is the Member in order to carry Waragi - not one, but three and more bottles – into this Parliament? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, it is free sitting. You can sit on any side. 

Hon. Ssemujju, you have put me in a tricky position. I do not know whether the Member is carrying Waragi or water because we allow water here. (Laughter) He has not told us what he is carrying. I do not know how you quickly scanned that it was Waragi. (Laughter)

(Hon. Feta rose_) You man, I am helping you and now you are –(Laughter)- Honourable colleague, please, make your statement on the Floor. If there is anything you want to table, you will seek the Speaker's permission. I do not need bottles. (Laughter)

MR FETA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for protecting me. I do not know the content of what I have carried. I have carried something that is suspected to be killing people, but I do not know if it is Waragi, poison or alcohol. 

However, I want to lay it on the Table for Parliament to examine it. I, therefore, seek permission to lay on the Table these substances for proper investigation. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You can read the name for the record, and then give it to the Sergeant-at-Arms to get it out of the Chamber for proper handling and passing on to the relevant authorities who will test and tell us the contents of the product.

MR FETA: The name is “City 5; pineapple flavoured”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is recorded. Colleagues, sometimes we are a bit flexible because you may have watched on TV people being buried in West Nile. And, when a colleague says he wants to present this matter in a way that expresses the real situation, I have to become flexible, as the Presiding Officer. So, honourable minister, conclude your response; matters of national importance are ending at 3.00 p.m. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, on the issue of adverts on radios and TVs, like Mukama Nayamba and others, we are going to work with the Uganda Communications Commission and the ICT Ministry to see whether we can crack - and the Ministry of Health - to make sure that these adverts are not allowed because they mislead the public. 

But to also emphasise that the people who have been producing this particular liquor - the outlets have now been closed. We are working with the police in Arua to carry out further investigations and carry out more arrests in case they are caught.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But what about the one in circulation?

MR BAHATI: We are working on it, through enforcement, to get it off the market.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable minister, work together with the MPs from the region to keep them updated, but also if it is illegal - to have a non-certified product on the market - then how do we allow it to be advertised? So, you need to work with UNBS and the Uganda Communications Commission. 

2.48
MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogoola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My matter is on the mysterious murder of a four-year-old girl. I rise to bring to the attention of this Parliament the gruesome and mysterious murder of a four-year-old girl named Nayebale of Kiteredde Village, Mitete Subcounty, Ssembabule District. 

She went missing from her parents, Mr Ssemaganda Livingstone and Ms Namyalo Rose, a week ago. Her body was found buried in the neighbourhood on 21 August 2022, with her head and limbs chopped off. Investigations are ongoing and the suspect has been arrested and is in police custody. 

Mr Speaker, the late Nayebale was the only child of Ms Namyalo, who is crippled. She now lives alone in a rented house after her husband abandoned her. Being crippled, she depended heavily on her late daughter to help her get around and run errands. 

Mr Speaker, children and women in my area have to trek long distances in search of water and firewood, which exposes them to high risks of rape and murder. 

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the Ministry of Water and Environment intervenes urgently to cause provision of safe water in this place in a reasonable distance.

Secondly, the Office of the Prime Minister should intervene and help this disabled woman to get a permanent house where to live and give her something in the form of capital so that she can survive. 

Lastly, the Ministry of Internal Affairs should urgently and fully investigate all matters related to this case because we have many in different areas. Those are my prayers, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister? 

2.50
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker and colleagues, the honourable member brings a pertinent issue and I want to thank her. The Ministry of Internal Affairs will investigate this matter and I request her to give me details in writing, in my office, so that we can see how we use the Prime Minister's office.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

2.51
MR IDD ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Government of Uganda procured marine ambulances in order to strengthen emergency healthcare services on water bodies, and to to address serious gaps in emergency services. 

These ambulances were commissioned by His Excellency the President of Uganda on 25 May 2022. It is now three months since these ambulances were commissioned. However, as I speak, they are still docked at the Marine Airbase -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, wait a minute. I want to request the whips to talk to their Members. If a Member does not want to come and participate in the proceedings of this House, they should not come to the corridor and shout for other Members. (Applause) 

If it continues like that, we are going to close it off. We are going to remove the seats from that corridor; we cannot continue like this. Please, if you want to talk, you just go to the canteen; we are conducting serious business here.

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the right audience because this is really a matter of national importance; it needs everyone to be attentive. (Laughter) 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Health puts these ambulances to the purpose for which they were procured. 

Secondly, I would like to advise the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that once such projects and procurements have been made, they should not hurry to commission if they are not ready to hand them over to the communities. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister for Health?

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga Mugisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank Hon. Idd Isabirye, for raising that pertinent issue. 

I want to correct the date - we launched these ambulances on 20th May and His Excellency the President, presided over the commissioning in Entebbe at the Uganda People's Defence Forces and Marine Headquarters. 

These 12 ambulances - we actually procured 14, the two are yet to be delivered. The 12 ambulances were supposed to be distributed immediately. However, due to financial constraints, and lack of operational funds, we did not send them immediately to these places, and I would like to request you, Members of Parliament, since this is the House that appropriates, to assist us so that we can get these ambulances to their destinations. We need a carrier to take them to these places, which I will read to you: 

    1. Type C ambulance is supposed to go to Obongi in Moyo. It can only be transported by a carrier or a wheel loader;

    2. The next is also type C ambulance and it is going to Serere; 

    3. The other one, which is also type C ambulance, is going to Kumi; 

    4. The other, which was given to us by the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunisation (GAVI) is going to Amolatar in areas around Lake Kyoga; and

    5. Ambulance 5 was given to us by TASO, which is already –(Member timed out.)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you kindly go and handle that with the Prime Minister because Parliament will not manage to handle issues of wheel loaders? (Applause)

MS MUHANGA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, kindly help the ministry to ensure this is handled.  

2.56
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, this matter is going to be handled, and I believe your order will be taken into consideration. The minister should come along with me tomorrow; I want her in my office and get this done. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.57
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister was smart enough to take an early flight out of this matter. But if I were the Prime Minister in a Government, I would force the minister to resign today for the statement she has made; is asking Members of Parliament to help to carry ambulances, which were supplied in May!

Can the minister account for the lives lost out of wilful negligence of duty, by waiting for a Member to ask a question and then to –(Interruption)

MS MUHANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Leader of the Opposition, I did not say that we are looking for a wheel loader to take these ambulances. What I said is that we are looking for operational funds. And, operational funds means one of them - and I was still reading when my time wound up - that we shall need wheel loaders and carriers to deliver them to the areas where they are supposed to go. That means we need funds, but not that we are looking for honourable members to take -(Interruption) 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have allowed me to raise a point of order -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, although the Member is off the Floor. 

MS OPENDI: Yes, but what I want to say is: Honourable minister, surely, ambulances flagged off by the President in May, and you had to wait for the Member to raise it here, before you ask Parliament to give you operational funds?

Mr Speaker, I know the Prime Minister has guided, but it is completely unacceptable that the honourable minister had to sit for three months to wait for transport to take these ambulances to Kumi and Amolatar; plus you also had to wait for the Member to raise this on the Floor. I think that is not proper. 

So, Mr Speaker, is it in order for the minister to waste our time here, asking for operational funds, yet she could have gone to the Prime Minister to handle this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do not mind, take your seat. Honourable colleague, on the point of order, it is the Speaker to rule. 

Colleagues, this is a matter which the Prime Minister has spoken about. What we want is our ambulances to go, and the Prime Minister has said, tomorrow, they will ensure that action is taken - finance is also here. 

So, let us go to another colleague.
 
MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the former Minister of State for Health, Hon. Sarah Opendi, who is very incensed that the honourable minister is wasting parliamentary time - the procedural issue I am raising is whether NRM members of Parliament who know the performance of their party and Government should continue wasting parliamentary time. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, if I am to judge, I would ask myself, between Hon. Iddi and Hon. Ssemujju, who has wasted Parliament’s time? (Laughter) It will be difficult for me to judge. 

3.01
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the UPDF brutality in enforcing illegal fishing on our water bodies. 

On Friday, 19 August 2022, UPDF officers, during their operation, attacked fishermen on Lake Victoria at Katosi Landing Site and arrested some, but one of them, called Rashid Omari, aged 32 years, drowned. The body was retrieved yesterday from Katosi Landing Site. As I talk, the body is in Mukono waiting to be transported to Madi-Okollo District. The whereabouts of those who were arrested are not known. 

Mr Speaker, it is not once nor twice, but several times, that the House has guided that UPDF operations on our water bodies be handed over to the police. Unfortunately, this has not been respected –(Interruptions)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, on matters of national importance, we do not allow the provision of information; these are matters of urgency. I have given that guidance on several occasions.

MR ETUKA: Mr Speaker, I pray that with immediate effect, the UPDF operations on our water bodies, which is the livelihood for many Ugandans, be handled with humility and by the police.

Secondly, I pray that the family of the deceased be supported to transport the body to his ancestral village, and that also, some financial support be extended to them to meet burial expenses. I so pray.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Minister of State for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES)(Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true, there are a lot of complaints that colleagues always bring to my attention. Some even call. The biggest problem right now, however, is the issue of the budget. It does not allow me to go to the different places, from where the honourable members of Parliament, who raise such issues, hail. While you organise to go to one side, more issues are raised from the other side. 

Concerning soldiers versus the police, the issues of fisheries are vast on the ground. The issue of enforcement has to do with a lot of sensitisation, which needs the local leaders, the MPs and my ministry to move around. For example -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, you will not hatch a plan within my earshot and think I will help you to execute it. I heard how you hatched a plan for order; she was standing for clarification, which has matured into order. We are not going to run the House this way. Continue, honourable, but conclude. 

MS ADOA: Mr Speaker, I want to promise the House that I am going to reach different places and also work with the Minister for Defence and Veteran Affairs to see that we sit down with some of these very harsh soldiers. My promise to this House is that I am going to reach different places - not only his place because there are so many places - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have got your point. Please take up the matter seriously. 

Colleagues, I also want to give guidance. When you have a matter of information or clarification and you request three times and it is not granted, please know that the colleague has not accepted, and take your seat. Otherwise, you disorganise a colleague on the Floor. Standing up for three minutes asking for clarification - I request that if a colleague has not accepted, just accept. I can find a way of giving you another opportunity. 

Honourable minister, please take up this matter seriously and ensure that the Member’s concern is handled. 

Honourable Leader of the Opposition -

3.07
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you for your kind indulgence, Mr Speaker. I want to extend my sympathies to my sister, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. She must be feeling terrible about the Frontbench, but I can understand her troubles. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, you have been here. The issue of fisheries and the military probably occupies a huge space in our records as Parliament and the minister did not sound even knowledgeable about the circumstances under which the Member is complaining. 

With your indulgence, will you kindly ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to rise and pick up this matter? Members are complaining all over; it is not a new matter. The minister sounds to be reading from incomplete notes. She says she is looking for money, and there is no money. She is about to ask for fuel from Members. (Laughter)

With your indulgence, Mr Speaker, will the Rt Hon. Prime Minister assure the country that this matter is well understood and, therefore, has the mechanism of dealing with it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, today I do not understand the chemistry between the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of the Opposition; they seem to have connected so much. All the trust is now in the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. (Laughter) 

Sometimes, colleagues are also challenged; she tells you what she feels from her heart and what she knows. Once the Rt Hon. Prime Minister feels that a Member of the front bench has given an answer that is not satisfactory, she will always rise up and she always gets the first call, as the Prime Minister. Since she has remained seated, she is satisfied with the answer given by the minister. (Laughter) 

3.10
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, last week we were here and a Member of Parliament from Nakasongola, Hon. Sekyanzi, raised the same matter. 

There are some steps we have taken except that we were with a senior minister, Hon. Frank Tumwebaze, the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, and the permanent secretary in my office. A number of resolutions came up and the State Minister for Defence and Veteran Affairs – I do not know whether he is here – Hon. Oboth -

We had a lengthy meeting and we agreed that the ministers for Defence and Veteran Affairs, and for  Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, should ensure that they observe how these activities are being done. 

Like I told you last week, the major objective of the marine army on the waters is to help us harvest mature fish, protect the lake and also help curtail - Because remember, there were a number of crimes being committed on the waters. 

Mr Speaker, I request that we go back together with my sister - I will team up with her together with the ministers for Defence and Veteran Affairs, and for Internal Affairs. We shall return here and give you a conclusive statement on the matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we expect a statement in one week. I hope it is feasible.

Colleagues, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a group of primary school students from Yumbe District who participated in the just concluded Ball Games School Tournament that took place in Masaka District. They emerged champions in the Under-14 Boys category. Please, stand up for recognition. (Applause) Thank you. (Applause)

I do not know why you people are afraid of calling the Attorney-General to order because I saw him clapping. (Laughter) Someone has said it is a maiden act; so, we have forgiven him.

They are represented by Hon. Ezama Siraji Brahan, Hon. Onzima Godfrey, Hon. Alioni Yorke Odria, Hon. Oleru Huda Abason and Hon. Avako Melsa Naima Gule. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you. 

Hon. Jesca Ababiku?

3.13
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the excessive flooding which has covered the whole of Adjumani District. By last weekend, the worst-affected subcounties included Pakele and Arinyapi. 

Many houses are submerged and crops, which had matured, have totally been destroyed. 

My prayers are: 

    1. I request the Office of the Prime Minister to go to Arinyapi Subcounty to assess the problem because the occurrence of floods in that subcounty is yearly. Even if it means resettling our people to another place, as a district, we shall support you. We need you to go to Adjumani to make the assessment in Elegu Parish, Arinyapi Subcounty. 

    2. We need food and non-food items. The non-food items we need are tarpaulins, blankets, and utensils. 

I beg to submit.

3.15
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the Member’s issue. When we go back to the office, today and tomorrow, we shall dispatch a team. I also want the Member to help us inform the District Disaster Committee, to write a comprehensive report of what actually transpired so that we can act accordingly.

MS ABABIKU: Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable colleague. You do not access the microphone without my permission. 

MS ABABIKU: I am very sorry, Mr Speaker. We have submitted the report. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can see this is planned defiance -(Laughter)- but I request that to have order in the House; only access the microphone with the authority of the presiding officer.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TRUSTEES INCORPORATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

3.16
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Trustees Incorporation (Amendment) Bill, 2022”, be read for the first time. I beg to move. The Certificate of Financial Implications is laid on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What documents are you laying, Attorney-General?

MR KIRYOWA: The Certificate of Financial Implications and a copy of the gazetted Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill is referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

MR KIRYOWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read for the first time. I beg to lay a copy of the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2022, and the Certificate of the Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. In line with rule 129, it is referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

MR KIRYOWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read for the first time. I beg to lay the gazetted Bill and a Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

MR KIRYOWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read for the first time. I beg to lay the Bill and a Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is referred to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PARTNERSHIPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

MR KIRYOWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Partnerships (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read for the first time. I beg to lay the Bill and the Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

MR KIRYOWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read for the first time. I beg to lay the Bill and a Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Procedure?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have carefully watched the Attorney-General move and claim to have laid. Other than the Trustees Incorporation (Amendment) Bill, 2022, I have not seen him lay any of the Bills. (Laughter) Unless the Clerk, in a way, has them. 

Mr Speaker, we have had previous incidences where Bills were alleged to have been laid and Parliament was being blamed for not taking action on them, when they were not actually laid. Can the Attorney-General be directed to actually lay the Bills for -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I have copies of the Bills here. I am sure he should be having them, but Attorney-General, do the necessary when you read a Bill. Please, continue from where you had stopped. You should not go back - lay on the Table. (Laughter)

We had done companies; so, we are going to the Insolvency (Amendment) Bill, 2022.
 
BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INSOLVENCY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022

MR KIRYOWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Insolvency (Amendment) Bill, 2022” be read for the first time. I beg to lay the Bill and a Certificate of Financial Implication..

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Thank you, Attorney-General and Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business, you are producing work, but you have a very ambitious legislative agenda, which talks of 62 Bills. Kindly listen to my communication. So far, you have laid nine for this session. There was: One on the Uganda Human Organ Donation and Transplant Bill; and the other on the Museum and Monuments Bill, 2022.

We also have two Private Members’ Bills that are being handled. We have another two Bills that came from the first session. The reports are more or less ready. So, next week, we shall handle the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2022. We should handle it expeditiously because Government is losing revenue. We have to pronounce ourselves on it - and the Local Content Bill.

The Speaker has the microphone; so, I do not know why, when the Speaker is on the microphone, Hajji is - Allow me to finish colleague and then I will allow you.

I have not pronounced myself on the time provided for these Bills under rule 129. Otherwise, they are very urgent. The chairpersons of the committees on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, Co Defence and Veteran Affairs, and Tourism, Trade and Industry, together with the Government Chief Whip, the Opposition Chief Whip, the Dean of Independents, and the Attorney-General, I need you for a meeting tomorrow morning at 9.00 a.m. in my Chambers, to discuss how we can work on these Bills expeditiously because there are repercussions if we do not have them in two weeks’ time. I want us to sit and agree on the modus operandi. Shadow Attorney-General, please ensure you attend that meeting in my Chambers tomorrow at 9.00 a.m..

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I abide by your ruling, I would like to bring to your attention the matter of your ruling in referring the Bills that have been read, to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs – for example, The Partnerships (Amendment) Bill, The Trustees Incorporation (Amendment) Bill and The Companies (Amendment) Bill. 

I have been a member of this committee before and I have no objection to their competence in handling this. However, I would like to seek your intervention as to whether we could incorporate two committees, to also have the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, whose primary mandate is to interact with the institutions involved in this matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sure. That is not a problem because we complement each other. However, these are issues we shall handle tomorrow in the meeting. Clerk, take note of that so that it is one of the issues we agree upon in tomorrow's meeting. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you have summoned a meeting and mentioned the people who will attend. If I heard you properly, you said “Dean of the Independents” – an office that is non-existent. At least, I occupy an office that exists, as a whip of FDC, but you have summoned someone occupying a non-existing office, in the Administration of Parliament Act and our rules. 

That is why I am seeking a procedural issue for us to understand where this person is, and who created that office.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable, that is my officer and I can summon my officers to attend my meetings. The Dean of Independents is under the Office of the Speaker and we know it has been the practice – even here in gazetting Members, we have been using that. All this is aimed at incorporating the Independents, because if you call the Government side, the Opposition side and we have the Independents; where do they belong? We need to find a way of incorporating them into whatever we are doing. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE RELEASES TO THE UGANDA ROAD FUND 
FOR THE FIRST QUARTER OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as you come, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from Kampala International University Law Society, who are on a study tour of Parliament. They are here to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you. 

Honourable minister, you have 10 minutes. I hope your statement is uploaded.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 17 August, 2022, I appeared on the Floor of Parliament regarding funding for maintenance of roads in the country. I informed the House that due to resource constraints and the need to coordinate our fiscal and monetary policies in order to stabilise inflation, Government had provided Shs 30,304,884,923 of which Shs 6,280,000,000 was for maintenance of District Urban Community Access Roads (DUCAR) and Shs 24,024,884,923 was for national roads Under the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). 

However, Members of Parliament expressed concern regarding the meagre resources allocated for road maintenance, especially the DUCAR, and guided that additional resources be urgently mobilised for road maintenance of DUCAR. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to inform the House that in line with the above guidance, my ministry has mobilised additional resources, and is in the process of releasing the budget balance for quarter one, that is, 25 per cent of the budget under the DUCAR category, amounting to Shs 37,231,349,250, towards road maintenance.

That Shs 37 billion is over and above the Shs 30 billion that was released; and over and above the Shs 6.2 billion that was released for DUCAR. I beg to submit. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I think some action has been taken. Hon. Byanyima, who is our chief architect on the issue of the road fund, let me allow you a minute – and Hon. Opendi, who moved the motion.

3.31
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, the budget we appropriated here for the road fund was Shs 480 billion, which translates to Shs 120 billion for the first quarter. So, Shs 30 billion is not even half of it.
 
We are looking at Uganda as a country, where we have over 136 districts, and we should think that by giving them the little money, it ends up as people's pocket money. If you do not give them something fair, then, we start blaming the districts. Each and every Member of Parliament is on the district road committee. 

So, you got Shs 25 million only, which went to the districts. Mr Speaker, I feel more effort is needed so that they can get more money. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. These are the people who moved the motion.

3.32
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have rightly said that I moved the motion and Hon. Byanyima seconded my motion, but my motion has not been dealt with by the minister. We are talking of release of funds. 

My motion was clear: to operationalise the Uganda Road Fund. In operationalising the road fund, the monies meant for the Uganda Road Fund, as is stated in the Act, are not being given.

Some of you are clapping, but that is peanuts. I have got phone calls from town councils all over this country. Some town councils received as low as Shs 3 million. What can you do with Shs 3 million in a subcounty?

So, Mr Speaker, my motion has not been dealt with and your directive, guided by the Attorney-General, for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to comply and operationalise the Uganda Road Fund has not been implemented. 

Last week, I did state here - the minister came here and told you – you are No.5 in this country. The Speaker, who is No.3 in this country, guided the minister, who I think is No.11 in the country, to operationalise the road fund – but that has not been done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Sarah. Colleagues, it is not about numbers, but working together as a team. We complement each other. I might be No.5, but facilitated by No. 40. (Laughter) This guard who keeps my security to ensure my safety, I do not know his number. So, it is not about numbers. 

(Members rose_) No, colleagues, I do not want to open this up. Let us put it clearly. Please, colleagues, the minister has listened to us. We came here on Thursday; it was more or less a war zone in this Parliament because the minister had given us only Shs 6.2 billion. We told him to go and get us more money. What we need is money for our districts. 

The minister has responded by allocating a further Shs 37 billion. Therefore, we should congratulate ourselves that we have worked with the minister and we got some money. 

Now, Shs 37 billion –(Interjection)– yes, listen to me. You see, colleagues, the problem of discounting your efforts, all districts in the country had been given -(Interjection)- No, please, and I am the one who raised this matter. So, I will not allow points of procedure or anything on it. 

And, I want us to appreciate - where you push a minister who had given you Shs 6.2 billion and he adds Shs 37 billion - colleagues, we should learn to appreciate and then demand for more after we have appreciated. You see, I am a businessman; I first put what is available in the pocket, and then I negotiate for the rest. Okay. 

Therefore, I thank you minister, for listening to the House. But as per rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure, we need an action-taken report on the motion, which we passed here, where the Attorney-General guided properly as raised by Hon. Sarah Opendi. In the meantime, keep looking for more money to add to the Road Fund; our districts need more money. 

STATEMENT ON ACTION-TAKEN TO IMPROVE FOOD SECURITY AND MITIGATE THE IMPACT OF LONG DRY SPELLS AS WELL AS THE PERFORMANCE OF THE TRACTOR SCHEME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I guided that we shall discuss this statement together with the committee report on the Parish Development Model. I understand that the committee is finalising; so, we shall handle this item on Thursday. Clerk, include this item on the Order Paper for Thursday as item No.3.

STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION ON THE OVERSIGHT VISIT TO ELGON SUBREGION TO ASSESS THE DISASTER SITUATION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, this statement was uploaded around two weeks ago. So, Leader of the Opposition, please do not go through the entire statement. Just use 10 minutes and focus on the observations and recommendations.

3.37
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Mr Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, with the Members of the shadow cabinet, undertook an emergency response oversight visit to the Elgon and Sebei subregions, following a heavy downpour that led to the bursting of Rivers Nabuyonga, Namatala, Nashibiso and Napoli.

This was in accordance with Article 82(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, section 6(e) of the Administration of Parliament Act, 2006, and rule 14 of our Rules of Procedure. 

While in Mbale City, Mr Speaker, the most affected, the fatalities and destruction that was reported across the Elgon subregion districts of Bulambuli, Sironko, Mbale, Manafwa, Namisindwa, Bududa, Kapchorwa, Kween and Bukwo, were deaths of over 30 people, and thousands were displaced. Approximately 4,057 households, about 30,000 people have been affected since the 31st of July, and 5,600 people have been displaced. 

Over 519 households have been affected in Mbale District alone, and with many more displaced internally from all the affected districts. About 400,000 people were cut off the National Water Grid and have to trek long distances in search of safe and clean water. 

Apart from the loss of human lives, Mr Speaker, the disaster left behind the obvious social consequences of damage to property, destruction to crops, loss of livestock and the deterioration of the human health conditions resulting from waterborne diseases in the aftermath. 

Relatedly, landslides hit Bududa District on Wednesday, 3rd August, leaving thousands of people homeless. The hardest hit were the subcounties of Bushika, Bunabititi and Nakatshi. In Bushika, the parishes of Fusa and Buriri were entirely covered, forcing the residents to seek refuge at Nangako Town Council Headquarters. 

The villages of Sihamosi, as mentioned, are no more. Properties including houses, livestock and entire gardens of coffee, cabbage, onions, bogoya, and Irish potatoes were buried. Over 50 households have been damaged and over 300 people displaced. 

Mr Speaker, while we seem to hide our heads in the sand, Uganda is highly disaster-prone, ranking at 21 out of 190 countries globally. And, it is risk-driven by the increasing frequency, intensity and scale of disasters. 

The Elgon subregion in particular, has for the past decade, proved to be a hotspot for floods and landslides. And has experienced well over 12 disaster occurrences since the year 2010; it is in particular known for a pattern of increasing frequency and intensity of disasters that are caused by natural hazards.

Mr Speaker, the response from the Office of the Prime Minister and other entities, such as the police and other forces, was extremely slow, despite the disaster having been reported by the District Disaster Management Committees in advance. Ironically, the line Minister of Disaster Preparedness, in his report in this House indicated that the situation was under control. 

Mr Speaker, the recent disaster occurrences in the Elgon subregion speak volumes on Uganda’s capacity to contain disasters of even a basic magnitude, without huge losses and fatalities, including massive damage to both public and private property, as witnessed by our delegation. Much as the first response to disaster often includes search and rescue operations, as well as the provision of immediate relief for those affected in the form of medical care, food, water and temporary shelter, it was not the case in Mbale. 

The Office of the Prime Minister, for instance, negligently left the task of issuing updates and extending relief to UNICEF and the Uganda Red Cross Society. 

Observations

    1. Limited financing for Disaster Risk Response and Management for local governments; this one is crucial, Mr Speaker;

    2. Absence of disaster response coordination among government agencies and other humanitarian actors; 

    3. Limited capacity over disaster-risk response and management structures;

    4. Negligence and unnecessary delay to act by the police and other forces; 

    5. Lack of early warning systems; and 

    6. Limited funding for the Contingency Fund. The main sources of disaster preparedness and management financing are the National Budget, and other financial or in-kind donations channelled mainly through the OPM. 

Parliament is compelled to budget at least 0.5 percent over the previous budget for the current year's Contingency Fund. 

Section 26(1) of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015, establishes the Contingency Fund, which is replenished with an amount equivalent to 0.5 per cent of the appropriated annual budget of Government for the previous financial year. 

For the Financial Year 2022/2023, Parliament ought to have budgeted for contingencies to the tune of Shs 244.121 billion, being equivalent to the 0.5 per cent of the appropriated budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

Unfortunately, during the corrigenda, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development cut that provision to a paltry Shs 62.068 billion, which puts emergency relief efforts in jeopardy. 

Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission

Article 249(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for the establishment of a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission by Parliament, which has not been operationalised. 

This law on disaster preparedness and management, which is provided for in the National Disaster Preparedness and Management Policy, has not even been tabled despite the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) having initiated a roadmap with a budget for its approval in 2019. 

The Sino Uganda-Mbale Industrial Park is one of the sites that suffered the biggest brunt of the flash floods. However, we observed that the park, which sits on 2.6 square miles of land with 10 factories, was built in the Namatala Swamp into which several rivers naturally drain. Government in allocating this important wetland to an industrial activity must have significantly contributed to the disaster. As a result, the river flow within Mbale City has lost a natural draining system, leading to massive flooding.

Government should, as a matter of urgency:

    1. Deliver sufficient food and non-food relief to the areas to aid those displaced, as the earlier consignment dispatched by the OPM to the region was minimal;

    2. Government should set up proper camps to offer shelter to the thousands of the locals displaced by the floods as the 150 tarpaulins do not seem to serve the purpose;

    3. There should be sufficient medical supplies. These should be made available to counter the threat of waterborne diseases;

    4. The Ministry of Works and Transport should arrange for machinery from local governments across the country to be deployed in Mbale for the re-opening of roads and repair of bridges needed. It should also expedite construction of works at Bunambutye in Bulambuli District;

    5. Government should delink the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees from the Office of the Prime Minister and be granted its own vote; 

    6. Government should also expedite the enactment of the National Disaster Preparedness and Management Act to establish the Disaster Preparedness and Disaster Management Commission so as to operationalise Article 249 of the Constitution;

    7. Government should create a specific budget line for disaster interventions in all its ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) and the district local governments in disaster prone districts;

    8. It should facilitate local governments, especially those with a higher vulnerability to disasters, to allocate up to 10 per cent of their local revenue towards disaster-risk reduction and management; and

    9. Lastly, Government should plan and implement a storm drainage master plan for Mbale City to manage the flash water or floods and storm water runoff and, reduce storm water pollution, protect and enhance the quality of life in areas affected by the drainage system.

In conclusion, the passing of the National Climate Change Act, 2021 afforded this country a legal framework to confront the adverse effects of climate change. However, we have observed selective application of the law, where some industrialists and large-scale farmers have been given unfettered latitude to use wetlands as they so wish. 

Therefore, restoration of wetlands is unfairly targeting poor smallholder farmers to be evicted from wetlands when the big ones are at liberty to stay. 

The case of Mbale flooding is a wakeup call to all leaders to confront climate change without segregation and promotion of personal interests. This House has it, within its powers, to take a strong stand on the financing, operationalisation and coordination of emergency response to disasters everywhere in the country. 

I beg to submit.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, Chief Opposition Whip. I was reading through your report, of course. I waited for the minority report to be attached, but it did not come. I am saying this because out of the 10 supposed signatures, you have only six yet this is your delegation. Why didn't members of your delegation sign? I think you should call them to order. Isn’t that defiance? (Laughter)

I think this is very important. We want members to sign these reports. Prime minister’s office, is there anything you would like to say on this?

3.51
The minister of state, office of the prime minister, (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugee) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have a comprehensive report on issues of the Elgon subregion. Even my coming late to the House right now is because I have been meeting the UN family. They have been giving us details of the items that have been delivered to the Elgon subregion.

The Deputy Speaker: Chief Whip, I think the level of defiance on the part of your Members – (Laughter)

Ms anyakun: If you can give me only tomorrow or Thursday, I will be able to present a report responding to this.

The Deputy Speaker: Leader of the Opposition, the Minister requests to bring her response on Thursday so that then we can have a debate on this matter. Thank you. Debate on this matter deferred to Thursday. 

PERSONAL statement on the state of affairs in the Democratic Party

The Deputy Speaker: No, please. That is for Thursday. Our rules are very clear - rule 54. Such statements are for Thursday and I talked to the Member; I told him. 

Honourable members, I know that you have powers, under rule 54, to make personal statements to explain a few issues you might be having; we shall be having it on Thursday because that is what the rule says.

Mr nambeshe: Most obliged, Mr Speaker, but Thursday seems to be congested with lots of business. I would implore your Office to consider tomorrow because matters of disaster -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are taking over my powers. I am the one with the Order Paper. Do you mean you have already made an Order Paper for Thursday?

Mr nambeshe: But we might be overwhelmed –(Laughter)

The Deputy Speaker: I will ensure that we give it enough time; TAKE my word. Let us get to item number eight. I want to handle items 8 and 9 that have been pending for long. We shall end with item 7. There was item 6, which I know is not yet ready, but the Government Chief Whip wanted to make an appeal.  

3.54
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chief Opposition Whip for AGREEING to designate Members to the Standing Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation on Thursday. 

I had informed Members of the National Resistance Movement represented in this Parliament to express interest to serve on this committee. With your permission, let me re-echo that same call; for Members who have not yet expressed interest, please kindly do so between today and Thursday morning, before we designate. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Whips, you are also called upon to designate members of the Appointments Committee to a second standing committee of the House. The Speaker made that ruling sometime back; we have been waiting to do that. Therefore, members of the Appointments Committee should be given another committee because they rarely have business on this one and we want to utilise them effectively. Please do that on Thursday together with thE Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER'S BILL ENTITLED, “THE RAINWATER HARVESTING AND STORAGE BILL”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Yeri Ofwono? The honourable colleague is not around. Let us go to the next item. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER'S BILL ENTITLED, “THE CONTRACT FARMING BILL”

3.56
DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move under rules 56, 121 and 122 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament on a motion seeking leave of the House to introduce a Private Member's Bill entitled, “The Contract Farming Bill.” 

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution, and rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament permit a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member's Bill; 

NOTING that Uganda’s agricultural potential is considered to be one of the best in the world with 80 per cent of Uganda's land arable and the country is endowed with good temperatures, fertile soils and two rainy seasons over much of the country, leading to multiple crop harvests per year;

FURTHER NOTING that according to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, 70 per cent of Uganda's working population is employed in agriculture and the agricultural sector contributed about 24.03 per cent of the GDP of Uganda in the year 2020, and accounted for half of Uganda's total exports; 

RECALLING that in 2013, Government formulated the National Agricultural Policy with the aim of commercialising agriculture, owing to the fact that the agricultural sector in Uganda is fragmented and dominated by small farmers, most of whom combine subsistence farming with cashcrop and livestock farming; 

FURTHER RECALLING that owing to the importance of the agricultural sector to national development and transformation, the National Development Plan III prioritises agro industrialisation and contains interventions that are aimed at improving production and productivity, creating market access and elimination of bottlenecks for agricultural development; 

Mr Speaker, I am not going to read the entire narrative since it is uploaded. 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

Parliament grants me leave to introduce a Private Member's Bill entitled, “The Contract Farming Bill”, a draft of which is attached hereto, and to order the publication of the said Bill in the preparation for the first reading.” 

I so move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Christine, Hon. Mpindi Bumali, Hon. Michael Timuzigu, Hon. Florence Akiiki, Hon. Ibanda Rwemulikya, Hon. Yusuf Nsibambi, Hon. Hanifa Nabukeera, Hon. Milton Muwuma, Eng. Ronald Balimwezo, Hon. Allan Mayanja, Hon. Francis Katabaazi, Hon. Ethel Naluyima and many Members of this House. Honourable, would you like to speak to your motion in three minutes?

DR BWANIKA: Mr Speaker, many farmers in this nation (39 per cent) are subsistence farmers and a large portion of them, who are smallholder farmers, are faced with a great risk of price fluctuations. This Bill, if passed, will go a long way in mitigating the risks that arise out of price fluctuations. It will also help the farmers in this nation to negotiate for the best prices with the buyers. 

This legal framework, if passed into law, will help the farmers to minimise post-harvest losses since the farmers will be connected directly to the buyers. Therefore, the question of them looking for where to keep their produce, will not arise. That will help the farmers to get further benefits out of agriculture as an economic enterprise. 

The buyers are also going to benefit out of this legal framework because the provisions of this proposed law will help them to not only connect directly to the farmers to negotiate the best prices, but also to plan for the markets. 

Mr Speaker, the provisions of this Bill further provide for block farming. All of us know that in this country, one of the huge problems with farming is land fragmentation. Block farming will give an opportunity to our farmers to aggregate the pieces of land in their possession and, therefore, help them to benefit out of economies of scale. Block farming also helps the farmers to benefit from their individual experiences when they carry out farming together.

Lastly, on contract farming and block farming, if this legal framework is enacted into law, it will improve the environment under which the farmers are going to produce, especially under the Parish Development Model. It will help the farmers to access markets and it will render the Parish Development Model beneficial to our farmers who are waiting for it. 

Mr Speaker, if this Bill is passed into law, it will put a smile on the faces of the farmers in this nation who  have long-awaited a legal framework that connects them to the best markets. I so move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable colleague. Seconders? Hon. Allan Atugonza, Hon. Apolot Stella. Colleagues, two minutes each.

4.06
MS STELLA APOLOT (FDC, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to second the motion for the contract farming Bill. 

Contract farming is an agricultural production process based on an agreement between the buyer and the farmers, and it establishes conditions for the production and marketing of farm products. 

Contract farming in Uganda has been restricted to plantation crops such as sugarcane and tea, where outgrowers have been supplementing the production of the large agribusiness firms like Kakira, Kinyara and Kasaku Tea Estate, among others. 

Mr Speaker, adopting contract farming in Uganda will go a long way in improving the profit margin and revenue of the small-scale farmers, as it will also reduce the production cost - since they will have blocked their farms and combined their labour. 

Contract farming will also promote good quality products since both stakeholders have an equal interest in its success in terms of production and processing. 

Mr Speaker, directly contracting with buyers will increase competition leading to higher prices of farm produce for small-scale farmers, hence higher incomes. 

Contracting will also go a long way in contributing to NDP III and pillars No.1 and No.2 of the Parish Development Model, which roots for agro-industrialisation, production, storage, processing, marketing, improved infrastructure, economic services such as improved roads, access to infrastructure, and agro-technologies, among other benefits. 

Uganda can also borrow a leaf from the neighbouring East African countries like Kenya, which has about 40 per cent of the farmers producing under contract farming. 

According to Oya (2012), Uganda has only five per cent of its farmers producing under contract farming. 
I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. (Applause) Hon. Pamela. 

4.09
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by Dr Abed Bwanika about contract farming. 

Contract farming is carried out on the basis of an agreement between the buyers and farm producers. Sometimes it involves the buyer specifying the quality required and the price, with the farmer agreeing to deliver at a future date. 

The use of contracts has been attractive to many farmers because the arrangement can offer both an assured market and access to production support. Contract farming is also of benefit to buyers who seek supplies of products for sale further along the value chain or for processing. 

There are also potential benefits for national economies as contract farming can lead to economies of scale; the farmers are assured of a market once their produce is ready. 

Contract farming controls the whole farming and agriculture value chain right from the seed to the plate. It also gives the buyer and the producer security for their transactions since there is a binding agreement. 

Last, but not least, contract farming helps farmers concentrate on what they can sell instead of producing what they are unsure of, in terms of their market. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Hon. Christine Ndiwalana. Colleagues, this is something where we do not usually have a lot of debate because it is clearly provided for. It is your right under Article 94(4)(b) and rule 122(1) to have a Private Member's Bill. 

There are two things we have to be cautious about. One, Article 93 which talks about restriction on financial matters - Honourable member, please ensure you comply with that Article. 

Two, Article 94(4)(c), where we put a heavy burden on the Attorney-General, the implementing agencies; for example, if each Member brought a Private Member's Bill - Therefore, I want to encourage colleagues that before bringing these Bills, first dialogue with the implementing agencies to see whether there is a gap that can actually improve on the existing laws. If indeed, the gap is so big, you can have this as a private Member's Bill. 

Leader of the Opposition, I think we shall need a dialogue with the Attorney-General, the Government Chief Whip and the Chief Opposition Whip to see how best we can support Members, and ensure that we do not bombard agencies with very many Bills that they will fail to implement.

Rule 122(2) is very clear. Once we give permission, that is when the Clerk will come in and help the Member. What the Member is seeking is under rule 122(1) - permission. Therefore, we do not need to debate whether we are giving him permission or not. 

Once the permission is given, then we shall apply rule 122 where the Member will go and look for the certificate of financial implications to support the Bill. Then, it will be brought here for the first reading, once he meets all the requirements, and we process it. We will debate at the right time, when the committee has presented a report. 

So, colleagues, allow me to put the question that this House grants leave to Hon. Abed Bwanika to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Contract Farming Bill.” 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable. Go and work on your maiden Bill. Colleagues, a Member having a Private Member’s Bill should not put you under pressure to also go and start working on one. (Laughter) It is your right, but he should not put you under pressure – that he will go on record for having introduced a Bill. You can come and work closely with him. I do not want our Members to be under any pressure. 

I need us to handle one more item; on the performance of the loan for Karamoja since the minister is here, and then we will call it a day. We will have done a great job. Clerk, can you call that item? It should be item No.8. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF EUROS 10 MILLION FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ITALY TO FINANCE THE KARAMOJA INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (KIDP) PHASE II UNDER THE HEALTH SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN (HSDP)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, Committee on National Economy? I will request Government, if you have any new update that could help us, to give it to us and we call it a day.

4.15
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Robert Migadde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to start by laying the following:

    1. Minutes of the meetings of the Committee on National Economy; and 

    2. A copy of the report of the Committee on National Economy on the performance of €10 million from the Government of the Republic of Italy to finance the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project (KIDP) Phase II under the Health Sector Development Plan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, you have 10 minutes.

MR MIGADDE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. The report I am presenting is for the Committee on National Economy on the performance of €10 million from the Government of the Republic of Italy, to finance the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project (KIDP) Phase II under the Health Sector Development Plan.

On 19 March 2020, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to Parliament a request to borrow the same amount from the Government of Italy, and this Parliament approved the request on 18 June 2020. 

During the 8th plenary sitting of the first meeting of the second session of the 11th Parliament held on 14 July 2022, the Speaker directed the Committee on National Economy to assess the performance of the €10 million loan from the Republic of Italy. 

Pursuant to rule 178(2)(c) of the Rules of Procedure, the committee considered the assignment and now reports.

The methodology is clear – aware that I have 10 minutes.

Findings 

Delayed implementation of the project

The Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project (KIDP) Phase II was designed to address the low healthcare infrastructure distribution, improve the coverage situation, access and quality of healthcare in the region. 

He informed the committee that due to the obligatory loan effectiveness conditions, the loan implementation process had been delayed as Government tries to fulfil loan effectiveness conditions such as: 

    a) Issuance of a legal opinion by the Attorney-General; and

    b) A verbal note to the Embassy of Italy from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, notifying that all internal procedures have been fulfilled and finalised. 

Mr Speaker, we interacted with the Attorney-General and noted that the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development entered into a financing agreement without clearance from the Office of the Attorney-General.
 
We also noted that the agreement between the Government of Uganda and the Government of Italy was signed one year later, on 19 August 2021, while the financing agreement was signed on 6 October 2021 – stressing this – without clearance by the Office of the Attorney-General.

Consequently, different meetings were held, and one of the important meetings to note was the one held on 28 March 2022, where officials of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and those of the Attorney-General, met to discuss the matters raised.  Mr Speaker, for the last two to three years, the only activity has been correspondences from finance to Italy and from finance to the Office of the Attorney-General. 

The issues raised at the meeting were:

    a) That the multiple correspondences between them and the Attorney-General was as a result of the matter being handled by different officers at different points from their end. That is a submission by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; and 

    b) That much as their request had not been clear, the legal opinion requested ought to have covered the two agreements, i.e. both the financing agreement and loan agreement. 

Mr Speaker, the committee also noted that in the letter dated 5 May 2022, the Attorney-General forwarded to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, respective addenda to the two agreements on the law applicable and the dispute resolution. 

On 18 July 2022, the legal opinion was duly rendered and delivered to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The committee observed the following:

    a) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development signed the financing agreement without seeking a legal opinion, contrary to Article 119(4)(b) and (5) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; and

    b) Although the proposed amendments to the agreements were submitted and received by the Government of Italy, it is not clear –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, I do not know whether the problem is with the timing. I think I have used five minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go on, honourable colleague. 

MR MIGADDE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. The committee notes that the process has taken over two years and communication between the parties has taken too long, in endless correspondences, which has affected the loan disbursement. 

The committee recommends that:

The Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development should, in future, abide by the legal provisions of the Constitution;

Those who signed the financing agreements without seeking the legal opinion of the Attorney-General should be personally held responsible for any shortcomings in the project delays; and

The Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Office of the Attorney-General and any other ministry relevant to fulfilling the effectiveness of the conditions of a loan should form a committee to minimise the bureaucracy in the inter-ministerial correspondences.

Mr Speaker, the committee also noted that the loan of €10 million seems to be too small and could have been easily absorbed in the normal budgeting process. The committee, therefore, recommends that the House resolves that a minimum amount for any external borrowing should at least not be less than $20 million to minimise the costs related to contracting loans and maximising benefits.
  
The committee further recommends that in future, Government should develop mechanisms of internally financing such small-scale projects to avert future pressures on debt.

Mr Speaker, there is an ongoing project already which is funded by a grant which is €4.2 million from the Government of Italy, but it has taken over five years for this grant to be fully availed.

The committee recommends that the final accounts and closure with the previous contractor be concluded to verify the project cost overruns that were estimated to be US$344,315 largely as a result of delays in fulfilling contractual obligations. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that Geo Terrestrial studies be carried out prior to project implementation to avoid cost overruns. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the overall performance of the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project (KIDP) Phase II, as at August 2022, is at zero as no loan disbursements have been made by the project financers due to delays by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to put in place key loan effective conditions in order to trigger loan disbursement for implementation of the project. 

As a result, the anticipated project objectives, outputs and outcomes, have not been achieved despite the timely approval of this loan by the Parliament of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleagues. I think this report helps us in terms of efficiency of implementing projects which we pass here. That is why the committee really – I do not know how you can encourage Government to borrow more by saying you only approve huge sums. 

It is a very clear precedent here that a committee of Parliament or Parliament, does not question the resolutions of the previous Parliament. This was a resolution of Parliament, processed by the same committee on which you and I and Hon. Migadde, used to sit. 

Secondly, when you say that the Government of Uganda should absorb such expenditures, how does the Government of Uganda raise this money? Some of it is borrowed from the money market at over 15 per cent through bonds and bills. 

But this is a loan which we are getting at zero management and commitment fees. I think it had a grant element – so it was more or less an interest-free loan. Now, which business sense does it make for you to say, you do not borrow 40 billion internationally at zero-interest rate, but then you go borrow it from the money market at 15 per cent, and you come and implement a project?

So, we should allow Government freedom. I remember how this loan came, and in that committee we were processing the Spanish loan of €20 million to do the aerial survey of the Karamoja mineral areas; and the MPs from Karamoja made it a point, and appealed to the House, that we should not pass the loan for survey of minerals before we pass a loan for health centres - improving health infrastructure.

We did our part as a House, but for two years, nothing has been disbursed. The question is: Before a loan is brought here, you mean you are not ready? As Parliament, we approve, then you go back to work on terms and conditions? I thought we approve the terms. There are some other details, maybe, which usually are not yet complete. 

So, Attorney-General, this is aimed at curing such defects of us approving a loan and for five years, it has not been implemented. We look shabby as a House. Attorney-General, I do not know whether you want to say something before I allow a few colleagues. 

4.29
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I actually read this report with interest, and definitely, there are many lessons learnt on how we do our business, and you can be sure it will be a lot more smoother. 

We lose a lot of time in inter-Government departmental letters and communications. Now we have taken on a new method where we meet physically, go through these processes and then render the opinion after we have discussed them. We are moving a little bit more efficiently more than before. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I got information that you cleared this loan and implementation is starting.

MR KIRYOWA: Yes. We insisted on handling the documents afresh; and they were processed, approved and sent back to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning, to handle. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I have information that the first batch of €5 million – because I really followed up on this – was going to be released so that they start implementing the project. 

Hon. Aza? I will allow just like five colleagues; I do not know really understand what we want apart from going on the record as having spoken. (Laughter) I am going to listen; it will determine whether we are just going on record – to have spoken or not. Hon. Aza, and then Hon. Obigah Rose. Please, use two minutes each. 

4.31
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, a similar scenario happened in 2020 when we passed a loan here, of $300 million, for construction of three roads. That was in May 2020, and one of the roads was supposed to be from Laropi to Moyo up to the border at a place called Afoji. But up to now, we have not seen any signs; not even the compensation of the people along the roads –nothing! We do not know where that money has gone since 2020. I would like to get information about the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, did we pass a loan?

MR AZA: In May 2020. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under which funder?

MR AZA: The African Development Bank. It was supposed to be used for constructing three roads and one of them is from Laropi to Afoji Border point with Sudan. Up to now, there are no signs. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Migadde, when are we getting our report on performance of loans? That report needs to be given comprehensive debate on the Floor. 

MR MIGADDE: Mr Speaker, it will be ready next week on Wednesday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, as you debate, you know that we assigned the Committee on National Economy to bring a comprehensive report on performance of loans. So, let us limit ourselves to this Karamoja loan. 

4.33
MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I feel touched that Karamoja is really going through hell - still finds this kind of air. I want to thank the Attorney-General that we are getting back on track. However, I want to say that it is important to track all the projects that are in the country so that we do not pay air to these so-called funders or people who are giving us loans. Otherwise, I am in agreement. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.34
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad that we have had this discussion. I thank the committee for a good job done. Three years are a lot, waiting for health facilities to be constructed. A number of lives have been lost in the process of waiting. I want us to note that the delay was ours; it was by our Government and not by the financier. And, so, it is my prayer that we track the progress of this implementation. 

Mr Speaker, whereas you have said that there is five million already released, the actual construction of the health facilities is not yet happening. If we have to wait for another three years to review this, then we will be contributing to the number of lives that are being lost. The House may need to know that Karamoja missed all the other alternative financing for healthcare, including the UGIFT, as a result of this waiting for three years. 

So, let Parliament do its work of tracking progress by causing Government to take action where there is a commitment of this kind.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.35
MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Chairperson for this wonderful report presented. 

I think in this country we have a problem with the issue of borrowing. You and I, Mr Speaker, used to sit on the National Economy Committee in the last term - I notice that while there is a lot of borrowing, implementation of these projects and making sure that these monies are put into good use becomes a very big challenge. 

Looking at Karamoja, this was a very well-intended loan to help Karamoja. These people have suffered for almost two years now without any project taking place in that area. I want us, as Parliament, to be serious with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The procedure is very clear, before you come to Parliament to ask for a loan, you ought to have done all other necessary steps. We come and pass the loan, then you go and implement. I do not see why we are going in reverse, that after Parliament has approved the loan, you go back and begin negotiations. I think this is a bad practice by the Government. 

I really support your view, Mr Speaker, that the committee should bring a performance report on all loans. You will see how money has been wasted, yet Government is paying a lot of interest. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.37
MS SUSAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the wonderful report presented. However, I want to be guided on whether this country needs another commission to help us identify our priorities. I am saying this because every time we go looking for money to do something good, it is sat on. We always pass loans here to take care of even refugees. However, when it comes to our own people, the taxpayers of Uganda, we dilly-dally. I do not understand whether we have good intentions for our own people. 

So, I want to be helped, whether we need another commission or an authority to identify our priorities. Even in the budgets, you find “unfunded priorities”. Why do you then call them “priorities” if they are unfunded? Something needs to be done.

Secondly, there are ministers who have a very high appetite for asking for loans in this House. I do not know whether the President still follows up like he used to do when we were in the Committee on National Economy with you, Mr Speaker. Otherwise, I recall that there were some loans that would be requested for, the House would approve them, but they would never be used for the purpose for which they would have been picked. They are redundant up to now yet taxpayers are paying interest. This is very bad for our country; something needs to be done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.39
MR ROLAND NDYOMUGYENYI (Independent, Rukiga County, Rukiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report presented and the proposal. 

However, like the previous speakers have mentioned, in this country, we have a problem of borrowing not based on priorities. There are so many redundant loans in the Ministry of Finance, which are not helping Uganda’s economy to grow. There are so many loans, Mr Speaker, on which we are paying interest yet they are not doing the work they were supposed to do. I do not know to what extent this country can go on borrowing. 

Whereas borrowing is good for purposes of spurring the economy, but if the loans are not properly used, and are redundant, then what is the whole purpose of borrowing? Why can’t we also look at the internal sources of getting funding for some of these projects? Why should we always go out to look for loans, yet there are also internal sources of funding? It is quite absurd that when you look at the budget, for example, for this financial year, you notice that almost 50 per cent of it will be spent on interest payment. For how long are we going to continue borrowing, yet this borrowed money is expected to be bringing -(Member timed out.)

4.41
MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We appreciate the committee because it is going on record and after that we are likely to pass this loan as a House. On page 8, I would request that we delete the statement that is encouraging the borrowing of “20 million”. 
We should recall that as a country, our public debt is over 52 per cent. Right now as a country, we only need to devise more means of how we are going to overcome the difficult economic tide we are going through. So, I request that we delete that statement because we should not be the ones to again strengthen borrowing in this country, when we have not yet settled the debts we have. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, I totally agree with you. It is the finance minister who knows how we are moving with the economy. And, whenever he needs to borrow he comes here. So, we should not be saying we want them to borrow higher amounts. No, let him borrow when he feels he needs to do so.

4.43
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson for the report presented. I am not oblivious of the fact that it is partly post-mortem, but progressive postmortem, so to note. I would like to invite the chairperson and members of the committee - because they are going to handle so many other complex situations of borrowing - to be bold in the future. One, they need to tell Parliament who these officers are, who are signing without the opinion of the Attorney-General. Where do they get the locus to opine on a matter that is legally closed? 

If we do not mention them, then we are incubating impunity. From what I have seen here, probably the Attorney-General has been doing “fire brigade”, but the lender was very firm on conditions precedent; that the opinion of the Attorney-General must be obtained before the loan is cleared.

I think there is a problem here, and I would like to invite the chairperson, in future, to have the courage to mention these individuals so that we can know people who want to usurp powers of the Attorney-General. We can only be thankful to the lender for being insistent.

Two, is the fact that the committee was not generous enough to give Parliament enough information on the specificities of the beneficiaries - because we know it is an old facility of the 10th Parliament - by way of appraising the exact projects and districts, and where needed, the specific amounts thereof. 

One of the worries - and I know it will come back here at some stage - is €10 million in 2020. Did the committee consider a GDP deflator on the figure, to be sure that the same project goals will be achieved, so that we get assurance from Government that there is a remedy to close the financing gap? This money cannot serve the same purpose and accomplish the project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In fact, Honourable Leader of the Opposition, it was Shs46 billion at that time. Now it is Shs38 billion.

MR MPUUGA: We have a problem there and as part of what we can agree, can we invite the finance minister to come and make a comment on this loan - even when this report passes - as to how eventually the entirety of the targets will be obtained under the circumstances, given the erosion of the value after it was borrowed. Those are the comments I wanted to make, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairman, this is a very clear report and we expect another report from you. Colleagues, of recent, all of you are submitting, but no one is bringing out anything specific to this. There are general issues to do with the report, which we expect next week, and where the finance minister will have to come and explain. There are loans, which are even worse, when you get the report. 

In the meantime, Clerk, extract the report of the committee in 2020 and upload it on our Alfresco so that we can easily access it and Members are able to get the details. Colleagues, I do not want to waste any more time on this matter. 

I now put the question that the report of the Committee on National Economy on the performance of the loan of €10 million from the Government of the Republic of Italy to finance the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project (KIDP) Phase II under the Health Sector Development Plan, be adopted with amendments. There are clear amendments, which we have made. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, regarding the meeting I had called for tomorrow at 9.00 a.m., I can say I still have some time. I invite the Leader of the Opposition, the Government Chief Whip, the Opposition Chief Whip, the Attorney-General, the chairman and vice-chairman, Committee on Finance; Chairman, Committee on Legal, Rules and Privileges to meet me in my Chambers in the next 10 minutes. 

The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 4.47 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 August 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)


