Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.


Thursday, 29 August 2019

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I received a letter from the Minister for Security raising some matters on the Order Paper. If you look at item no. 6(viii); the arrest, detention and torture of Ms Asha Atim by operatives of the Internal Security Organisation at a safe house in Kyengera, raised by hon. Kassiano Wadri.

His view is that the matter of safe houses has been substantively referred to the Committee on Human Rights. Therefore, handling it again piecemeal might not help. This response is supposed to be given by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister during the Prime Minister’s Time. We will see how to harmonise that so that we do not begin debating prematurely what we have already referred to the Committee on Human Rights. We will see how to handle this in a way that preserves integrity of the work of the committee. Please, take note.

Honourable members, I had said that I would give a ruling on two issues: one being the request by hon. Sseggona on the issue of externalisation of labour, that the Speaker should consider constituting a select committee to handle, in detail, some of the issues that have been raised. 

On that matter, I will guide as follows: this Parliament has received three different reports from three different committees of this House. The Committee on Equal Opportunities presented a report on the externalisation of labour and they made visits to the affected countries.

The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development did the same and reported to this House. Furthermore, the Committee on Foreign Affairs conducted the same studies, visited the same places and came back and made a report on the substance of what they found in the field. 
Honourable members, we have had discussions about what is happening there. We have heard of the cases that have been reported in this House, children in distress, those that have not been evacuated and repatriated to Uganda and several other cases. This House is aware of what is going on with this externalisation of labour.  

What we know now is that there is an association of the registered and licensed firms, which are doing these things. It is called the Uganda Association on External Recruitment Agencies (UAERA). Each agency involved in recruitment and deployment outside this country pays a security fund of Shs 50 million, which is supposed to be insurance for evacuation, treatment or any other activities that could happen to people affected by this kind of situation. However, it looks like this is not being utilised.

I would like to use this opportunity to call upon families or people affected in any way that there are funds available with the Uganda Association of External Recruitment Agencies for repatriation, treatment and all the other related matters that affect our children that happen to be in those situations.

Honourable members, we have also discussed and found out that there are some gaps. We found that there are three categories of situations; there are children who escape on their own and get there and these do not go through a firm or any agency. Therefore, when they get there, there are no mechanisms for doing repatriation because they are not connected to any agency. As a country, we have a responsibility to look after these as well.

The second category is those children who go through the formal processes; licensed agencies and they get good employers and have no issues. Some of them have gone and come back, gone again and come back. Some are going back for the third time and they have not had any situation with their recruitment issues. 

The third category are children who are recruited properly through these agencies but when they get there, they get into situations of families that are not very receptive, abusive and they fall into these unfortunate situations.

Instead of setting up another committee to deal with these issues, our Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development has already studied this matter and the outstanding issues are clear. 

Therefore, I will not set up a select committee to deal with this issue. However, I have substantively referred outstanding matters to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to handle and come and brief the House about how far they have gone with the situations, how things have improved and we see how best to handle it. I accordingly guide.

On the second issue, you will recall that a motion was moved here on 1 August 2019, by hon. Wilfred Niwagaba. Honourable members, I would like to give you the background of this matter so that you understand where my guidance is coming from. You will recall that on 1 August 2019, I deferred my ruling on a procedural issue raised by the learned Deputy Attorney-General on the motion seeking leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill titled, “The Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2019,” moved by hon. Niwagaba.

Hon. Niwagaba first gave notice of this motion on 26 January 2019. The Speaker deferred the presentation of this motion until end of April. The purpose of deferring this was to give the Attorney-General’s Office and Attorney-General himself the opportunity to present the Government Bills on both constitutional amendments and electoral reforms. At the beginning of May 2019, the hon. Niwagaba again raised this matter. He said: “April which was the date given has expired and there has been no presentation from the Office of the Attorney-General on either electoral reforms or constitutional amendment.” Could he be allowed to present his motion?

In the meantime, another notice of motion for leave to present a Private Member’s Bill on constitutional amendments was also served to the Speaker by hon. Paul Mwiru. He was requested by the Office of the Speaker to consolidate his motion with that of hon. Niwagaba to avoid the multiplicity of motions on the same subject matter. 

There was a protracted delay from the office of the Attorney-General and on 26 July 2019, hon. Niwagaba again submitted a fresh notice to the Speaker on his old motion. Eventually on 01 August 2019, after six months, hon. Niwagaba moved a consolidated motion under the provisions of Article 79 and 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rules 120 and 121 of our Rules of Procedure. His view was to amend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the draft Bill was also a part. 

Hon. Niwagaba’s main issues that he wanted to deal with in his proposed amendments were as follows:

    1. To deal with issues of the Electoral Commission. He proposes some changes.
    2. The time within which fresh elections may be held following a by-election. 
    3. Donations during the electoral period.
    4. Involvement of public officers in the political campaigns.
    5. The adjudication process especially election petitions involving Members of Parliament at High Court level and Court of Appeal level.

During the debate, the learned Deputy Attorney-General raised objections on some of these issues:

    1. Whether the motion does not actually require a certificate of financial implications;
    2. Whether a certificate of financial implications is determinant of compliance with Article 93. His argument was that if a certificate of financial implication has not been issued, he cannot proceed because Article 93 would bar him from proceeding; 
    3. Whether the requirements of Article 93 of the Constitution applies to draft Bills accompanying motion for leave and lastly; 
    4. Whether proceeding upon the motion by hon. Niwagaba is contrary to a resolution passed and adopted by the House in 2015 to refer all amendments to the Constitutional Review Commission;

Honourable members, as you recall, given the nature of the way we are proceeding, hon. Sseggona requested that we should give some response to what the Attorney-General raised so that when I am making my ruling, I can combine all those issues.

Having reviewed the issues raised by the learned Deputy Attorney-General and the reply made to them by hon. Medard Sseggona, I now guide and rule as follows;

I am alive to the provisions of Article 79 of the functions of Parliament, Article 94 (b) and Rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament on the right of a private Member to move a Private Member’s Bill. Article 93 on the limitations imposed on financial matters, section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 117 of the Rules of Procedure on the need for certificates of financial implications and finally Rule 123 on the settlements on the issue of financial matters.

You are aware that Article 94 (4) (b) and Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure guarantee a Member’s right to move a Private Member’s Bill. 

Rule 121 further prescribes the procedure contributing a Private Member’s Bill which is passed by way of a motion to which a proposed draft Bill is attached. That is the motion that is before us. 

The right of a Member to move a Private Member’s Bill is not absolute and is limited by Article 93 of the Constitution. Article 93 of the Constitution prohibits Parliament from proceeding on a Bill or a motion unless such a Bill or a motion is introduced on behalf of Government where it takes provision as follows:

“(a) 	proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill, that makes provision for any of the following -  
(ii) 	the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction; only a reduction is permitted in the circumstances.
(iii) 	the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda of any monies not charged on that fund or any increase in the amount of that payment, issue or withdrawal; 
(iv)	 the composition or remission of any debt due to the Government of Uganda; or 
(b) 	proceed upon a motion, including an amendment to a motion, the effect of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes specified in paragraph (a) of this article.”

Whereas Article 93 of the Constitution bars Parliament from proceeding on a Bill or a motion that makes provision for those matters enumerated above, the Constitution does not guide on who is supposed to advise Parliament on whether a Bill or a motion makes provision for matters that are barred by Article 93. 

I am aware that Parliament enacted the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 wherein Parliament in section 76 imposed an obligation on every person introducing a Bill in Parliament to ensure that the Bill is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. 

The certificate of financial implications envisaged under section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 indicates the revenue and expenditure estimate of the intended law for a period of more than two financial years after commencement.

It also indicates the impact of the new law on the economy. In other words, a certificate of financial implications envisaged in section 76 does not signify that a Bill complies with Article 93 of the Constitution or otherwise. 

Honourable members, you may recall that section 76 was carried over from the Budget Act, 2001, which was actually a result of an amendment moved on the Floor to challenge Government to ensure that Bills passed and assented to are implemented by the Government.

The background is that we used to pass Bills and there is no money to implement them; so, they remain on the shelves and they say that commencement date may be in two, three, four or five years and yet Parliament has spent time passing this particular legislation which does not have money for its implementation. Therefore, Parliament, in its wisdom said, “no, for every Bill that you bring – not just for Private Members but even for the Government – show us its financial implication by certificate issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell us that this Bill is going to be implemented; otherwise, do not waste our time because we do not act in vain.”

That is why the section applies to both public Bills as proposed by Government as well as Private Member’s Bills. 

You also recall that in Article 94 (4), provisions are made for how Parliament should proceed with these Rules of Procedure and the Rules of Procedure enacted are housed under our Article 94 and make specific provision on the right of Private Members to present Private Member’s Bills. These rights are guaranteed by the Constitution. 

Therefore, I am of the considered view that section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 does not and was not enacted to specifically guide on the requirements under Article 93 of the Constitution. Therefore, issuing a certificate of financial implications does not mean you have complied with Article 93 of the Constitution.

In the circumstances, I now turn to Rule 123 of the Rules of Procedure for guidance. Rule 123 provides as follows:

“123. Rules regarding settlement of financial matters

(1) No question shall be proposed upon any Bill, motion or amendment, which has not been introduced or moved by a minister if in the opinion of the Speaker, the object of the Bill, motion or enactment is to make provision for any of the following…” – and it reproduces the provisions of Article 93 of the Constitution.

Rule 123, like Article 93 of the Constitution, bars Parliament from proceeding on any motion or Bill, which makes provision for the prescribed matters, except where the Bill or motion is introduced on behalf of Government. Furthermore, Rule 123 obligates the Speaker to make a determination on whether a Bill or motion makes provision on matters that are prohibited under Rule 123 of the Rules of Procedure and Article 123. 

Having observed that Rule 123 grants the Speaker the obligation to determine whether a Bill or motion makes provision for matters prohibited in Rule 123 and Article 93, I now make the following findings:

One is that the motion moved by hon. Niwagaba does not contain any matter that contravenes Article 93 or Rule 123 of the Rules of Procedure. In this finding, I am alive to the fact that what is before Parliament for debate is a motion for leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill to amend the Constitution and not a Bill. I have examined the motion and I find that it does not contravene Article 93 of the Constitution or Rule 123 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

Secondly, whereas the motion moved by hon. Niwagaba is accompanied by a draft of a Bill, it is my finding that such a draft Bill is outside the ambit of Article 93 and Rule 123 of the Rules of Procedure. 

In reaching this finding, I am aware that a Bill within the meaning of Article 93 and Rule 123 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda is that, which has been published in the Gazette as required by Rule 121 of the Rules of Procedure. Before its publication, a draft Bill can be changed by the mover any time to add or remove any matter. 

Since Article 93 and Rule 123 of the Rules of Procedure applies to a Bill, the draft Bill attached to a motion by hon. Niwagaba does not come into the ambit of Article 93 as argued by the learned Deputy Attorney-General.

The learned Deputy Attorney-General also made an additional point, which I guided on at that time, that the Bill attached should be almost in its final stages upon which I guided that under Article 93, when leave is so granted, the Member is given the authority to access services of Government to draft the final Bill, meaning the Bill could not have been in its final form. This is because if it were in its final form, the Constitution would not be saying that, “after we have granted you leave, you again go and seek technical advice on how you finalise your Bill.” 

I, therefore, answer issues 1, 2 and 3 in the negative. (Laughter)

Finally, on whether proceeding upon the motion by hon. Niwagaba is contrary to a resolution passed and adopted by the House in 2015 to refer all amendments to the Constitutional Review Commission, I have examined the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015 and found, in paragraph 6.3, that the committee recommended that Government considers constituting a Constitutional Review Commission. I have also established that this recommendation was adopted by the House while considering the report. 

I have considered the learned Deputy Attorney-General’s objection on this matter and I find that the adoption of that resolution does not, in any way, bar the introduction of a Private Member’s Bill to amend the Constitution, a right that is guaranteed by our Constitution. 

Indeed, honourable members, if you may recall, in 2018, this very Parliament granted hon. Raphael Magyezi of Igara County West leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill to amend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. I find no merit in the objection raised by the learned Deputy-Attorney General on this matter – him having argued that hon. Magyezi be granted leave to present the Private Member’s Bill in 2015, way after that resolution was passed by Parliament. I, therefore, also answer this issue in the negative. 

Honourable members, in the premises, it is my ruling that I find that the issues raised by the learned Deputy Attorney-General cannot be the basis for preventing this august House from debating and considering the motion moved by hon. Niwagaba. 

Therefore, this matter will be placed on the Order Paper at the next time Parliament is sitting and this motion will be dealt with and Parliament will take an appropriate decision on whether to grant or not to grant leave to the honourable member to present this Bill on constitutional amendment. I so rule and order. (Applause)

Honourable members, in the public galley this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Christ the King Primary School, Arua District. They are represented by hon. Kassiano Wadri and hon. Mourine Osoru. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure. When you were ruling on the first issue to do with the export of labour, I thought it would have been proper for you to guide us. When I raised this issue as a matter of national importance, the presiding Speaker then ordered the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to bring a statement here about the same. The statement was brought when you were in the Chair. It was then that hon. Sseggona raised a motion on the need to set up a select committee -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He did not raise a motion. He raised a procedural matter.

MS NAMBOOZE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. The issue was whether that matter would be handled in a select committee or the report would be debated here by the whole House. Now that you have ruled that we shall not be setting up a select committee, is it not procedurally right for you to allow debate on the report that was presented by the minister?

The other procedural matter I would like to raise is about the remedy the Speaker provided for the victims of UAERA, which is not a statutory body but an association. The law governing associations is that you associate when you want. Associating is not mandatory and you cannot push anybody into an association. We have not put up any statutory organisation in that direction.

Isn’t it an act of running away from our responsibility if we refer children of Uganda in foreign lands who have cried out to Parliament for help; to an association, which is not a statutory body?

This is why I would like to be guided on what happens when matters come here and reports are made but they continue being unresolved, yet, people continue suffering.

When such people run back to Parliament, should we allow them to petition Parliament in vain? I wish to be guided about those three issues and maybe, if it pleases you, guide me on how somebody can make an appeal against the ruling of the Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are clear on how you deal with the ruling of the Speaker. I do not want to take you through a course on how to do it. The provisions are very clear.

On the first bit of the procedural matter you raised, I tried to explain why handing this matter back to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development would be the best course of action for this Parliament.

The reasons are simple; they have been there, they have seen and they know what the gaps are. I also said that the Committee on Foreign Affairs was there. The Committee on Equal Opportunities was there and they have all reported to this House. 

There remains only some outstanding issues, which are in terms of implementation of some of these things, which have been recommended and that is why in my assessment, I find it better or more appropriate for the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to continue with what in their docket. It is their responsibility.
	
Unless we are saying that we no longer have - which we would never say - that our committees are not capable of doing what they have been assigned.

Accordingly - and I have a very able chairperson in hon. Alex Ndeezi - I am sure they will be able to do these things. The sole purpose is to make sure that systems are put in place so that children who go out receive good treatment and those who run into trouble have recourse on how they can be rescued while those who get injured can be treated.

In my assessment, it would be the best thing to do rather than create another infrastructure altogether, which will start by learning what the thing is and then, start doing the job, which will take a much longer time.

The Committee on Gender - please I am not ruling. I am just recapping what I already stated. The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development would be able to deal with this.

On the second issue as to whether the statement from the minister should be debated now, that will be double work. I now also refer this statement to the committee and to handle these things comprehensively.

We trust our own committees to come back here with recommendations and if there are inadequacies, we will see how to fill in the gaps but for now, I give our committee the right to proceed with this matter.

The second aspect on the association not being a statutory body; the externalisation of labour at this moment is not being handled by any statute. 

It is individual contracts and obligations under those contracts. These companies that are exporting labour have an arrangement and they have agreed in their protocols that in any situation where an accident should occur, somebody falls sick or somebody runs to any kind of trouble, there should be systems within their own organisations to be able to handle this.

They have this scheme, which they call the insurance scheme and each of them pays Shs 50 million. I was referring to this situation, which has come to the Parliament where they say that “so and so is in distress.” They are asking the family to pay $3,000 that should not be a responsibility of the family and nobody should ask that question.

The people to be asked are the Uganda Association of External Recruitment Agencies. If they can contact the families, why can’t they contact the association? 

If they can come to Parliament and try to contact the minister to get to the Government, why can’t those same people contact the association to make good what the obligations are under the arrangement and I think it would be the best thing in those circumstances.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do agree with your ruling on the issue of externalisation of labour but won’t it be procedurally right that we have our Hansard corrected because if we refer to these young men and women who go to look for survival outside as children, it is like we have those below 18 years being exported. 

We would not like to be mistaken as referring to children who are below 18 years of age and are not supposed to be employed in that category.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. My father still calls me his child. It is about context; our children. I do not know how to say it in your language but they will always still be our children. That is the context in which we are using this, not in any age bracket.

2.44
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am here on behalf of the Shadow Attorney-General to warmly welcome your wise ruling and the orders that you have made and also to reassure the House that the Shadow Attorney-General is ready to proceed. 

He will be consulting the Deputy Attorney-General and we are very happy that in his submission here; at least the body language tells us that he has respected your ruling.

I would like him to cooperate with us because it is in good faith that these constitutional amendments have been proposed. Thank you very much. I put the Deputy Attorney-General on notice that we will be consulting his office over this matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How do I rule on that? (Laughter) Let us go to business. Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, what timeline can you give this particular item - because it is quite urgent? 

2.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Alex Ndeezi): Mr Speaker, we have been handling these issues and I assure you that we have the expertise and capacity to do it. We are also prepared to work with any other Member who may have interests in this matter, including hon. Nambooze. You are welcome. I think you will give us two months, in view of the complexity of the matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, we will give you one month. We expect a preliminary brief in two weeks of what is going on and then after a month, you report.

MR NDEEZI: Alright, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. (Applause)

2.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Janepher Egunyu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek guidance from you on a matter that is before this House but particularly, work that was sent to the Committee on Human Rights, which I chair.

On 15 August 2019, the House directed the Committee on Human Rights to investigate allegations of existence of safe houses being operated by Internal Security Organisation (ISO) in Kalangala and Kyengera. This was after a matter of national importance that was raised by hon. Latif Sebaggala during the sitting on Thursday, 15 August 2019 whereupon he alleged that there were reports of Ugandans being tortured in safe houses in Kalangala and Kyengera.

Since this issue was sent to our committee, we have sat but on our first day, we had challenges because we had to draw a work plan on how we are going to move. The first challenge we got was that the person who brought the matter on the Floor of Parliament here is a member of the Committee on Human Rights. So, we agreed that following other scenarios, let us move with him from A to Z as work moves on to the end.

Mr Speaker, in my observation, I have seen that some of the witnesses that we are going to invite or those who intend to come to our committee are committee members, including hon. Latif Sebaggala while others are Members of Parliament here. They also indicated that they will come as witnesses before the committee, including hon. Francis Zaake.

Mr Speaker, we feel challenged and we seek your guidance because if Members are committee members and members of Parliament, our hands are tied and we cannot move to the last bit. We have fears that as we call witnesses – and you know the process is that we have to report back to this House – the witnesses are members of the committee and some of them are members of Parliament here. Won’t this create, at a later date, some areas where people will say that maybe there are some issues of conflict of interest, if such Members are involved in the activity that was sent to us from A to Z? 

I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am just thinking as I talk because these are new matters. If I raise a matter in this House, I raise it from the facts within my knowledge. In a way, I am a complainant to Parliament. Can I still be a member of the committee examining my complaint? Would it make sense? 

I am the complainant, I am also now going to be the investigator and the adjudicator to take decisions on what should come to Parliament. Would it make sense? I do not think it makes even ordinary sense - (Laughter) - before we go into laws, rules and things like that. I think it is simply common sense and decency requires that we do decent things.

If I have complained to this House and the basis of my complaint has caused an inquiry, I cannot be a member of that inquiry committee. I can only be a witness. I can only give evidence and once I have finished with my evidence, I withdraw and wait for the outcome in form of a decision.

Therefore, if the matter was raised by hon. Latif Sebaggala and he is a member of the committee, I think it would only be fair that now being a complainant, after he has laid his evidence and given you all that you need, he should withdraw from the committee and let it handle its work. Let him also come and receive judgement from the committee like all of us. I think that would be fair. That is my guidance. Thank you. (Applause)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I thank the chairperson of the committee for bringing up this matter. We have had those challenges on several occasions. Even if I were the one having an interest in a matter that is being handled in the committee, I would withdraw.

The procedural matter I would like to raise - I followed the committee proceedings yesterday - the Speaker ruled and directed the committee to go and look at those safe houses physically. Is it procedurally right for an honourable member of Parliament, who is a minister, to rule in the committee that its members cannot be allowed to access those areas; the General who is a Minister of Security and yet, the Speaker ruled as you were seated there?

Can the minister direct the committee that they cannot access those places and Members fear? That is the fear we are seeing. A Member like hon. Latif Sebagala –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have the prerogative and mandate of this House and you have been given an assignment to go and visit a place. Please, go there and be stopped from there. (Applause) Then, the issue would arise because right now, there is nothing.  There was a matter from Mityana.

2.55
MR HENRY MAKUMBI (NRM, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance to do with Ssekanyonyi Health Centre IV located in my constituency.

We have a problem of rampant deaths of mothers and babies and those who are supposed to be operated on because the health centre does not have an operational theatre to handle such cases.

If it was not for me to help that health centre IV with an ambulance, the situation would have been beyond imagination. Recently, we lost three mothers because there were no means of transport. The ambulance had taken some patients to Kiruddu General Hospital and those ones were brought in. There was no rescue; they could not be taken to Mityana Hospital because there was no means.

Mr Speaker, my humble prayer is that the Ministry of Health – the good thing is that the minister is here. Please, come down to Ssekanyonyi Health Centre IV and find out what is happening. Is it that we are not supposed to have a theatre or because it is by policy that all health centres IV must have operational theatres and only Ssekanyonyi Health Centre IV does not have one?  

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my honourable colleague for raising this very important issue about the health centre IV facility in Mityana District.
Indeed, as he has put it right, a health centre at level IV should have a theatre, which is functional, medical officers and an anaesthetist to give anaesthesia. Indeed, it is very sad to hear that we have lost two mothers because of absence of those facilities. 

I cannot, at this time, give a definitive response because I need to send our team to the ground as he has said. Often time, you get the theatre functioning but an anaesthetist may not be there. As a result, operation is a problem. 

Allow me to send a team from our ministry to get over there and liaise with the Mityana District Health Officer to ascertain exactly what is on the ground. That is when I can give you the feedback at an appropriate time. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we do not need a feedback. We need actions in Mityana. Wherever the health centre IV is, just go there, do your job and make sure there is a theatre. We do not need updates. (Applause)

DR MORIKU: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. I think it would be right. Certainly, we are going to send a team to the ground to find out if indeed there is no theatre at the Health Centre IV.

What I know is that all the Health Centres IV have got theatres. There may be one or two things, which are not right. Our team is going to the ground and they will find what is there. Immediately, if there are issues, they will rectify them. Appropriate action will be taken. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

2.58
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Three days ago, the police of Malaba arrested a group of 27 people who were entering the country illegally. The group turned out to be Congolese who had escaped from a rescue camp in Kenya and they were seeking refuge here in Uganda. The group, which include juveniles, are now stuck in Malaba. The police tried their level best to give them a safe haven but they are constrained with feeding them. There are also those who need specialised medical attention because they are badly off.

My prayers and also the prayers of the police are that transport be organised immediately to evacuate the refugees to the nearest rescue centre. Secondly, in the meantime, food should be organised for those people. Thirdly, medication also should be sought for those people before they are taken to the rescue centre because they are badly off. They include vulnerable children and mothers.

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the Minister of Internal Affairs will attend to this issue tomorrow.  (Power blackout.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is somebody trying to force an adjournment? (Laughter) Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Lalogi Primary School from Omoro District. They are represented by hon. Jacob Oulanyah and hon. Catherine Lamwaka. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

3.01
MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga): Mr Speaker, I have a big problem in Rukiga. We have a broken bridge in Rwamucucu sub county. First of all, allow me to thank the minister who took his time to visit the bridge. When he came, he advised me to write to UNRA, which I did. Up to now, we have not got any response. The bridge is broken and yet, it is used by many schools. The most important part of it is where they are constructing the seed school. It is so hard to access the sub county with the materials?

My prayer is to the minister to tell us when this bridge is going to be worked. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport is going to be contacted to get in touch with the Member to ensure we start working on this bridge. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That should apply also to the issue of Tororo. Instead of coming here tomorrow, they should go to the respective districts and sort out those problems. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, when I said the minister will attend to the issue tomorrow, I meant he will take action on the issue.

3.02
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance that touches families of over 1,000 Ugandans. On 23 August 2019, Daily Monitor ran a story of how the marriages of close to 1,000 couples who wedded at the Church of Resurrection Bugolobi are null and void. 

A dozen of these couples are my constituents. It is true the marriages that were conducted in this church between 2006 and 2016 were done before this place of worship had been gazetted for such ceremonies to be held, hence, rendering the marriage contracts null and void as per section 34 (2) of the Marriage Act.

However, it is not tenable in the ears of an ordinary person who I represent here that a marriage conducted in a church can be nullified just because the church’s registration had not been gazetted. I have information that this place of worship is now registered and gazetted. 

If it is going to be held that these marriages are null and void, we shall have brought problems and agonies in over 1,000 families in the country. Some of these people have since died and if you are to nullify some of those marriages, you will bring inheritance problem. This also touches mostly us, women. Each year that goes by, a woman ceases to be marriageable. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, if men who got married in 2006 are given an opportunity to say that the women they married and have been living with were never in any legal marriage, some of them might change their minds and we will lose these marriages, which we should support. (Laughter) This will even bring problems to the children. 

A child born out of marriage has a legal status. These people went to church in the middle of Kampala City. Where were the Government institutions to guide Ugandans? People would like to know when the ministry is going to bring out a list of those places where people can go so that they do not enter marriages and after a decade, they are told that after all they are not married.

My prayer is for the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to tell this House if there is no remedy that can be given to these couples to retrospectively consider that they were legally married so that they are not required to undergo the same ceremony again. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.06
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, under our law, the Marriage Act, marriages can only be registered by the Registrar of Marriages. Prayer houses are licensed to conduct and register marriages on behalf of the Registrar of Marriages. It is not that every prayer house is licensed or gazetted to conduct such marriages. There are terms and conditions for each prayer house, if it is to apply and be allowed, to fulfil. Couples should be prudent enough to find out whether the prayer houses they are going to are duly registered. 

Having said that, hon. Betty Nambooze is saying that somebody is seeking to nullify the marriage and I say, “no.” If you solemnise a marriage in a place, which is not licensed, nobody needs to come out to apply for nullification. The marriage is null and void ab initio; whether somebody has moved to nullify it or not. 

The status of the place of solemnisation is one of what we call the essential requirements of marriage. There are formal requirements, which can make the marriage voidable. In other words, the marriage subsists until somebody moves to nullify it. 

However, there are essential requirements whose contravention automatically makes the marriage null and void; ab initio. It is unfortunate that our people over the time have not bothered to ascertain what kind of places they solemnise their marriages in. 

There can be some remedial action. The remedy can only be to repeat the marriage; not necessarily in the religious institution but before the Registrar of Marriages. Countrywide, Chief Administrative Officers - in the past, it used to be district commissioners - are gazetted Registrars of Marriages. 

Therefore, let them comply and it is simple. They just go and announce the intention to get married, it is pinned on the notice -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about those who have died?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Now, the issue of those who are dead does not arise because under the law, marriage terminates with death. Therefore, there is nothing to dissolve it. Whether the marriage was there or not, on death, the relationship dissolves and so, you do not need to worry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No but there are issues of marriage and inheritance involved.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: I was coming to that, Mr Speaker. When it comes to inheritance, the law has still made provision to make sure that it does not matter. Under the law, both legitimate and illegitimate children, assuming somebody presents a case and say that there was no marriage and so, the children are illegitimate - children who are considered illegitimate and the legitimate ones have the same and equal rights over inheritance except matrimonial property.

Upon the death, if a man has lived with a woman for some years and they had children, there is what we call imputed marriage. The law imputes that there was a marriage between the couple. When that arises, then property and other inheritable assets are regarded as assets in the lawful marriage. After death, I do not see any problem.
 
However, the honourable member should be advised to advise couples to first of all check with their religious houses - because when a religious house is registered, it is issued with a certificate authorising them to solemnise marriages on behalf of the Registrar of Marriages.

It is important to note that religious functions of whatever religion are not necessarily legal functions because if you do not have that mandate given to you by the Registrar of Marriages, whatever ceremony you perform, even if you dance to God for three hours, that marriage will not necessarily be a legal marriage.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this is to inform you that the 21st Uganda National Prayer Breakfast will take place on Tuesday, 8 October, 2019 at Parliament ground parking yard starting between 7.00 a.m. to 8.30.a.m. The key information about this year’s event is that the Chief Guest will be His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Ugandan. The Chief host will be Rt hon. Rebecca A. Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament of Uganda. 

The keynote speaker will be Pastor Johnny Enlow, author of Seven Mountains Prophecy: Restore seven organisations of the United States of America. The theme for this year’s prayers is “The power of character in leadership, Titus 2: 7-8.” 

Please, confirm your attendance by 15 September, 2019 by filling the Uganda National Prayer Breakfast confirmation forms in the lobby of the Chamber and placing them in the respective boxes. 

Kindly, note that only Members who confirm will be issued with invitation cards in their pigeon holes. Therefore, if you like to attend this Uganda National Prayer Breakfast, please, do the needful. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE UGANDAN DELEGATION TO MOSCOW, RUSSIA TO ATTEND THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON “DEVELOPMENT OF PARLIAMENTARIANISM”

3.14
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague who appears on the Order Paper is not around but I am a member of the delegation. This is a Report of the Ugandan delegation to Moscow, Russia to attend a Second International Conference from 1st to 3rd July 2019 on “Development of Parliamentarianism.”

Mr Speaker, the Second International Forum on “Development of Parliamentarianism” was held in Moscow, Russia from 1st to 3rd July, 2019. The conference was organised by the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the rules require you to first lay the document before making a comment. You cannot present the full report now.

MS NAUWAT: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I just have one copy with me –(Laughter)- which I intend to lay after I have submitted. That is why I have proceeded. Mr Speaker, before I proceed, let me lay on Table the report of the Ugandan Delegation to Moscow, Russia to attend the Second International Conference from 1st to 3rd July 2019 on Development of Parliamentarianism. I beg to lay.

The Deputy Speaker: Let the records capture that. We will find an appropriate day to debate the report in full but the rules allow you to give a comment on the content of the report.

Ms nauwat: Mr Speaker, the second international forum on development of parliamentarianism was held in Moscow, Russia from 1st to 3rd July 2019.

The conference was organised by the State Duma of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation. The forum brought together representatives from Europe, Asia, Africa, North and South America.

The participants included speakers and vice-speakers of Parliaments, legislators, scientists, experts and civil society.

The search for effective legislative solutions and answers to global changes was the major goal of the forum.

The Ugandan delegation comprised of the Rt Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, hon. Rebecca Kadaga who was the leader of delegation, hon. Etuuka Isaac Joakino and I. 

The staff of Parliament included Mr Peter Busiku, Mr Kenneth Omoding, Mr Moses Jonathan Kago, Ms Justine Tumuhairwe and Mr Daniel Emochu.

The speakers and vice-speakers of participating countries made remarks. Thereafter, there were presentations and discussions in sections in a round-table format. The Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda made her remarks and they are contained in this report.

There were thematic areas that –

The Deputy Speaker: Were there some recommendations you would like to highlight?
 
Ms nauwat: Yes, Mr Speaker.

The Deputy Speaker: Highlight the recommendations and then, we move.

Ms nauwat: There were key issues that were discussed and recommendations made under each, after discussions. One of the key issues was media wars, how to beat fake news.

The recommendations included:

1. 	Personal data must be respected and properly used;
2. 	Security measures must be taken to protect internet users especially children;
3. 	Technology companies should be responsible for their users;
4. 	Human rights existing in the real world must be equally protected on the internet;
5. 	The social and economic benefits associated with new technologies should be shared fairly.

The other thematic area was legislative support of trade and economic cooperation between Russia and African countries. The issues under that included tariff and non-tariff barriers in trade and imperfections of bi-lateral legal framework.

The recommendations are such that- 

1. 	There is need to create registers of the regulatory and legal framework of cooperation;
2. 	Both bi-lateral and multi-lateral documents to be made accessible to all subjects interested in foreign economic activity.

The other area was Russia-African security cooperation as a factor of peace and stability in Africa; Role of Parliament. The conference looked at effects of climate change as a potential conflict factor. 

The recommendation was that decisions on key security and legitimacy issues including peacekeeping missions, the presence of foreign armed forces and democratic transit procedures can be made by African Regional organisations in close cooperation with the United Nations (UN).

Another area was to do with terrorism in the stateless territories. The recommendation is the restoration of state institutions. There should be effective control over such zones, which will allow solving the problem of the influx of recruits into terrorist networks and thereby reducing the level of security threats. For example, it is known that almost a third of the al-Shabaab fighters in Somalia joined it for economic reasons and 15 per cent were recruited by force.

It is possible to achieve a two-fold reduction in the number of illegal armed groups by returning troubled regions of Africa to social-political and social-economic normalcy. That includes the monopoly on violence, legal guarantees, unimpeded movement of goods and money.

The other thematic area was sustainable management of natural resources and community development legislative framework for extractive industry.

The other was exchange of legislative experience between Russia and African countries in regulating new economic sectors, digital technologies, innovation and communication.

There were other pertinent issues, which included international security, dialogue of legislation for peace and stability, law making and legal framework for the digital future. 

We looked at challenges and solutions. There was also the issue of Inter-Parliamentary cooperation; role of legislation in poverty and inequality reduction, environmental legislative agenda, effective interaction for sustainable development and the role of youth in the development of Parliamentarianism; experience and priorities.

Finally, there was international humanitarian law and humanitarian cooperation; the role of Parliament and Inter-Parliamentary association. I beg to submit.

The Deputy Speaker:  Thank you. We will find time and look at this document and the recommendations made therein. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION OF THE 54 CLANS OF SAMIA-BUGWE FOR RESETTLEMENT IN WEST BUGWE AND SITAMBOGO CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE

3.23
Ms Jane Nabulindo (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to present the petition under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure.

The humble petition of 54 clans of Samia-Bugwe for resettlement in West Bugwe and Sitambogo Central Forest Reserve.
The petitioners are representatives of 54 clans of Samia-Bugwe who require to be resettled in West Bugwe and Sitambogo Central Forest Reserve commonly known as Busitema Forest Reserve.

The petitioners raise that by minute 44/62 of Bukedi District Council and the resolution was to first request Central Government to allow the people of Samia-Bugwe to settle in the forest reserve. 

The said resolution was brought to Parliament on Thursday, 20 September 1962 to which the then Minister of Regional Administration passed to the Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives on 25 September 1962 because the subject matter of the resolution was within his portfolio.

Thereafter, the Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives sent a reply to the Secretary General, Bukedi District on 30 October 1962 in which he gave them a go ahead and advised that the resettlement be done in clan groups and community arrangements as it was before.

From that time, the matter did not arise until 12 May 2005 when Ms Rose Munyira, former Woman Representative for Busia raised the issue of Busitema Forest Reserve demanding its re-opening since National Forestry Authority (NFA) had reoccupied the forest. 

Parliament had no objection to the people resettling on their land, as long as they did not tamper with the land already allocated to Busitema College, now Busitema University. 
However, NFA has maintained armed guards in the area under the guise of guarding the forest, although the forest is no more. What is left are trees lining up from the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) junction up to the Busitema University and lay of shrubs and grass. To date, the petitioners have been denied access to the land by NFA. 

Now, therefore, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament carries out an investigation into the matter to establish ownership and status of the West Bugwe Forest Reserve and the claims of the petitioners. 
Your humble petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray and hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.”

I beg to lay. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nabulindo. I will refer this petition to the appropriate Committee on Natural Resources. 

I have heard her calling it West Samia Bugwe Forest Reserve and we want to establish ownership of a forest reserve; I do not know how that happens. Nevertheless, I refer this matter to committee. Please, take note and handle this petition urgently, since people are affected. Report to the House and advise us on this matter. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SENIOR CITIZENS GRANT NATIONAL ROLL OUT UNDER SOCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS FOR EMPOWERMENT (SAGE)

3.27
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to brief this august House on the status of the SAGE implementation and the planned national roll out. 

My statement was circulated. So, I will leave out the update on the implementation of SAGE and just go straight to the national roll out. 
I make this statement in view of the Parliament decision that I should come back and present a brief. This resolution was made on 28 November 2018. 

In response to the popular demand for SAGE, in the financial year 2018/2019, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development developed and presented several roll out options. As a result, both Cabinet and Parliament directed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to find funds to roll out the senior citizens grant to all districts in the country.

You will recall that in June 2018, you instructed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to make a statement on the Floor of this House on funding for SAGE roll out. 

The statement made by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development of this House, which analysed the rollout options in detail. Its report was presented and adopted by Parliament. 

This august House resolved that the national rollout starts this financial year, 2019/2020, by covering people who are 80 years and above but gradually coming down and ultimately covering all older persons of 65 years and 60 years within the next three years.

Covering all persons of 80 years and above in all the 135 districts of Uganda, while keeping on board the 157,000 beneficiaries in 61 districts currently covered by the programme, requires Shs 142.46 billion each financial year. Of this, development partners have committed Shs 50 billion in this financial year, leaving a balance of Shs 92.46 billion to be covered by the Government of Uganda in the same financial year. Government has provided Shs 62.88 billion, leaving a shortfall of Shs 29.58 billion. 

It is against this background that my ministry has put in place the strategy and plans to deliver the national roll out in this financial year.

Given the resources available, the ministry will accordingly pay all the existing 157,000 beneficiaries in the 61 districts for 12 months and the new beneficiaries’ districts for six months starting from January 2020 to avoid creating arrears. This is on the understanding that in the Financial Year, 2020/2021, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will provide the full budget of Shs 142.46 billion to ensure all SAGE beneficiaries are paid for 12 months.

National Rollout plans and progress

Allow me provide some highlights of the plans for the national roll out and the progress there made:

    1. We have signed memoranda of understanding with 74 local governments, previously not covered by the programme and it is already on-going. We expect that by the end of August 2019, they will have been returned to the ministry; 

    2. When the memoranda of understanding are returned, orienting the districts to the programme, training leaders at different levels (district, sub county and parishes) on their roles and responsibilities is planned for August and September 2019;

    3. A public information campaign to inform the country on the roll out and the communities on the roll out is planned for August/September 2019;

    4. The process of procurement of a new payment service provider for new beneficiaries started June and is expected to be completed in November; 
    5. Targeting, registering, verifying and enrolling of beneficiaries will take place between October and December;

    6. Payments to new beneficiaries will commence in January 2020 so that we do not create arrears; and

    7. Specific activities related to preparing potential beneficiaries for payment namely targeting registration, verification and enrolment will be spearheaded by our regional technical support units, once the training of the district officials is completed.  

Targeting means the selection of potential beneficiaries of the grants. In view of the national roll out, the sole primary source of information for targeting older persons to benefit from the grant will be the National Identification Registration Authority (NIRA) data. This is in line with overall Government policy of the national identification cards. 

This, therefore, means that for one to be targeted, they must be:

1. 	Registered with NIRA and in possession of a valid National identity card. We are aware that there are some older persons whose finger prints no longer register. NIRA is taking that into consideration and will address it in due course. 

2. 	Of the right set age threshold as at the time of registration. Therefore, the individual must not be a pensioner.

Mr Speaker, the targeting process is automated through the SAGE Management Information System to minimise exclusion and inclusion of errors. 

The following are the steps: 

1. 	The programme will access data of older persons from the NIRA register; 

2. 	Load it into the SAGE information system to have potential beneficiaries selected in the SAGE information system; 

3. 	Data of selected older persons will be shared with the Ministry of Public Service, for screening of pensioners;

4. 	The lists of older persons from which pensioners have been screened are then shared with the district local governments for verification to ascertain that the people on the list are known in the communities, are alive and are of the right age; 

    5. The older persons who meet the criteria are registered with the programme and their names shared with the payment service provider for enrolment; for example, their details/biometrics (names, photos, finger prints, etcetera) are taken by the payment service provider. Accounts are opened for them and are ready to be paid. All these processes are between now and January 2020.

    6. The details of the enrolled beneficiaries are then returned by the payment service provider to our information system and stored in the SAGE data bank for use in the generation of the payrolls;

    7. Payrolls are generated and beneficiaries paid in their respective communities directly or through their preferred next of kin for those who are infirm.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker, as we start the roll out, permit me to make a special appeal to Members of this August House to support the preparatory activities through effective mobilisation of the population, to ensure that the preparatory activities are smoothly concluded in December 2019, to pave way for beneficiary payment in January 2020. 

The ministry commits to provide all the necessary information to members of Parliament to facilitate this process in their respective constituencies.

Finally, I would like to thank you and Cabinet for supporting the proposal for the national rollout. I wish you all the best in this endeavour. It is now a reality. Let us work together to advocate for more funds for the sustainability of this programme.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the telephone number for the person managing SAGE is indicated there. For further inquiries, please, call that person. This is an update from the minister, which we requested for. We will have a short time for interaction. It will not be the one hour for full ministerial statement but an update statement.

3.39
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, central): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I beg to place on record my appreciation to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, for this very important statement, which I believe forms part and parcel of our aspirations in relation to empowerment of the older persons in this country.

I congratulate you very much for obtaining the required resources. I thank you very much for respecting the various parliamentary resolutions on the question of national wealth. 

My only worry is that this statement has been made by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development but we have a funding gap of Shs 29 billion. I, therefore, request that at an appropriate time before this debate is closed, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development assures us that we shall obtain the required Shs 29 billion. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.40
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. We also urge her to put in a request for the additional funding because some of us, who are neighbouring districts that are already benefiting from this programme, are rendered incompetent because we are not able to bring this national programme to our districts. Honourable minister, this is causing us problems.

To put Members out of this crisis, I would like to request that you do not wait for 2021 for the national rollout. We have passed supplementary budgets in this House, I would urge you to present a supplementary budget, which on behalf of these Members, I believe we shall pass overwhelmingly without debate. (Applause)

Secondly, some of the old persons in some districts during the registration of national identity cards did not disclose their actual date of birth. The old women would go for registration and they would ask her: “How old are you?” She said: “I do not know”. They would then estimate. Eventually, they found themselves outside the bracket of the 80 years. Now, they are not benefiting and they think they have been deliberately left out. I would, therefore, request that when you are doing the enrolment, you take keen attention to the actual age of these people.

In some districts, we have persons who are 60 years old and in some places, it is difficult to find a person who is 80 years old, yet the essence of this programme was a retirement package for people who are not in the civil service. When they retire from cultivating and casual jobs that our peasant relatives and parents do, they should be able to earn something that would give them some minimum way of sustaining themselves. 

Therefore, if the official retirement age of civil servants is 60 years, why should we raise the bar? How do we expect those people who have not served in the civil service but have retired from cultivation to survive? I beg to move.

3.43
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the good statement. In Mayuge District, our elders are benefiting and we would like to thank you for the good job you are doing. 

The other issue is to do with national identity cards. The issues I have found in my constituency concern those who come to me to complain that they are not getting the money even when they are of age. I have found out that they under declared their age. An 80 year old person at times has 60 years on his or her national identity card.

I have been very honest with these people. It is very common with the ladies; the majority of the mothers would under declare their age. However, on the physical appearance, they are old and that is a very big challenge. 

Therefore, majority of my elders have missed out and they are there languishing. I do not know how the ministry is going to help us to correct that under declaration of their age. I thank you.

3.45
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Putting the threshold of the old people at 80 years is a little high; even getting people who are 80 years and above is not easy. In fact, it is only the lucky and countable few. 

In my constituency, the bar of 80 years is being blamed on the institution of Parliament. It is a decision by Cabinet or the ministry but some individuals think that this is a law that has been passed by Parliament. I think a person who is old is old irrespective of whether that person is 60, 70 or 80 years. 

The honourable minister should bring to this Parliament some kind of comparative analysis. If we want to start from 60 years, what would be the financial gap? How about if it is from 70 years? I am wondering what magic they used to make the bar 80 years because if the issue was only financial, then we would compare and see which one is affordable and go by it. Otherwise, setting the bar at 80 years and the institution of Parliament is being blamed is very disastrous. I would have preferred a compared approach so that we see which one is more workable and then the institution of Parliament appropriates accordingly. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought we had this debate here. These comparisons were brought, the figures were presented showing what the implication would be if we start at 60 years. We asked, would we ever be able to roll out, and the answer was no. If we start at 70 years, would we ever be able to roll out? The figures were astronomical and the answer by this House was still no. We then asked, what is workable if we are to achieve national rollout? That is what was scientifically arrived at. Let us avoid that line of debate because we had that debate here. That is why I was wondering what we were going to debate on this issue today because we have had this debate repeatedly.

3.47
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for presenting the good report particularly that the ministry is working with NIRA to consider older persons who cannot sign properly for national IDs. 

I would suggest that this good gesture be extended to people with disabilities as well and to people who are temporarily disabled, the drunkards. You might find a very old person drunk and they cannot –(Interjections)– yes, they are also people. They may go on a day when somebody is totally drunk and cannot sign well. 

I would like to seek clarification from the minister. I welcome the idea that recruitment has started for new beneficiaries but I would like to know whether this recruitment will be inclusive of new beneficiaries in districts where SAGE is already operating. Thank you.

3.49
MS HELLEN ADOA (NRM, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know the debate was handled. Unfortunately, that day I was not in this House. Biblically, 70 years would be the right age because the Bible says that from 70 years and above, it is just added years. 

Otherwise, my concern is that there is a group of people who have been moving around soliciting money from elders that are 60, 70 years and above asking them to register if they have to benefit from this programme. 

My appeal to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is that they please sensitise the community and also pass messages on radios and other media houses to save the elders from being conned of their money. The elders have lost a lot of money to join this programme out there, including in Serere.

3.50
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Article 8A of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda tells us to legislate in the best interest of the people we represent. There are sub counties where you will not find somebody above 80 years yet the law says that we must have 100 people per subcounty. What will happen? Shall we practice double standards that somewhere we are recruiting from 70 years and somewhere else 60years and in other places above 80 years?

Civil servants retire at 60 and after which they begin receiving their pension then. We are saying that those that have not been in formal employment, if they want to benefit from Government, they must be 80 years. The civil servant who retired at 60 will have benefitted 15 years more.

The life expectancy is just moving from 65 to 70 years. My humble appeal, as the minister and the Prime Minister are here is, this Parliament that legislated that time and passed this law is the same Parliament that is recalling and presenting the appeal and request that we recall what we legislated the other time and bring something new, that is in the best interest of this country and the elders that we are fighting for, and those people that put a brick on what we see in this country –(Interruption)

MS KAWOOYA: Point of information -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, accessing the microphone before you are allowed is not proper. 

MS KAWOOYA: Mr Speaker, he was talking about the SAGE and the years and those who legislated. I was among those who legislated at that time. He has come in now and he does not know why we legislated that law that way at that time. (Laughter) Now, as a Ssenga, I want to give him information. I will be brief.

At the time, when we were debating this, I was a Chairperson of Equal Opportunities Committee, meaning that the whole thing originated from the Committee on Equal Opportunities. We were looking at old age being from 50 years. 

When we came here, we said that anybody that is 75 years is still useful; can stand in an upright position. Now we are saying that old age should start at 80 years. That means that things have all changed. 

As the people who legislated that time, that was then but now things have changed. I am 62 years. If you add me five more years, I become 67 and if they retire me, you mean I cannot benefit? I am an example. When they say, “old people come,” if I join the queue they will say, “Madam Anifa, you are not old.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to give the information now? 

MS KAWOOYA: The information I am giving is that he had said those people who legislated at that time had put it at that and I am giving you the reason why it was at that. We are the same legislators now in the Tenth Parliament and we can do it better to suit the needs of our people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have the Prime Minister’s Time at 4 o’clock and I would like to close this before that time. We have two minutes left. Therefore, it is only those who are going to speak for seconds that will be allowed. Can I have the Member for Oyam District speaking for 30 seconds?

3.56
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, what will happen in subcounties where we do not have elders above the age of 80?

Secondly, you have said that NIRA will help identify the elders whose fingerprints cannot be recognised. We have had a lot of problems with NIRA over the difficulty in getting the national IDs. Can you assure us that you have already talked to NIRA and they are going to help in that respect?

Thirdly, you have urged us to help you in the mobilisation. I have tried to do that mobilisation. However, whenever I talk about the age of 80, I get booed. What trick must I use to help you do the mobilisation? In my district, we are not going to get anybody who is above – (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is no one minute. You will use 30 seconds. Let us have the Member for Kasese District. Your 30 seconds are over. (Laughter)

3.57
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Mr Speaker, it was a technical problem not associated with Kasese but the administration of Parliament. I would like to thank the minister for the information she has given to the House regarding our elderly persons accessing the funds.

Like many Members of Parliament are requesting, it is becoming a problem for people to let our elderly persons know that the money is not sufficient to cover the whole country. In addition, in some subcounties there are no people who are 80 years and above. 

What we are requesting is that since Government has said that let 100 people who are 80 years and above benefit from each subcounty, in a situation where a subcounty does not have people who are 80 years and above, can’t we advise the subcounty to look for people who are the next –(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us pose it here. Please, let us respect the time. Honourable minister, make brief responses so that I can go to the Prime Minister’s Time.

MS MUKWAYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some people say that if horses were wishes, everybody would ride. To respond to hon. Kiiza, this time we are not going per subcounty. We are collecting all people in Uganda who are 80 years and above. According to the statistics, we have already identified 204,000 on the data –(Interjection)- Yes, you do not know these people but they are there. That is what relates to the billions of shillings that we have to raise.

I would like to appeal to you to stick to your decision and allow me to do this. Within the next three years, hopefully the budget will have improved and I will get more money and we go back to reach those who are 60 or 65 years old.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us go to the next item.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, you are welcome to this leg of the session. Honourable members, as you see on the Order Paper, there are issues that the Prime Minister will deal with first before he goes to the face-to-face. There is a particular item on the safe houses that I would like you to handle with some - the matter is before the Committee on Human Rights and we do not want any contradiction at this moment.

4.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, there are a number of issues that have been raised and have not yet been answered and we agreed with the Speaker that we will be clearing them as we go on. We want to clear them so that there is no backlog at all. I propose that for the purpose of this afternoon, I address one of those issues. The issue I would like to address is about the problems being faced by some exporters of Uganda’s horticultural products to Europe and the efforts being made by Government to overcome this matter.

Mr Speaker, with your permission, this is the short statement I have over the matter. It explains what Government is doing to overcome the challenges being faced by Ugandan exporters, especially with regard to the presence of pests on some of the horticultural products, which is threatening to compromise our competitiveness.

Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to inform you, Members of Parliament and the country at large about the steps being taken to ensure that Uganda’s horticultural exports to the European Union remains competitive and acceptable to the market in spite of the problem I have already mentioned. Indeed, the Government and the EU are engaging over this very matter.

As you may be aware, the EU offers a premium market for Uganda’s horticultural exports that include flowers, fresh fruits and vegetables. Annual earnings from this market are estimated to be $60,700,000. However, over the last few months, there have been interceptions of some of our exports on account of phytosanitary standards due to increased incidents of pests. This has come as a result of, among other reasons, climatic changes. Consequently, the EU asked Uganda to take corrective measures to meet the required standards.

To address this concern that the EU has raised, the Government of Uganda has so far undertaken the following measures:

    1. Government has put in place a committee comprising of technical experts from the ministries responsible for agriculture and trade, as well as the people responsible for handling exports to study the matter comprehensively, identify the gaps and bottlenecks to attain the required standards. The team has adopted joint actions plan to address the areas of concerns.

2. 	We have increased the number of inspectors at Entebbe International Airport from four to 11. In 2018, we had four inspectors only. The inspectors will further be increased to 25 before this year ends and next year we intend to make them 50 inspectors.

This will ensure that we have enough inspectors at exit and entry points, cargo terminal at Entebbe Airport and also other major border points because some of the goods pass at different exit points.

These will enable us to track and monitor the quality of exports leaving Uganda to Europe and other export destinations. 

1. 	Our laboratory capacity has been strengthened. We have partnered with Chemiphar an internationally accredited laboratory to test samples to ensure that only produce with acceptable, maximum residual limits of agro-chemicals are cleared for export.

2. 	Through the Civil Aviation Authority, Government has allocated space at the cargo terminal at Entebbe International Airport to serve as cold rooms to improve fresh handling. In addition land has been identified for the construction of a fumigation centre at Entebbe International Airport. This will further help to guarantee that exports coming from Uganda are free from pests. 

The above steps will cost approximately Shs 8.83 billion of which Shs 1.4 billion is for activities under Ministry of Trade and Co-operatives; Shs 3.6 billion from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; and the private sector will contribute Shs 3.3 billion to this effort. So, it is a combined effort between Government and the private sector.

The Attorney-General is in the process of working out the necessary mechanism to absorb the contribution of the private sector.

Mr Speaker, you will appreciate that investing resources to meet these requirements is of great strategic importance. For example, increasing the market share from the current 0.06 per cent to one per cent would earn the country approximately $1 billion per year in terms of horticultural products alone.

This is an important market that the country should jealously nurture and Government is determined to ensure that it is done so that Uganda’s export potential and export earnings can significantly increase. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do they have clarification in Prime Minister’s Question Time? This is not a statement; it is a response to a question and we are going to proceed like that. If you want to ask additional questions you will ask. Can we open it up right now?

4.09
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister what Government is doing at Entebbe is at the tail end. The Europeans are saying that there is so much chemicals in the tomatoes and it is done in the gardens.

We used to have agricultural officers who helped farmers but the people growing tomatoes are spraying so many pesticides onto these tomatoes. You are going to put inspectors at the airport when the tomatoes are on the way out. That does not help.

I was in Europe when the Europeans stopped importing Ugandan fish. The problem was at the landing sites and so the Government and the European Union came and helped to put up toilets at the landing sites. That helped to improve on the quality of fish being exported.

The Government should help farmers on how much pesticides should be sprayed and the types on the market are so fake. There is UNBS but these chemicals come in and go to the peasants who keep spraying. I expect Government to help the farmers by regulating the spray of insecticides-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, it is Prime Minister’s Question Time. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can Government help the peasant on how to spray pesticides and regulate so that we can export these tomatoes and other products?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this programme of inspectors in not going to be isolated from the rest of the system. The fact is that they will be working closely with extension workers. This is going to involve identification of the farms where the exports will be coming from so that the inspection will in addition include inspecting the actual farms where the products are coming from. 

It is going to be a wide network from the farm onto the market so that Uganda’s exports are full prove and very well protected. The idea of excessive chemicals even on the farms will be subject to inspection.

4.12
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as a leader of Government, would you consider setting up regional clearance centres for the fish, coffee and other exports so that with the participation of the private sector all these exports are cleared with the expertise at the regional centres so that by the time they reach the exit points, they are clear and certified?

Would Government consider that as a more effective measure to ensure that our exports are very clean and meeting the requirements of importers abroad? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issue of Uganda’s competiveness is very important and as I have said in as far as horticultural and other agricultural exports is concerned, there will be inspection of the individual farms involved in producing the commodities.

The point made by hon. Baba of other commodities, which Uganda is exporting in substantial quantities, requiring a greater national network of inspection is a reasonable point that Government will actively consider.

4.14
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, you have addressed one tail end of the challenge that is the challenge within Entebbe but most exporters are losing money when it is required to inspect after landing at Heathrow International Airport. 

Your cargo which is going to be verified and it is there for about three to four days and you lose it because some of them are perishable. Can’t you borrow a leaf from Kenya, which has acquired huge space at Heathrow airport and other airports in Europe and equipped them with cold room capacity so that as they verify their products, the products are still in a good state; that even if you were to verify them at Entebbe as you would like to do and they are going to take a week for verification the other side where they go, you still would have lost out. 

So, most of our products are being lost at the other end, where we have no facility for cold rooms. The eight billion shillings you are investing this way without investing the other end will not benefit the farmers so much. My question is can’t you find capacity and capability within the budget to also ensure that we have a facility the other end that can do the same?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the point being made is a good one. It is actually a whole chain from the farm up to the consumer. Therefore, on this chain, if we detect need for reinforcement - be it at Entebbe, Brussels or London - we will look at it.

Two, it has to be a phased investment programme but we will not leave any stone unturned in order to ensure that Uganda’s competitiveness is not undermined.

4.16
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as the Leader of Government Business, I would like to get this answer from you. What plans do you have for the fishing community of this country in as far as the fishing industry is concerned because they are not benefitting from that programme? 

Also, what programme do you have to make sure that they have the right fishing gears? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, on the question of fishing gears, I expect that the minister responsible for fisheries advises farmers on this very point. Two, there is a programme which is going on on our lakes to ensure that our fish is protected. I am happy to say that that programme has already shown success. Some of the factories that had closed are being reopened because of increasing amount of fish out of this programme of protecting our fisheries sector.

4.17
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, recently during the President’s visit to different areas, specifically in our area, our people raised the issue which is very familiar to you and that is resettlement of the people of Sebei. We were told that as Cabinet, you sat and instituted a committee of five ministers to come down and settle the issue of resettlement. 

On Saturday, I have a fundraising in that area. What am I going to tell these people? It is a serious issue, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We have raised this on several occasions and have actually failed to explain to our people. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that there has been quite an issue of resettling people in the Sebei sub-region. It is true that Cabinet set up a team, which is headed by hon. Janat Mukwaya, who is fortunately in this House. She and I have been in contact over the matter. 

She has steered the team, which is due to meet the Prime Minister on this subject. After the meeting with the Prime Minister, Cabinet will be adequately informed but the idea is to settle everybody affected in Sebei sub-region and sort out this matter once and for all.

4.19
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I thank you for the efforts Government is making to promote our agricultural exports. However, as you know, our exports are meeting a lot of challenges, particularly agricultural products, because of the preferences of the consumers from the different areas in the world as requirements.

Now, as you are aware, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in October 2018, Uganda signed a Memorandum of Understanding with United Arab Emirates to open markets for Uganda’s agricultural products. That Memorandum of Understanding was signed by hon. Vincent Ssempijja, on behalf of the President.

There are fewer restrictions compared, for example, to those ones in the European Union markets. Now, what is being promoted by such potential markets is contract farming; helping farmers produce what they are going to buy. Can we also have this programme initiated by people who are buying or willing to buy our agricultural products? For instance, one of the provisions which they offered us was to build an agricultural institution for Uganda to improve on the quality of what they are going to buy. That could also apply to the European Union. If there are pesticides that are prohibited not to be applied on our farms, they should come through –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please ask the question.

MR KATURAMU: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, don’t you think that in some of the markets where we have restrictions, the consumers may be pursuing protectionist policies in order to promote their own farmers?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the offer by the United Arab Emirates to support Uganda in enhancing our own production of agricultural products so that we can be able to supply their markets. That is a welcome offer which we should pursue.

The issue of other countries protecting their markets is not surprising. Let us do our best to make the Ugandan products as competitive as possible so that their consumers end up preferring Ugandan products.

4.22
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This Parliament sends us to sit at the Pan African Parliament. This is the only time we can share what we do. I would like to thank the Prime Minister and he has indeed said he came to focus on one issue; export.

I am aware – and I think he is aware – that this year, the theme of the United Nations is “Acceleration of Sustainable Development and Partnership”. In the same year, African countries signed the AU Charter for Free Trade Movement (African Continental Free Trade Agreement). I am sure you are aware of all that, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

My question is why hasn’t Uganda signed the Maputo Protocol, which requires that every African country must allocate ten per cent of its budget to agriculture? Your concern is about trade. The African continent has said okay. My question is how are you going to trade what you do not have?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there is a lot of investment in agriculture. If you estimate it in the narrow form of saying, “How much money is going to the Ministry of Agriculture,” you may get a small percentage and a wrong picture.

Nevertheless, the investment in infrastructure, airport facilities and water for irrigation and related issues is an investment in agriculture. My own assessment is that the overall investment in the sector is well over 10 per cent.

On the other issues, Uganda is committed to playing her role in ensuring sustainable development for our country and the region and ensuring that Uganda remains as competitive as possible. That is the way forward. 

Also Uganda, true to her Pan-African commitment and nature, will ensure that we continue and promote participation especially with the continental free trade area being signed. The issue of the ratification of the Maputo Agreement, details can be given subsequently but I must say that we have literally gone beyond that. We are now focusing on the whole continent. 

4.26
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, Government constructed certain structures in form of stores, which were meant for storage of produce in so many districts in this country. Butaleja has so many of these stores being a major grower of rice in eastern region. We also benefit from Doho Irrigation Project.

Mr Prime Minister, my issue is that these stores have remained empty for the last four years. Since Uganda suffers every year from hunger and we import food from other countries, how are you preparing Uganda to make the best use of these stores so that we are not struck by disaster again and as a result, we lack food to give to our people?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I expect my sister, hon. Mugeni, to be mobilising her constituency to ensure that those stores are full to capacity. (Laughter)

4.27
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, in Kibaale District, which I represent, eight sub-counties out of 13 do not have a Government-aided secondary school. Is it an anomaly? What is Government doing to address such an anomaly?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is an important subject matter that this House has discussed many times. It is a subject that Government is very committed to; to ensure that every sub-county gets a Government-aided school. The aim of Government is to ensure that in this kisanja, that important promise is fulfilled. 

4.28
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, there are many Ugandans who are detained in the Democratic Republic of Congo. We know some of them like Mr Sam Mugumya. They have been there for more than four years; they have never been charged. What is Government doing to make sure those Ugandans receive justice?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Ugandans should conduct themselves very well both within the country and wherever they go abroad. Secondly, in case Ugandans get into problems, Government of Uganda will, without any exception, provide consular services. Thirdly, there is greater cooperation among the Eastern African countries and as our relations warm up, it means it would be easier to handle issues that may be amongst us including cases that ndugu Mwijukye is talking about.

4.30
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, the new Mulago National Referral Hospital was closed some years ago for expansion and renovation. One of the units affected is the ICU of the Uganda Heart Institute. Right now, there are over 500 children with heart problems waiting surgery and treatment yet there are only four beds available for them. 

Ugandans have waited for the completion of the expansion and renovation of Mulago Hospital in vain. What plans does Government have for these children?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it takes some time to put things right. It is true it is taking some bit of time to get Mulago Hospital refurbished. The programme that I last saw was that by the end of this year, Mulago Hospital should be ready for use and the children that my brother is talking about, and all other patients, will be able to benefit.

It is true that the Intensive Care Unit at Mulago was small and this was one of the reasons why this renovation is taking place. We do expect that a much larger Intensive Care Unit will be available in Mulago Hospital for both intensive care patients in general and for children and heart cases in particular.

4.32
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to ask the Prime Minister about Apo Army Primary School, which was a presidential pledge while visiting Yumbe District. The school was built but not all the components were put. It has no teachers’ accommodation. The teachers have lost interest because they are accommodated very far. The community provided enough land. So, when will the teachers get their accommodation so that they get motivated to teach and the performance improves? The school, to date, is not even coded. Can you update the country about the status of that school?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we should salute President Museveni for fulfilling his promise of building the primary school. What remains is administrative. Coding and providing teachers’ accommodation will be implemented by the Ministry of Education and Sports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon are pupils and teachers of Yumbe Model Nursery and Primary School. They are represented by hon. Ashraf Olega and hon. Zaitun Driwaru. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

4.34
MR PATRICK OCAN (UPC, Apac Municipality, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question is about the plight of refugees in the country. What is the Government position in addressing the existing gaps in the provision of social overhead capital facilities in the gazetted refugee settlement districts of Uganda, considering the influx of the refuges and asylum seekers? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: I missed the last component of your question.

MR OCAN: I asked about the Government’s position in addressing the existing gaps in the provision of social overhead capital facilities within the gazetted refugees settlement areas, and districts of Uganda considering the influx of refugees and asylum seeker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issue of providing services to gazetted refugee areas is being aggressively handled as my brother would know, by Government of Uganda and the international community and the refugee hosting communities and the districts. It is an on-going programme and we ask all colleagues, Members of Parliament and local leaders to give it an equivocal support.

4.36
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the issue of wrong pesticide and drugs of cattle has been on for some time. What is Government doing to stop such a problem? What safety plans does Government have to stop wrong pesticides and drugs for the cattle and crops?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, thefts are a problem not only for the areas, I mean issues of cattle. However, you know in Kampala there are pick pockets and in many other centres there are this and that. My advice is simple and straight; vigilance of the people of Uganda reporting to the authorised authorities like police so that these bad elements can be apprehended and dealt with in accordance with the law. 

Perhaps, giving more comprehensive answer is that we should nurture and bring up our children in a manner that they will detest doing bad things like theft among others so that we have a more decent society.

4.38
MR EDWARD SSEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu South County, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is an on-going exercise of supplying electricity in most of our rural areas. However, in my constituency Katikamu South in Luweero District, some time back early this year, electricity poles were planted in most of the area without electric cables. Some were even dumped on the ground which are about to start rotting.

May I know whether there is a timeframe for rural electrification agency responsible for this exercise for the completion of this programme? If possible may I know when it will end? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, when electricity poles are distributed, they should straight away be connected or it should not take long. In case there is delay, the wanaichi and leaders should be informed if there is a problem. This matter will be taken up by my office with the Minister of Energy and Minerals. 

4.40
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The House is aware that the police officers through Members of Parliament reported an issue that their savings were being misused. They were contributing to a scheme but they were not getting their savings and there were no mechanisms of withdraw nor accessing loans through their savings.

Mr Speaker, up to now, this issue still goes on. The police officers of this country through their saving scheme called Exodus Cooperative Savings and Credit Society Limited are contributing. However, the officers say that when you go to ask for money from the scheme, they do not access it. We would like to know Rt Hon. Prime Minister when the members of this scheme, serving police officers of this country will receive or benefit from their savings? 

Secondly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I got the opportunity of visiting Zoka Forest and I found -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable one question.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, when you save your money with a SACCO or a bank, you are expected to be at liberty to withdraw the money in accordance to the existing terms and regulations. I would be surprised if the police SACCO or Exodus is violating the agreed terms and conditions of how members should handle their money. This is a subject that-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: RT Hon. Prime Minister, the matter came here that Shs 5 billion from the SACCO was borrowed and used by the police. Therefore, during the Budget, there was a proposal that was approved by Parliament that the Shs 5 billion is returned to the SACCO. That is where the problem is. The question is, has it been returned?

There was a debate here why you should appropriate money to a SACCO. You should appropriate it to the police but ring-fence it so that it goes back to the SACCO. Maybe you follow up on that because Parliament passed that Shs 5 billion to be returned to the SACCO.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I oblige.

4.43
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you will recall that I raised the concern about the Shs 100 billion which was injected by Government to stabilise maize prices. On that question, you directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to bring a similar statement like the one you have just taken us through. Therefore, I do not know what has happened. 

DR RUGUNDA: Well, the minister must be busy working on the statement for the House; he will bring it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just been informed that the honourable member for Dokolo County is accusing the presiding officer of practicing tribalism; for having picked hon. Nambooze instead of the member for Dokolo. I am practicing tribalism.

4.45
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the President of Uganda and the President of Rwanda for having reached an understanding. Would the Prime Minister, therefore, tell us under that agreement, what we are supposed to and not to do so that we join the President in fulfilling the terms of that wonderful agreement? 

In the first place, why did we have that conflict, which we have now resolved? We would like to know that so that we join the Government in implementing the agreement.  Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I congratulate my sister, hon. Nambooze, for the enthusiasm and full support that she has extended to President Museveni and President Kagame on reaching a common understanding.

Secondly, we will get details of this agreement and the House will be briefed. The responsibilities the House is expected to perform will be articulated. 

4.45
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the Prime Minister that the women councils for Dokolo are meeting next week to evaluate the performance since this term started and since they were elected in office.

However, in the coordination of the various ministries, I do not know whether you are also informed of the presidential pledges targeting certain sensitive areas and particularly, what is due to women. 

The President decided that all the district women councils will be given two heifers. They are asking me when the two will arrive because the next election might come before they get them and they may not be voted back to office. 

We would like to also know what has happened to the Women Entrepreneurship Fund (WEF) for this year. I do not know whether other districts have got theirs but the fund has not arrived in Dokolo. They are wondering what is going on with the money that Parliament has budgeted for the women councils.  Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the fulfilment of the presidential pledge of the two heifers will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Indeed, what happens is that when the President makes pledges, the responsible ministries take over the matter for implementation.

Secondly, you did raise the question of women’s funds having not yet arrived in Dokolo. Dokolo will not be discriminated against or handled differently from other districts of Uganda. I do expect that the money will be arriving in due course if it has not arrived yet.

4.47
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, our beloved President has been moving around the whole country trying to launch internet connectivity. In West Nile, there has been connectivity in Koboko as launched by the President.

However, in some parts of the country and specifically in West Nile - Metu, Lefori and Moyo subcounties, there is interference by a signal from Sudan. 

When you also come to Zombo, it is the same thing. It is in all areas bordering West Nile including Adjumani, Moyo, Arua, Maracha and Zombo; there is that interference by the signal from neighbouring countries. How can that be rectified?  Thank you.


DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true a number of border districts go through this problem. Nevertheless, the Minister for Information, Communications and Technology and National Guidance is going to be instructed to deal with this matter that is affecting West Nile District.

4.49
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, looking at the cover page of the manifesto of our mighty party, NRM, there is the theme; “Job creation and modernisation of Agriculture”. 

Of recent, I have seen people telling Ugandans that we have implemented at least 62 per cent of our manifesto. How would you rate that implementation as far as job creation to Ugandans is concerned?  Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the performance of Government in terms of implementation of the manifesto including job creation, is on course; it is making steady progress. Our push for more investments, improved and modernisation of agriculture are all accompanied by jobs being created.

Therefore, implementation of the manifesto is on course and more jobs are being created. Ndugu Mbwatekamwa should tell the country, without any hesitation, that jobs are being created. (Applause)

4.51
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we resurrected the spirit of the defunct East African Community in the East African Treaty. We remember it for the joint venture of railways, harbours, industries and even the airline.

With over a dozen years of the East African Community being in place, the Kenyan Standard Gauge Railway cannot connect to Uganda. Everybody is struggling alone with an airline yet the old one we revived used to have an East African Airways.

What is that we have in the new East African Community, which is the common market going to a Union and should possibly become a federation? What is it that we have in common as East Africans, in terms of inter-connection and a shared property, that the citizens and the people of this region can be proud of to say, “Yes, we revived the East African Community and this is what we have”? What is the strategy of Uganda and Government as a partner state to make sure that we have a partnership of the joint venture projects?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as the question was being raised, fortunately, I heard many members of Parliament enumerating many things that bind us together in East Africa.

It is true we had gone some distance but we are moving rapidly together. The fact that we have a common market in East Africa is one of the greatest binding successes that the East African Community has. One can enumerate many.

You talked of the Standard Gauge Railway. Who told you that the Standard Gauge Railway is going to leave Mombasa and permanently end and stop in Naivasha? It is on its way to Uganda, South Sudan, DRC, Rwanda and many other areas. 

My dear brother, you have every reason to be happy and proud of East Africa getting closer together. It is a process, which does not take a day, but we are on the right path.

4.55
MR RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For some time now, we have had cases that have arisen in Kapchorwa District. 

The President has pledged several times and promised that Kapchorwa Hospital will be elevated to a regional hospital. When you look at Kapchorwa District, you will notice that it handles Bukwo, Kween, Amudat, Nakapiripirit, Bulambuli, Sironko and Kapchorwa itself. Those are six districts. 

Kapchorwa District is an area for tourists and we have had cases of accidents – last time, I raised the issue where we lost the army in an accident. 

Therefore, when shall we have Kapchorwa Hospital elevated to a referral hospital, given that it is one of our centres of tourism? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that there are plans to have Kapchorwa Hospital become a regional referral hospital. Nevertheless, there must be some basic facilities put in place so that is not just a referral hospital in name but in practise. Therefore, Government is now preparing the hospital to assume and become a referral hospital.

4.56
MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you very well know Rukiga District does not have any tarmac road. The plans to tarmac Muhanga-Kisiizi Road that connects to Rukungiri and Kamwezi Road connecting to Rwanda have been going on. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like you to tell us how far you have gone with that plan. Thank you very much. 

DR RUGUNDA: Rukiga District benefits from about 10 kilometres of tarmac road of Mbarara, Ntungamo and Katuna Road to Kabale. Nevertheless, on a serious note, the point that hon. Caroline has raised is true. That road is on the list of roads to be tarmacked and resources are being looked for to upgrade it.


4.58
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, may I get an answer to my question, which I asked you two weeks ago, since the minister has not come back to give me an answer? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is that question? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Is he willing to have it? Mr Speaker, I asked Ndugu that in 2006, a number of schools were taken over in Kampala; among them is Mbuya Army Primary School, which was a school for soldier children. It has stayed there for almost 10 years with no occupancy and the children are not there. I would like to know the person who took up that land. Who is in possession of Mbuya Army Primary School land? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the information is being sought. However, it appears like hon. Ssewungu probably has some valuable information. We will be happy and ready to share that information with him. 

5.00
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you explain to the people of Kazo why there is a drastic fall of milk prices? Even though we have lost all our animals, we still have hope that Government will rectify the situation by giving us acaricides to control tick-borne related diseases. 

The price of milk is Shs 300 per litre at a farm gate while in Kampala, it is at Shs 3,000. How do you expect the people of Kazo to survive, since it is their livelihood? Please explain. 

DR RUGUNDA: The issue of milk prices is of concern. This is partly because of the international market forces on milk but also, there has been improved livestock care, which has increased milk production. The market in Uganda needs to be better developed to be able to absorb all this milk at good prices. Government will work with the farmers to ensure that this situation is effectively handled and managed.

5.02
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this question begun since Uganda was formed; I do not know what year that was. 

You are aware that the neighbouring districts of Otuke bordering Lango, Agago bordering Acholi, Amudat, Abim and Teso have never got peace from the pastoralists. They bring their cows for grazing yearly and the people are worried of the coming four months from now. For so many years, Government has promised time and time again that they are going to drill the water dams. When will this happen? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Hon. Acon’s point of water for the people and the cows is part of the Government programme to ensure that we increase water supply for the people, the cows and the crops. It is an on-going programme and Otuke will not be left out in implementation. 

5.03
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in February this year, I remember the Ministry of Health called all leaders from Karamoja to Moroto on a regional meeting. This concerned the loan request on health infrastructure development for Karamoja Region from the Italian Government. 

The leaders from Karamoja do not have answers; where we are, whether and when it is coming to Parliament for us to approve this loan. Thank you very much. 

DR RUGUNDA: Hon. Esther, would you clarify the last bit of your Karamoja question because I missed it. 

MS ANYAKUN: Mr Speaker, I was asking about the health infrastructure development for the Karamoja–Italian Government loan for improving the health services.

DR RUGUNDA: The microphone is too close to you; give yourself space.

MS ANYAKUN: The Italian Government loan for Karamoja health infrastructure development.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is talking about the Italian loan for development of health centre facilities in Karamoja. When is this coming?

DR RUGUNDA: The Italian loan for health centres in Karamoja has been discussed and approved. We just need to check on the level of implementation but it has already been passed by Cabinet.

5.05
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government adopted decentralisation as a vehicle to deliver services to the population and to promote accountability and inclusion of people in decision making. 

However, to date, many of the activities, which are enshrined in the Local Government Act, which are considered as decentralised services like primary school activities, health centres and local revenue have all been centralised. Some of the primary school activities like construction of primary schools and health centres have also been centralised without formally making changes in this law. Is that not a contradiction in implementation of decentralisation policy?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there have been some issues of implementation but I agree that what is done should be consistent with the law. I think there is need for us to harmonise the law and the practice.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.07
MS GRACE KESANDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the affected families by Kyambura accident need to be compensated. Unfortunately, they do not have capacity to trace the owner of the fuel tank because they claim that he is from Kenya. How can the Government help them? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government machinery will be put in place to support the affected people to get the owner of the fuel tank. Furthermore, even if the owner maybe in Kenya, it will not make any difference; Government will be able to access the owner.

5.08
MR ABIGABA CUTHBERT (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we thank the Government for the work being done by Rural Electrification Agency and for free connection policy. 

However, some of us who come from rural constituencies still have a problem of access to water. It is very costly to access water even when the water line is just five metres away from a home. Is Government considering free connection to water because this is a service where people would be paying monthly depending on the usage?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I propose that we first concentrate and perfect on free power connections.

Secondly, as far as water is concerned, the focus is to ensure that there is a water source in every village and this is where I think we should concentrate instead of free water connection for the population.

5.09
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. About two to three months ago, there was a countrywide exercise of registering veterans. This exercise was hastily done to the extent that a good number of veterans were not registered. I would like to ask the Prime Minister whether there is a plan to go back and have those that were not registered, registered. What comprehensive programme does the Government of Uganda have once and for all, to clear the veterans? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is possible that there was either upgrading or making sure that figures that our friends have in veteran affairs, are accurate. I do not have the specific details of the exercise. Nevertheless, people should not be surprised when Government comes to crosscheck and update information. 

There was the second point that you raised? 

MS AVUR: My second point was to know whether Government has a comprehensive plan to once and for all, clear the veterans. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is a big problem in West Nile.

DR RUGUNDA: Government has plans to clear all the veterans. The veterans are many as you know but this is being done systematically and clearly, in a phased manner and it will be accomplished.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.10
MR ALBERT LOKORU (NRM, Tepeth County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I will not hesitate to ask this question. We say: “Education is the key to life.” However, most schools in this country, especially in Karamoja have not been coded. When will these schools be coded? Karamoja is one of the regions with low education levels yet though people have now embraced education, the schools are not coded.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, coding of schools has a financial angle to it because it means accepting responsibility and taking over the school. The Ministry of Education and Sports is systematically carrying out this programme in a phased manner until all the affected schools are indeed coded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.11
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kakumiro): Thank very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to thank the Government for tarmacking Kakumiro-Kibaale Road. It is now very motorable. However, during the construction, China Communications Construction Company covered the borehole for Kihumuro Trading Centre. It is highly populated - I have tried to reach to Uganda National Roads Authority and Ministry of Works and Transport - that borehole is not anywhere in their plans yet these people were depending on only that borehole. What plans do you have to have that borehole back to its original state?

Secondly, I would like to thank Government for buying tractors for people of this country. A total of 298 tractors were procured last financial year. I saw the President –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One question.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issue of the people whose borehole was destroyed because of road construction, will be handled; the borehole will be redone. 

Secondly, the ministry responsible for water and the company responsible for that road will restore that borehole. Our office is going to work with the honourable member to ensure that the people have their water source properly restored.

5.13
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will make some brief comments in reply as provided in our rules. I would like to begin with the issue of Uganda and Rwanda Agreement. It is our advice that as a country, we need to be informed. It would be in the interest of the President, who signed the agreement or the Prime Minister, to come to Parliament and brief Ugandans because the agreement is binding on us. Therefore, we need to know the boundaries within which we are to operate. 

On the same issue, you realise that as soon as the agreement was signed, the number of flights by RwandAir to Entebbe reduced. There are even fears that the flights may stop. You may have also noticed that some news websites were blocked. We were wondering whether the agreement was made to block websites, reduce flights and others.

On the issue of export, we can borrow a leaf from countries like Ethiopia. With Uganda National Airlines now coming back, instead of concentrating only on passenger planes, we could also acquire cargo planes so that our products can get to the market much faster and when they are still fresh. Government should also appoint very competent ambassadors or at least build their capacity. When they are out of the country, their primary responsibility is to ensure that they get good deals for our products in those countries. 

The issue of the Maputo Protocol has been coming up again and again, but I think the spirit of that agreement was that the direct investment must be 10 per cent. Every time we are given excuses in this House - roads, electricity – but I think Government should appreciate that the essence of the protocol was that 10 per cent of the national budget should go into agriculture. We will appreciate if Government can take steps, even from the three. If we had an annual increment of about two per cent until we get to 10 per cent, it would work better. 

I will conclude on the issue of milk prices. Last year, we had an incident where our development partners had procured fortified foods, I think for Karamoja, and we ended up losing a number of people. Why doesn’t Government work with those development partners - because milk is a very important component of nutrition - so that they can buy the milk from our local farmers here, pack it and then supply to those areas like Karamoja and other places that are facing hunger. That way, you would solve the problem of the low agricultural prices of commodities like milk and also address another problem of feeding our children who are suffering.

I would like to thank the Prime Minister. We are very grateful that you have finally organised your house, the Cabinet. This week, we did not see public comments. I think that is good for our country, that we have responsible Cabinet ministers that take charge. Thank you very much. 

MR RUHAKANA: Mr Speaker, I would like to salute the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament – (Applause) – for calling a spade a spade. It is true there is improved performance and I am glad that is being accordingly recognised. 

I have already made some comments on the Uganda-Rwanda situation. On the issue of the frequency of the airline going down, there are so many factors that could explain this. I will not indulge myself in any speculation on the matter. 

Suffice it to say that it is the plan of Uganda Airlines to expand. We are going to get two additional bombardiers. They will be four by September this year. Next year, we will have big planes, the Airbus 330, for long-haul flights. They will be traveling to China, UK, Europe and many other places. Therefore, there should be no worry; the airline is going to expand, serve passengers and also handle cargo. Later on, we may even have dedicated cargo planes. That is a question of development and progress.

With regard to our ambassadors playing their roles, yes, commercial diplomacy is now a major consideration by the Government of Uganda. Our ambassadors are highly sensitised and they are already promoting Uganda Airlines in as much as they are promoting tourism and other businesses.

On the Maputo agreement, as I have said, a lot is being invested in the agricultural sector. We must not look at agriculture in a narrow way but in its broad context.

As regards milk prices, we will work with anybody that will help us improve the milk prices for our people. Thank you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we deal with the statement of the minister. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ALLEGED PLANNED CONSTRUCTION OF A HYDRO ELECTRIC DAM AT MURCHISON FALLS

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Mr Speaker, my ministry was tasked to provide a statement on the status of the proposed hydropower project at the Uhuru site.

The proposed Uhuru hydropower project was to be developed on Uhuru Falls, which is adjacent to Murchison Falls. The site is downstream on River Nile in Kiryandongo and Nwoya districts, after the hydropower sites of Oriang, Ayago and Kiba. This site is one of the large hydropower sites Government intended to develop in the medium term to meet the growing energy needs of the country. The other large hydropower sites being developed include Kiba (330 MW), Oriang (392MW) and Ayago (848MW)

In that regard, Government signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with M/s Bonang Energy Ltd from the Republic of South Africa to undertake detailed feasibility studies of the Uhuru site. On 25 April 2019, the Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) received a notice of intended application for a permit from Bonang Power and Energy (Pty) Limited to undertake feasibility studies and other related activities in respect of the proposed 360MW Uhuru hydropower project to guide the decision on development. 

In line with the Electricity Act, 1999, ERA advertised the application from Bonang Power and Energy (Pty) Limited in the national media in order to get the public views and comments on the project, but also to consider the impact of the proposed project on public and private rights.

As part of the consultative process, ERA met the chief executive officers of key lead agencies, namely:

    1. National Environment Management Authority (NEMA); 
    2. Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA); and 
    3. Uganda Tourism Board (UTB).

Different public stakeholders were also given a chance to make presentations to the Electricity Regulatory Authority about the application on various public and social media platforms. Of the 686 presentations received, only one was in support of the project.

From the consultations, the following key observations have been made: 

1. 	Murchison Falls is the major tourist attraction at Murchison Falls National Park;
2. 	Murchison Falls site is the backbone for several economic activities within the park, including hospitality lodges, tour guides and entertainers; and 

3. 	The park is a Ramsar Site and home to a diversity of wild animals and special birds. 

These facts were brought to the attention of Cabinet for discussion and further guidance. I wish to report to Parliament that Cabinet decided that Uhuru and Murchison sites should, as of now, not be developed for hydropower generation. The site will be retained as it is and conserved for tourism activities. 

I beg to submit. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is clear. Does it attract a debate? No; let’s go to the next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF INDEBTEDNESS, GRANTS AND GUARANTEES AS AT JUNE 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, yesterday I proposed the question that the report of the Committee on National Economy on the state of indebtedness, grants and guarantees as at 2018 be adopted. That is the motion for your debate and we have some minutes to have this debate. We agreed that we would start the debate today. If there is no debate, I will put the question. Okay, let us have the Member for West Budama County North. Can we agree on the time? We will take three minutes each.

5.27
MR RICHARD OKOTH OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity to kick-start the debate on the report on the state of our indebtedness. I thank the committee for the report. 

Mr Speaker, I look forward to the day when our “economic hitmen” will start making their confessions. Why do I say so? When you look at the report, there are a number of issues raised that are very worrying to our country. The report highlights the issue of sovereign guarantees. When you look at what is happening under these sovereign guarantees, you will notice that the people who are benefitting are a selected few and the country does not stand to gain anything out of them. 

I will give two examples. We gave a sovereign guarantee to Rift Velley Railways (RVR). These fellows defaulted on all the terms and we terminated their services before they could even pay the money we had guaranteed. That means it is now the Government of Uganda to pay the debt. However, before we do that, we are already negotiating with them in London on how to compensate them so that they go peacefully. 

There are very many such examples. There is a hotel here which Government gave a sovereign guarantee. These fellows built the hotel, sold it and went away. Now, we have the hotel there but with a debt to pay. These are the issues that are worrying. That is why I said that I look forward to the day when our “economic hitmen” will start making their confessions.

Mr Speaker, in that report we are told that we are now moving away from multilateral loans to bilateral loans. Specifically, we are told that we are now looking more at China. They said we are moving away from the World Bank, which has been giving us concessional loans, and moving to non-concessional loans given by China. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at the terms, you get worried for this country. I would like to focus on the audit report given by the Auditor-General that points out things that this country needs to worry about. As much as we are getting loans from China, we are waiving off our sovereign immunities on all our assets. That means that should we fail to pay China, at any point China will have the liberty to sell off the whole of Uganda because we have waived off immunities, including on ourselves – (Member timed out.)

5.31
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This report is timely and I thank the chairperson and his team for bringing out key issues surrounding our debt management - how we incur debt and how we are servicing it. 

Of course, what comes to mind is that with our debt at Shs 42 trillion, every Ugandan living at the moment must pay at least Shs 850,000. However, considering that not all Ugandans are producing at the moment, it means that this debt burden is going to be transferred to the future. As a result of this irresponsible incurring of debts, we have seen credible lenders shunning the country and that is why we are going for Chinese loans, which have risen to 39 per cent of our borrowings. 

I would like us to pay particular attention to the rise in commission fees. From $5.3 million, we are now paying $10.5 million to people who connect Government to acquire these loans. 

On this note, Mr Speaker, having observed that the highest increment in borrowing in this country is during the period when the two ministers in charge of finance – hon. Matia Kasaija and hon. David Bahati – are in charge, they deserve a special title in this country. If Members would agree, I propose that we formally adopt the title, “the most borrower” so that we address them as “The Most Borrower Minister of Finance, hon. David Bahati”. Every Ugandan can then call them, “my loan” or “their loanships” so that every time they move, we know that “their loanships” are moving in this country.

I propose that we set targets for borrowing and we should identify our preferred sources of borrowing, so that we are not caught in a situation where we are running like headless chicken. We should profile countries and institutions that can give us cheap loans that can be managed. 

I also propose that we manage transparency and accountability. A number of loans are incurred in a way that is not transparent. My honourable colleague mentioned the issue of Rift Valley Railways but there are a number of loans that are performing very poorly. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should reorganise - (Member timed out.)

5.34
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

It is good to note that Uganda’s public debt remains manageable and receiving a low risk of debt distress. Currently, our GDP stands at 42 per cent, which I pray that we maintain as a country and do not exceed the 50 per cent International Monetary Fund (IMF) threshold. However, the interest payment as per 30 June 2018 stood at Shs 2.3 trillion, which is 17 per cent of the total revenue collections, and it is above the limit set in the Public Debt Management Framework of 2013, which is 15 per cent; so we are not doing well.

In the report, some areas of focus as a country to help us keep debt manageable are recommended. Government should continue to strengthen its public investment management to ensure that infrastructure investment generates the targeted growth dividend as we invest. 

On page 17 of the report, the committee noted that debt has followed an increasing trend over the years due to large investment in various infrastructure projects, which are required to stimulate Uganda’s growth. We should ensure that the currently planned projects are completed. At times we see projects stalling and this affects our payback as the rate of borrowing slows the economy.

My colleague talked about China; on page 20, we are told that China’s loans are largely non-concessional. This increases the country’s debt exposure. We should watch out for loans which have stringent conditions which could have adverse effects on Uganda’s ability to sustain our debt. Government should revisit the conditions critically. We should not rush for them because if we do not analyse, we shall end up paying a lot of interest on them.

Finally, Government should take measures to increase revenue collection. We borrow because our revenue is not sufficient.  At least if we increase –(Member timed out.)

5.37
MR MOSES KAHIMA (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report, especially since they asserted that most of the borrowing has been allocated to sectors that enhance our economic growth. 

However, I made an observation that we are moving from concessional loans to non-concessional loans, which are more expensive for this country. Further, it is indicated that there is a disbursement of 81 per cent of the total debt, meaning that most of the projects we acquire these loans for are not being implemented. 

When you try to internalise all this, you shall establish that some of these projects are being delayed by procurement processes and corruption tendencies. I implore the Government to make sure that once we source external debt for financing projects, we expedite their implementation because external debt carries a lot of burden in terms of interest. Therefore, we need to match the implementation with the acquisition of the loan.

Secondly, the threshold of debt sustainability is about 50 per cent as per IMF standards, but we are now at 42 per cent. That gives the impression that we are moving toward the threshold, so as a country, we need to watch this situation. 

Looking at history, Egypt lost its independence because of the projects that were undertaken by the Khedive Ismail who used a lot of external debt funding to construct the Suez Canal. Therefore, I implore the - (Member timed out.)

5.40
MS ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to specifically concentrate on Article 159 of the Constitution, clauses (1), (2), (3) and (4). Permit me to read Article 159 verbatim: 

“Power of Government to borrow or lend 
(1) 	Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Government may borrow from any source.

(2) 	Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.

(3) 	An Act of Parliament made under clause (2) shall provide- (a) that the terms and conditions of the loan shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless they have been approved by a resolution of Parliament…

(4) 	The President shall, at such times as Parliament may determine, cause to be presented to Parliament such information concerning any loan as is necessary to show- 
	(a) the extent of the total indebtedness by way of principle and accumulated interest…” This is where I would like to concentrate.

Can we, as Parliament, determine today that we can cause to be presented to us all the information concerning the total indebtedness of our country and the accumulated interest thereof? We need to see the status of most of the loans we have been taking. This is now my fourth year in Parliament but I have not seen this. I would like to see the total indebtedness of our country with a proper standing per loan. This way we shall be having transparency on each of the loans we have taken. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Every financial year when they are bringing the budget, it comes with a statement on the indebtedness of this country. I am surprised that you have not seen it. Even what we are debating is based on that. So, look carefully.

5.43
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I salute all of you. 

The issue we need to get worried about is borrowing money and not using it. While the money borrowed keeps on attracting interest, we again go on to borrow more money. I would like to rephrase the statement made by my colleague, the pre-current speaker. Instead of asking for the total sum of borrowed money, we need to examine these loans on a case-by-case basis. We need to find out why a particular loan facility has never been utilized; what factors are hindering the utilisation of the loan funds; and what we are we going to do about it.

Some of the loan projects I came across, especially as the chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee (Government Assurances), where implementation has got stuck, have problems in the area of counterpart funding. During the negotiations of the terms and conditions, some of the lenders say, “We give you this much as a lender and you pay this much as a country.” For compensation of people on a road to be built, for example, the lenders could say that the Government should do the compensation. When Government fails to raise the counterpart funding for compensations, there will be a problem.

Mr Speaker, I would like to submit that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come here with only those loans that have failed to move and separate them, on a case-by-case basis, and tell us why they have failed to move.

Secondly, we have a problem in this House when loan requests are attached to people or regions; it sometimes makes us lose our responsibility as Members of Parliament in examining these loan requests critically. People begin saying “our loan” or “my loan”. “Honourable members, please support my loan.” Even amidst us, there are people who go to the lobby and tell MPs that this is their loan or our loan, so they should support it. Because you are my colleague, if you tell me to support “your loan”, you disarm me from examining it critically –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is called lobbying.

MR FUNGAROO: That lobbying is very dangerous, Mr Speaker, because if it disarms honourable MPs from their responsibility of safeguarding the country from bad loans, then we fall into a trap. Maybe, this thing of “my loan” or “your loan” comes in with the fairness or unfairness of the distribution of projects that are supposed to be financed by loans. Those who have been consistently or persistently left out become so desperate to the extent that when they see a loan request, they say “include me there. Include my area” without regard to whether it is safe for this country or not.

Therefore, even if we are to support “your loan” or “my loan”, let us not blindfold ourselves beyond the limits of being careful. Otherwise, we may sell our country when we are standing in it. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.47
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for presenting a good report. 

I would have loved to see these loan funds distributed sector by sector, so that we are able to analyse which sector or ministry is not using them properly. I will give an example. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) contracted loans of about $418 million. Some have expired, others are left with a short time to expire but they have only utilised $127 million, leaving about 76 per cent of the loan funds unutilised. In the same ministry, transmission got a loan from Japan, which dates as far back as Bujagali, but about $108 million was not used. The loans were committed and have expired but they were not used. I am sure this is happening in other ministries too.  

Mr Speaker, the implication of this is that the country is not only losing the benefits of these loans but we are also paying heavily. For on the loans in REA, for example, when you consider 0.5 per cent charged on undisbursed loans, it comes to about $2 million dollars per year that we are paying. Remember, when we are getting these loans, we pay application fees. The money comes here but it is not utilised.

Therefore, my recommendation is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development helps us to break down these loans, ministry by ministry. Let each ministry have a sectoral committee, we look at them and forge a way forward. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.49
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for presenting an elaborate report that has brought out the issues concerning debt burden and debt management. 

I have noted in the report that the majority of the loans obtained are for project support, which would be a noble idea. However, going forward, I would like to implore Government to seriously plan for the project loans obtained. When you look at the implementation of some of the projects for which these loans are obtained, implementation is very slow on account of probably unpreparedness. Project designs are not ready. 

Negotiating to get compensation out of the way is always delayed and at times, even counterpart funding has been a challenge. So, there is no reason at times why we should obtain a loan for which interest accumulates, when the project is not being implemented. A colleague has brought it out clearly, that we have very many loans for the implementation of rural electrification projects, which have delayed on account of counterpart funding not being available. 

Secondly, we need to balance project loans and consider obtaining loans for sectors that will stimulate exports. At the moment, infrastructure loans may not achieve very fast results. However, the level of economic activity is quite low in the country, so servicing these loans may be a serious challenge.

Looking at the domestic debt, we need to seriously think about contracting it because it is impeding the level of economic activity. In fact, some of the businesses are threatened and are collapsing on account of failure by Government to sort out those kinds of loans.

I think we need to balance and in future consider loans that will stimulate exports and economic activity, in order to achieve the desired levels of economic growth. I thank you.

5.52
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy for updating Parliament on this very important status.

However, my first recommendation is that when we are discussing the indebtedness and solvency of this country, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide Members with the report on indebtedness, loans, grants and guarantees – as the Speaker has rightly stated - so that we are all the same page. Short of that, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development may be suspected of hiding information.

As we speak now, Mr Speaker, 25 per cent (Shs 10 trillion) of the 2019/2020 financial year’s budget is for external debt servicing. We are about $12 billion in debt. We have over Shs 7 trillion in domestic debt currently undergoing refinancing and rescheduling. We also have domestic arrears which are choking the private sector, the taxpayers, and therefore failing the vicious cycle of collecting taxes from the private sector - close to the same amount.

We have contingent liabilities. That is why I would like to interest Parliament in the Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs), including the hybrids of the production sharing agreement. We have over $6 billion debt in recoverable costs. We are about to engage in $20 billion debt to produce oil, if we get a refinery, the eco pipeline and the production of oil. 

We should have a total summation of all these projects for us to talk about the national debt. Currently, the recoverable loans are concealed as debt but not loans. I would like Parliament to unveil these because Article 159 that we read does not allow Government to commit the country without parliamentary approval. However, the Production Sharing Agreement (PSA) currently, – there is a lacuna – does not require parliamentary approval and yet we are committing the country at $27 billion, which is the size of the economy. 

I think if the Tenth Parliament does not engage in that, we shall have rendered this country a disservice – (Member timed out.)

5.55
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this very good report. 

I would like to say that borrowing per se would not have been a problem if the loans we are borrowing, first of all, were put into effective use and utilised immediately, so that we can reap benefits from them and have the ability to repay them. One of the greatest challenges we have in this country is that preparations for borrowing are made and brought to Parliament and we approve the loan requests, but at the end of the day, the loan will lie idle for three, four or five years, yet we continue to borrow, adding onto what we have not utilised. 

Therefore, performance of loans is one of the issues we should look into and put Government to task about. As Parliament, we should not approve additional loan requests for all these sectors highlighted by the committee that have non-performing loans, unless Government clears those loans and shows that the funds are being appropriately utilised.

Secondly, corruption is one of the issues that as a country we must address and stick to if these loan projects are to increase production. We went into a lot of borrowing from the financial year 2014/2015 up to today. One of the reasons put forward was the money from oil, which is not even coming. When will the oil come out? We cannot ascertain this yet. While we borrow to make roads, production of the economy is low and at the same time, borrowing and debts are going up. Unfortunately, we cannot get more money to pay these loans and also increase production.

If we do not promote exports, just like has been discussed here, how are we going to finance our loans, well aware that in this financial year, we are spending over Shs 10 trillion for debt repayment? This is where Government should come in so that we manage the business of this country like people who are schooled but not like people who are gambling on how to manage a country, running it into indebtedness. 

Zambia, for example, is not productive because of the loans they took from the Chinese. They are not able to pay back the loans. So, you end up having the Chinese taking over the critical –(Member timed out.)

5.58
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two comments to make. 

First, I appreciate the report and I think the committee has done a very good analysis of what the status of the economy is. I would have wished that our debate was centred on the recommendations made by the committee so that after all these lamentations, we end up providing some cure for the future.

I had an opportunity to look at the World Bank report for the year 2018, which was for the entire sub-Saharan Africa. It was identified that most of the African countries are using the very expensively borrowed loans on non-productive sectors. That is why some of us, when we contribute during the budget, we insist that more resources are directed to sectors which are productive.

Tourism, for example, is already making us a lot of money, yet we are injecting very little into the sector. Supposing Government strategically and deliberately directed resources to tourism, definitely it would achieve a lot. First, it would provide employment for our people and also generate revenue. Why is the Government not giving priority to tourism? I am yet to get an explanation.

Of course, the other sector, which has already been mentioned, is agriculture. It does not matter whether we sign the African Union Protocol or not, what is important is that we are now confronted with two disasters - youth unemployment is the first one. The only way the Government could help our youth is to try and educate them on how they can turn idle land into an economic base. That would be one way of resolving our problem of unemployment.

Two, you know we are voted to be here. The majority of our voters, almost 80 per cent, live on land. Could the Government deliberately direct resources to agriculture? This Operation Wealth Creation is just playing with public money. Nobody can come here and tell us that millions of shillings have been taken to Omoro –(Member timed out.)

6.02
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee chairperson for the report. 

I saw in the report that Uganda’s public debt stock has increased by 22 per cent. I went further to look at the countries in Africa that are in danger of falling into the China debt trap. By the way, 17 of them, including Uganda, are in danger of falling into the Chinese debt trap. The truth of the matter is that there are countries we can pick lessons from. We know surely that China now is the largest creditor, surpassing the traditional creditors like the World Bank and the African Development Bank. This is not something to jubilate about because the Chinese credit is largely not concessional. For that reason, the increased repayment burden on the taxpayers of Uganda is something to worry about.

We have seen what has happened in countries like Sri Lanka and Zambia, which has been mentioned. Sri Lanka had to surrender their seaport to China. The national assets of Zambia are already up for grabs by China. “Chinasation” of our economy is something to worry about and it is a new form of neo-colonialism. 

Mr Speaker, there is a book written by a Zambian writer on how Chinese loans are making Africa poorer. I will get to remember the name – Dambisa Moyo. If you read the book, you will realise that China has an ulterior motive in Africa. Already, countries that have had a nasty experience with them should be a lesson to our economies.

Mr Speaker, economists in Uganda are castigating Government for over borrowing because even when these funds are availed through borrowing, they are not put to proper use. The question of haemorrhage and corruption notwithstanding, even the other day a Member brought information on the low absorption capacity in a number - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this is a national Parliament. When we debate and mention a country, we should bear that in mind. Let us not incite diplomatic crises by the way we debate. 

You can debate and say the same issues you want to say but differently, respecting the diplomatic relationship that we have with, for example, the People’s Republic of China. Please, bear that in mind while you debate. This is not one of those meetings that you hold where there are no cameras. This is a national Parliament. So, bear that in mind.

6.05
MR MOHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you. This is a debate that transcends generations. Its import will be felt by our children and grandchildren. I would have expected you to have a full House. 

The question of survival of not only Uganda but the black Africans is so critical, going forward. In the global world where we play economics, increasingly we are failing to rise up the challenge. My humble contribution is that we should even be nonpartisan because this debate is so critical to what we will be and what tomorrow will be.

The question of indebtedness in our face is that we are already failing. I would like to ask the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who is here - If in this financial year he failed to get refinancing, we will have a whooping Shs 6 trillion, which he has no formula on how to repay. Shs 6 trillion of your national budget is through debt refinancing. That means you are no longer able to pay your debt. I do not see that kind of debate in this report. 

Mr Speaker, the other issue that is so critical is that this country had some debt relief in the Paris agreement because we had entered that dark line. Even if you argue on the West Asian debate and say “poverty”, did the Westminster borrowing kick out poverty? We continued to be poor.

Therefore, as we plan our national economy, we must make sure increasingly, those at the core of planning - Ministry Finance, Planning and Economic Development - think of solutions outside the box. You are borrowing for infrastructure development. There has been a tarmac road from Kabale to Kampala. Is there wealth on that road? From the entire Busoga and Busia, there has been tarmac, yet that is where the highest poverty indices are. From Gulu to Kampala, since time immemorial, we have had tarmac roads but I find grass thatched houses there. So, as we even borrow - My area has had electricity for the last 50 years and all I see is “danger, hatari” –(Member timed out.)

6.09
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

I have three issues to raise. One is about borrowing when Government seems not to be prepared. When we raised the issue of power in West Nile, we were assured that a loan worth $100 was secured to start extending power and that the work would start by May this year. However, up to now, there is nothing being done. That means this loan was procured when Government was not prepared, yet the delay attracts penalties.

Mr Speaker, the second issue is about borrowing to duplicate activities. You find money being borrowed to duplicate activities. I will give you an example. A lot of money has been borrowed for agricultural infrastructure development. When you go to Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, there is a loan being procured for that purpose. When you go the Office of the Prime Minister, money is also being borrowed for the same purpose. You go to the Ministry of Local Government, there has been borrowing for the same purpose. Why don’t we have a central implementing body that borrows money and puts it to proper use? Sometimes when you go to evaluate these projects, you see very big signposts but there is nothing tangible on ground.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to address myself to components of use of these loans. When you look at the implementation of these projects, if you go to the areas where money has been allocated, there are issues to do with training, purchase of equipment, capacity building, travel abroad and workshops. Workshops mean that people are going to sleep in these hotels and rest and sometimes have refreshments. Therefore, it means we are borrowing money for refreshments and accommodation in hotels. 

The effect of these loans is not there on the ground. Therefore, my major argument is about how to use these loans to cause impact. It is important to know this. When you go to other countries, many of them also go for grants but why is it that we run away from these grants? Although there are conditions, but many times when you look at the conditions, they can be fulfilled. The problem is that we still prefer loans to grants. 

The issue of excessive internal borrowing at a very high rate –(Member timed out.)

6.12
MR SILAS OAGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have a lot to say; if you gave me five minutes, I would be the happiest. 

The first is that borrowing is not a bad thing. This House should know that. The problem is how we negotiate the terms and conditions of the loan, our discipline as a country, and our investment decisions. Where are we putting the money? Is it under proper utilisation? What is the impact of the loans? Those are some of the things we should be looking at. 

In my own opinion, we should not even blame any country for having given us a loan. We are even lucky that there are people who give us loans today. Otherwise, they should be asking for collateral security which you do not have. The issue is with us and not those people.

Therefore, I would request the honourable minister to focus on a few things; first, the equitable utilisation of what you borrow. When we procure these loans, all of us pay back. How many times has Kumi Municipality benefitted from the loans you have got across the board? You need to bring to me that information and show whether the “boat is balanced”. My voters and I are among the people servicing the loans we are talking about. What have we benefitted as Kumi? Everybody, including my uncles, the Karimojong, are going to pay. What have you taken there? It is something that is critical.

We have been talking about the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) and other things that can help us stimulate the economy and the transport sector. Our issue is that if the trend in borrowing is going up, what is the trend in the improvement in the activities that we are talking about - the infrastructure; is it showing the same? I think that if we followed that, we would be a shining country. Otherwise, we shall be blaming those who are giving loans to us and yet the problem is with us. 

Mr Speaker, I am suspicious that most of the loans we get are overvalued. A loan that is supposed to be Shs 50 billion might go up to Shs 70 billion at repayment because somebody has added something for themselves. We must dig deep and get to the bottom of that.

I got information from Kenya, when they were dealing with the SGR, that some people in Government overvalued the Project Affected Persons’ (PAP) money when it came to giving what belonged to them. They had to get private consultants to bridge the gap. 

Those are the issues we are facing. Loans are not bad –(Member timed out.)

6.15
Mr Fredrick angura (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also add my voice in thanking the committee and make a few observations.

Like hon. Silas Aogon has said, loans are good and we need them to bridge the gap that Government is not able to. However, we need to change our approach. This is what I would implore the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to consider. Many times, when we get these loans, the project designs are not ready. Why can’t we reverse and use our own funds to do project designs so that by the time we get the loans, we start straightaway on implementation? That is one sector that is causing us problems and delays and making the loans attract interest. At the end of the day, the value starts to deteriorate.

Procurement is also a very big problem. One project procurement can take up to three, four or five years to be concluded. You then get into issues of administrative review, Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA). By the time you get to review this, we have already incurred a lot of challenges as far as these loans are concerned.

Regarding counterpart funding, Government has to style up. I am happy that the Committee on National Economy came up with a position that before any loan is processed, Government must give assurance of counterpart funding. I hope that is yet to be seen and the results will be observed on the ground. When you look at many loans that are not performing, it is because of counterpart funding. Many times, Government is not ready. 

Capacity building is another aspect. Whenever these loan requests come and the committee scrutinises them, there are repetitive components like capacity building that you feel like striking off. Something like a loan for electricity may include a component on capacity building and then even the second and third loan requests also have the same component. All this is leakage and wastage that is sometimes imposed on us. 

Government should improve on negotiation. If we did that, I am very sure we would be able to see value for these loans, if they can be absorbed in such a short time.

There is also another issue of a common corridor. Whenever these projects come up, especially infrastructural ones, a component of corridor acquisition becomes a problem. We have been asking Government time and again, why don’t you look at acquiring a common corridor maybe for electricity – (Member timed out.)

6.18
Mr George kumama (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must also add my voice to thank the committee for the report. It has made us understand what is happening and the debt burden.

It is very difficult for Uganda, as a country, to do without borrowing. Like other Members have alluded to, borrowing is good but what matters is how to manage it. How does Uganda instil financial discipline and management of these debts? Those are questions that we must understand. How do we change the attitude of our workers whom we give this money? We appropriate money as Parliament and send it to our workers in the ministries. What is their attitude?

When they get the money, some of them have a high appetite to fulfil their own aspirations before the work for the loan is handled. The corruption, which we have been talking about for a long time, is one of the things that makes us feel the debt so badly. Corruption is too much and the loan performance is affected. What we are aiming at as a country in borrowing this money may not be realised because of the attitude of our workers. We end up paying high costs in terms of interest and for a long time.

I would request Government to take on these issues very seriously - the issue of corruption, attitude of our workers and financial management and discipline. That is where the problem is, not the borrowing. In any developing country, or even in our homes, we borrow money. Most of us have developed through borrowing. However, the issue is: how do you pay back and instil discipline on borrowed money?

I would request that the high appetite that we have, as a country, to borrow should be managed very well because –(Member timed out.)

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, do you have any responses to the issues? You have three minutes.

6.21
The minister of state for finance, planning and economic development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to join you in thanking the Committee on National Economy for the report. They have not only produced a good report but also put in place mechanisms to check the Executive when we are proposing these loans for approval. We now have a system where before we bring the loan request to Parliament, there are conditions we must set in place and also the project must meet the conditions of the National Development Plan and all that. Therefore, the committee has done a good job.

For the last two weeks, they have also been calling sectors to check on the performance of the loans that have been approved by this Parliament. So, I would like to congratulate them.

I have two points to make. Mr Speaker, as you have indicated, our relationship with China remains strong. I think China remains our greatest ally, in terms of development, in the world. Therefore, when we talk about China, remember they are not forcing this money on us. We are the ones who borrow this money from them and they are also getting it from their own citizens. It is taxpayers’ money, hence they set conditions and we accept them. 

Therefore, we should not create an impression that they are out there to rob our country to do wrong things. They have given us money at the time when we need it. Nobody could give us money, for example to develop Karuma, but because of the money that we have got from China, you can see the progress that we are making. 

We also have a big challenge of land compensation. Despite the sensitivity of land matters, I think this House must stand firm and resolve this issue. One project can actually have an additional cost of close to 30 to 40 per cent because of land compensations. It can also be delayed by six months or even a year because of land compensations. 

We have issues to do with procurement, which we are now resolving. Karuma delayed for two and half years because somebody - a proxy - had petitioned court and the Inspector General of Government (IGG). Therefore, as we debate these issues, when these amendments come on public procurement, I would like to request Members to keep the same spirit that we have used here and stand firm to resolve these issues. 

With that, I would like to thank Members for the debate and the report. I would like to say that we will improve and take into consideration all the matters that you have raised so that we better the financial management in our country. I thank you. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the minister started off very well by saying that the committee is now going through all the conditions and making sure they are met before the loan requests are considered. However, the same minister also talked about lack of compensation as being one of the impediments. How can the committee approve the loan request when it has not yet confirmed if the owners of land have either been compensated or all the agreements and the preconditions attached to the land are solved? 

I think we need to diagnose these problems and deal with them. I know what you are getting at is that people should just leave their land open for you to grab. No! What we want you to do is to compensate people in accordance with the law, as laid down in the Constitution. We have never had this problem before. 

The procedural matter I am raising is that the minister should not divert the debate. We are very burdened by seeing our debts going from bad to worse. Please, do not peg the issue of land on your failures to manage the loans. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I understood from the minister is that in the implementation phase, even when the money has already been made available, there are some delays that occur. One of the causes is the issue of compensation and the other one is litigation challenges and administrative review of processes. That affects the period for implementation of the projects. That is what I understood. However, the procedural point on which you have already ruled might –(Laughter)  

6.27
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Sir. I would just like to appreciate colleagues for their contributions. 

I would also like to re-echo, what you have already said, Mr Speaker. I think we should confine most of our time to our own affairs because if you bring in failures in other countries and discuss them here, it is not fair. This is a public –(Interjection)– No, why don’t you talk about your own? You talked about Zambia and other countries. What has Zambia got to do with our Parliament? How about China? China did not come here to look for us. (Ms Nambooze rose_) 

Sir, this issue of points of order only coming up when I stand up – (Laughter) - Since morning, I have not heard anyone rise on a point of order. Where was your point of order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have always asked you not to access the microphone before I allow you to do so.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I appreciate that what colleagues have said is actually right, especially people who say loans are got but not implemented. That is very important and it is true; although we must know why they are not implemented. 

We must also honestly talk about corruption. Why are you shying away? Instead of talking of other countries, why don’t you talk of our own corruption here? It cuts across and it does not matter. Even if you do not negotiate for a loan, you are corrupt. (Laughter) This also affects our development – (Interjection) – What point of order are you rising on when you are also not orderly? What point of order are you talking about when you are out of order yourself?

Mr Speaker, we should understand that there is a lot of indirect benefit for these roads, like the one from Kabale to Kampala. I do not know how you can see the advantage. There is the road from here to Arua. I must give you an example. During the war, it would take us 14 days to go –(Interjections)– If you do not know about the war here, then you are out of Uganda. (Laughter) Why are you in Parliament if you do not know what I am talking about? I must tell you that Uganda went through 40 years of internal war, from 1966 to 2006. Go and do your research. As Members of Parliament, you should study but you are here asking, “Which war?” (Laughter) Are you taking us back? 

What I am saying is that it used to take us 14 days to travel from here to West Nile because we would move in convoys. You would only move once and if you missed the convoy, you would have to wait another two to three days, which made it 17 days. Even in the convoys, we would get stuck in the mud and nobody could pull us out. 

Do you still wonder about tarmac roads? Honestly, I do not understand. I also do not blame colleagues because God has given us different levels of understanding, –(Laughter)- so you cannot blame them. 

I appreciate and appeal to colleagues to particularly think about three things: One, let us concentrate on our own problems and bring in less of others. Do not debate as if you are against China. China did not come to look for you; you are the ones who looked for China. As the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said, he did not impose this money on you. 

Please, try to understand; tarmac roads have a lot of benefits. If I want to go now to West Nile, I will only spend six hours and save time. (Applause) For businessmen, the round trip enables them to make more profit. Therefore, frequency of sales makes more profit. Wear and tear of vehicles also reduces. As a Member of Parliament, if you mislead the public who do not understand scientifically, you will be in problems. Thank you, Sir. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I will now put the question that the report of the Committee on National Economy on the state of indebtedness, grants and guarantees as at June 2018 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have done well. Thank you for endeavouring, persisting and articulating the issues that affect our country and also for providing some solutions on how we should proceed. Thank you, General, for those final words. House adjourned to next Tuesday at two o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.34 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 3 September 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

