Tuesday, 28 August 2012 

Parliament met at 10.28 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I should emphasis that we need to start on time so that we can finish the big business that is before us also in time. 

We will alter the Order Paper. Item No.2, that is, Administration of Oaths, will come in the afternoon when we return for the sitting. 

Honourable members, we have a lot of work. I am going to make an appeal to the chairpersons of committees and the clerks to the committees, to expedite the work before them and finish in time so that we can meet the legal deadline imposed on us by the laws that we use, and finish these matters within that timeframe. 

If it becomes necessary, we will have to proceed by just laying some of these reports on the Table. If it becomes difficult for us to proceed with the debate, and time is not on our side, we will proceed just to lay those reports on the Table, which would not be in the interests of the citizens of this country, the interests of the committees and the chairs, and also of this Parliament. But if it should be difficult, that is what we will be forced to do.

I am also calling upon the Committee on Finance and Economic Planning to move quickly with the financial Bills that are before them. I think they have a few Bills that are supposed to go along with the budget issues. Those Bills are supposed to be the ones they use to raise the money for the Budget and they are before the committee. We should be handling them concurrently with the reports of the committee. 

It is my sincere hope and prayer that these matters will be handled quickly so that by Friday, we finish without extending the period given to us by the law. Thank you. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2011/2012

II) The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2012/2013

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman, you have 15 minutes. 

10.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Milton Muwuma): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2012/2013.

Mr Speaker, since I have 15 minutes, permit me to first go through the executive summary that will highlight most of the issues that we considered. 

In accordance with the provisions of Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and in line with Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs is mandated inter-alia, to critically examine Government recurrent and capital estimates and make recommendations thereto.

The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs considered: Vote 004: Ministry of Defence, Vote 009: Ministry of Internal Affairs Headquarters, Vote 144: Uganda Police Force, Vote 145: Uganda Prisons Service and Vote 120: Directorate of Citizenship and Immigrations Control.

The Ministry of Defence in the last financial year received a revised budget, including a supplementary, of Ugshs 1,080,495,754,696.

The ministry reported numerous achievements including enhancing the capability through acquisition, upgrading and maintenance of strategic weapons and weapon systems for the UPDF in line with the force design, aimed at fulfilling the core mission of the national force for effective defence of Uganda and her interests.

The committee observed that most of the vote functions spent over and above what Parliament had initially approved, and recommended that the ministry realigns its budgets within the MTEF figures and requests for sufficient resources from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development at the beginning of each financial year other than resorting to supplementary budgets.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs - Vote 009 

The Ministry of Internal Affairs received a total of Shs 10.514 billion of which Shs 8.496 billion was for recurrent expenditure, while Shs 2.018 billion was for development.

The ministry reported that it carried out many activities in all of its vote functions, that is, peace building, Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL), community service, NGO board, policy planning and support services. Many achievements were also highlighted.

The committee observed that many mechanisms and tools had been put in place to ensure NGO compliance with Government policies, and recommended that the ministry should do more to avoid duplication of roles in implementation of projects by NGOs, which is currently a big problem in the country.

Uganda Police Force 

Last financial year, the Uganda Police Force received Ugshs 241.46 billion of which Ugshs 191.682 billion was recurrent and Ugshs 40.9 billion was for capital expenditure.

The committee was informed that the Police Force was able to maintain law and order; reduce crime by 3.8 percent; mainstream community policing of neighborhood watch; enhance its scientific evidence-based investigations; and train three officers abroad in document analysis, forensics and DNA profiling, among other achievements.

The committee observed that the allocation to finance Police operations has been significantly reduced by Ugshs 32.2 billion, and recommends that Government considers providing Uganda Police Force with adequate funds for operations amongst other unfunded priorities.

Uganda Prisons Service 

A total of Ugshs 6.311 billion was approved by Parliament for Uganda Prisons Service, of which Ugshs 55.8 billion was recurrent, Ugshs 10.502 billion was development and Ugshs 0.914 billion was to cover taxes. 

The Prisons Service reported many gains such as the reduced mortality among prisoners, which reduced from 2 per 1,000 to 1.5 per 1,000 held prisoners; the rate of recidivism, which reduced from across 27 percent to 26.8 percent; and the reduction of average length of stay on remand by the prisoners, which reduced from 15 to 14 months.      

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the service lacks funds to feed prisoners and staff when they go to the different courts in the country, and recommends that funds be availed to the tune of Shs 3.2 billion to solve the problem of feeding prisoners and staff at the courts.

Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control

The Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control received a total of Shs 7.048 billion of which Shs 1.8 billion was wage and Shs 5.24 billion was non-wage and no provision was made for capital expenditure. The directorate made strides through the construction of five border posts of Amudat, Swam, Bunagana at completion stage, while Goli and Lira are at wall plate level; issued 66,787 Ugandans with passports; re-opening of one central border post and strengthening the posts of Butyaba and Sebagolo through provision of six uniports for temporary office and some accommodation in the Albertine Graben. 

The committee was informed that starting this financial year 2012/2013, the directorate will establish two regional centres for issuance of passports located in Mbale and Mbarara. The committee is worried that these regional passport issuance centres are likely to be abused and recommends that the directorate should first ensure the successful operationalisation of the ID processes including capturing of all the bio-data so that the applicants’ details can be traced in the system.

Mr Speaker, (vi) highlights the figures that we will require - so, I will invite Members to move to page 9 where we have general observations and recommendations. 

Over expenditure against the approved budget

The committee noted that most of the vote functions spent over and above what Parliament had initially approved. That has been alluded to and this was captured in the supplementary expenditure, which amounted to Shs 132.5 billion. Whereas the committee appreciates some of the reasons given as indicated earlier in the report, the committee still believes that the supplementary expenditure as a basis of budgeting for the Ministry of Defence should be controlled because it does not only destroy the principle of prudent budgeting, but also the resources are drawn from other votes, whose programmes are equally essential for service delivery. 

Some of the explanations for overspending did not warrant the huge sums of money provided, for example, maintenance of vehicles and aircrafts, which activities should have been budgeted for during the normal process of budgeting. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Defence should realign its budgets within the empty figures or requests for sufficient resources from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development at the beginning of each financial year other than resorting to supplementary budgets. 

The committee further recommends that supplementary requests are subjected to scrutiny by sectoral committees. Mr Speaker, this is a concern of all committees that when considering the initial budget, it is the sector committees that scrutinise and go through these ministerial policy statements, but when it comes to supplementary budgets, they are always referred directly to the Budget Committee whereby the input of the sector committees is very minimal. At times we come to know about supplementaries when they are being presented on the Floor of Parliament. 

Wage allocations

The committee has appreciated the increment in wage allocations for the Ministry of Defence, to substantially deal with the wage shortfalls that have persisted in the sector. The committee was informed that the funds provided will be enough to cater for the wage bill including the increment in line with the Public Service salary enhancement. 

Mr Speaker, this House will be happy to hear this; the committee was assured that there will be no further supplementary requests for wages this financial year. I think this is good information for Members to hear. The committee applauds this development and implores the Ministry of Defence to fairly allocate the increment across all ranks and file for the benefit of all gallant officers and men of the UPDF.
Capital development budget for the sector 

The General Military Hospital Mbuya 

The committee noted with concern that for the last four years, it has recommended for the commencement of the new general modern military hospital at Mbuya. However, each year, the Ministry of Defence laments about inadequate funding. This explanation did not convince the committee because funds for other activities can be found, including supplementary requests, but not for the hospital. It should be understood that world over, the military have the most sophisticated and up-to-date modern health facilities. So, as we move towards professionalising the Army, it is unfortunate that funds cannot be found for the hospital!

This financial year 2012/2013, the capital budget has been increased from Shs 25.05 billion to Shs 103 billion, but still,  the Ministry of Defence has not prioritised the general hospital in disregard of the parliamentary recommendations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, your executive summary was so comprehensive and I would recommend that you just pick some of the specific headings that are not captured in the executive summary like the AMISOM funding, and others so that you can comprehensively deal with the report because the executive summary is quite comprehensive.

MR MUWUUMA: Much obliged. Mr Speaker, I will take your guidance and just marathon through. There is non-tax revenue; it is clear. 

The committee recommends Parliament to be appraised on the operations of NEC enterprises, UPDF farms at Kisozi and Katonga, and Uganda Air Cargo, on how they are performing. This House would be happy if they received updates on how those investments are faring.

We shall move to progress of the professionalisation programme of the UPDF. The committee recommends that the modernisation programme, which is already on course be upheld and sufficiently funded. 

AMISOM funding 

Mr Speaker, like you have guided, despite the lengthy deliberations with the Accountant General on the mode of operation of the AMISOM account and the transfer mechanism of the funds from the AU to the Consolidated Fund, the committee is concerned about the legality and prudence of establishing and maintaining a special account by the Ministry of Defence without an Act of Parliament as required by Article 153(2)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and the statutory instrument as provided for by the Public Finance and Accountability Act 2003. This is because an account without the attendant established fund does not provide sufficient guidelines for managing such funds, and consequently falls short of the requirements for proper accountability in accordance with the law. This is evidenced by the wider latitudes where the ministry is at an apparent liberty to defray expenses not necessarily meant for AMISOM. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Defence considers remitting the AMISOM revenues to the UPDF fund as established by Section 25 of the Uganda Peoples Defence Force Act, 2005. The Ministry of Defence discloses as a must the AMISOM funds receivable to the government as part of NTR.

Pension and gratuity

Mr Speaker, on page 15. The government has over time and again engaged services of auxiliary forces like the Arrow Boys and Amuka; most of these have been disbanded, but have not been fully paid their benefits. Some of them are a security threat to their communities and the country. The Ministry of Defence whilst acknowledging settling some of them, there are, however, those who are still demanding to be paid -(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Give him some few more minutes and I think this line is important since it involves ex-service men. We should have it.
 
MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The committee recommends that:

•	The Ministry of Defence expedites its verification and payment of ex-service men and survivors.

•	The Ministry of Defence reviews the auxiliary forces’ complaints and settles them. 

Conclusion

The committee recommends that subject to the above observations and recommendations, Parliament approves the estimates of the Ministry of Defence - Vote 004, for financial year 2012/2013 as follows: 

•	Wage - Shs 325,147,243,814;
•	Non-wage recurrent – Shs 230,143,964,209; 
•	Capital - Shs 103,394,043,176;
•	AMISOM – Shs 245,273,400,000;
•	Taxes – Shs 10 billion. 

A total of Shs 913,958,651,199.

Ministry of Internal Affairs

In view of the above, the committee recommends that the community service orders implementation should be strengthened in order to save Government on colossal sums of money for maintaining prisoners.
 
The budget provision should be increased out of the savings generated so that it is strengthened to address their funding gap. 

Amnesty Commission

Demobilisation of squatters 

The committee recommends that the commission tenure be extended and the commission be provided with adequate funding to enable it finalise its work. 

We are reliably informed that the extension was made for one year, but we feel that there are some conditions that were not clear on the extension regarding the running of the Amnesty Commission. So, we call on Government to streamline the conditions herein entailed as far as extension is concerned. 

NGO Board

Mechanisms and tools to ensure NGO Board compliance with Government policy -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, were you also able to find out whether the extension was only in part of the Amnesty Act and not the whole of it? 

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, we were told so; that the initial policy was amended and some clauses that were not friendly, according to the current situation pertaining. So, the concern of the commission is that Government should review – I think it is this House to urge Government and the Ministry of Internal Affairs to consider extending the entire policy. 

The committee recommends that:

•	The Ministry of Internal Affairs should do more to avoid duplication of roles in implementation of projects by NGOs. 

•	The NGO Board should take over the allocation of operations areas to avoid over congestion of NGOs in particular areas. 

•	The ministry follows up the operations of NGOs and ensures that they perform the functions and projects they are supposed to perform. 

•	The committee appreciates what has been done and recommends that more needs to be done including creation of a desk to address gender issues. Sir, this was to do with gender budgeting issues in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration

Observations

On the national ID project, the committee recommends that the entire project implementation be realigned to correct past mistakes so that Ugandans can be issued with national identity cards to salvage the colossal sums of money already invested. 

The committee further recommends that the possibility of cost-sharing the cost of national IDs with the public as alluded to in the Budget Speech by His Excellency the President be ruled out since it is illegal and unconstitutional. 

Regional centres for issuance of passports

The committee recommends that the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control should first ensure the successful operationalisation - Mr Speaker that one has already been alluded to. 

The committee recommends that there should be more stringent decisions to be undertaken so that all the aliens are closely monitored, and their activities checked for them not to cause security problems. 

On construction of the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control’s building, the committee recommends that next financial year 2012/2013, this project should be given topmost consideration. The committee may not wish to listen to the usual lamentations of limited funds by Government.
  
Management of border points

The committee recommends continuous training and deployment of officers on a full-time basis if the country is to stop being a drug conduit and remain safe from suspected terrorists.

Construction of new border posts

The committee recommends that the directorate considers other deserving areas including areas around water bodies as more funds are availed to the sector in the medium-term.
 
A border post should be established in Kabong District, which is currently porous and results into trafficking of arms. 

The committee recommends that the sector should widen its scope of coverage and integration of gender issues in the sector budgeting other than providing maternity leave as reported. 

Uganda Prisons Service

We talked of the cost of keeping prisoners in jail; the committee was informed that the projected prisoners’ population is a daily average of 34,200. The monthly average of prisoners’ population growth rate, financial year 2011/2012 was 0.5 percent. The trend is expected to continue. 

The committee was further informed that inmates are fed on three meals per day. A prisoner’s daily feeding is estimated at Shs 2,300 per day. Two meals for a prisoner: lunch and supper cost approximately Shs 1,000 each and 3,000 for breakfast. This is mainly for basic foods of posho and beans. Therefore, Shs 28.7895 billion is required for feeding a daily average of 34,200 prisoners for 365 days. But the budget provision is Shs 13.902 billion plus 6.2 billion projected from prisoners’ farm production which is also dependent on weather leading to a shortfall of Shs 8.71 billion. 

The committee recommends that since food is a basic right and that the prisoners have no other means of accessing food other than the official provision, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that this gap is filled in the course of the financial year 2012/2013.
 
Transporting of prisoners to court

The committee applauds the plan to have court facilities within the prisons premises to reduce congestion and cut costs of transporting prisoners to court. It recommends that funds be provided to fund the transportation of prisoners to court.

Feeding of prisoners while at court

The problems require immediate attention as the committee scrutinises this year’s budget. The committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Finance finds funding for this since the funding gap is only 1.2 billion for transport and Shs 2 billion for food, hence a total of 3.2 billion. 

Children in prisons

The committee recommends that additional facilitation should be sourced from other alternative sources, including donors, to cater for these children so that they can have decent growth since they are not convicts, but victims of circumstances. 

Investment plans – capital development budget

The committee recommends that the prisons authorities explore the possibility of using cheap technologies like the use of hydrofoam machines instead of using the existing business contractors who take the bulk of the money with a limited coverage.

Prisons land

The committee recommends that the Uganda Prisons Service ensures that the said transfer of Luzira Prison follows all lawful processes and procedures in an open and transparent manner. Otherwise, the current piecemeal parceling out of land may leave Luzira complex and establishments hanging on a small piece of land at a great cost to Government.

Uganda Police Force

Non-wage allocation of operations funds

The committee recommends that Government considers providing the Uganda Police Force with adequate funds for operations amongst other unfunded priorities. The ministry of finance should provide at least the Shs 101.1 billion as last year’s revised budget to avoid using supplementary measures since this is a known funding gap.

Domestic arrears

The committee recommends that this strategy for clearing of arrears should be tabled and explained to Parliament because the entire sector including Ministry of Defence is grappling with huge domestic arrears with no feasible plan for their payment.

Rent 

The committee recommends that Uganda Police Force adheres to the promise to relocate from rented premises on Parliamentary Avenue by May 2013 to the Uganda Police Force headquarters in Naguru.

Public-Private Partnership update

Regarding the PPP, the committee noted that the Uganda Police Force PPP Accommodation Project is at the final stages of procurement and the preferred bidder was appointed in January 2012. The initial round of negotiations were held with a consortium of the preferred bidder on January 15 2012 at which matters related to project designs, financing and delivery timelines were discussed. The second round, which largely covered land and other technical aspects of the project, was held from July 24-26, 2012. The third round which is expected to dwell on project financing, that is lenders and equity partners, legal instruments, redesigns and affordability, is planned in September 2012. 

The committee also observed that the Uganda Police Force is discussing with the project developers and contractors on the possibility of a phased approach to the delivery of the PPP solution. The committee also awaits a concrete relocation plan and budget for the Uganda Police Force -PPP. 

The committee noted with concern that whereas the PPP negotiations are in advanced stages and whereas no contract has been entered into, the Uganda Police Force is making hurried arrangements to relocate 6,211 personnel of the Kampala Metropolitan Police to four possible relocation sites. These have been identified in Busunju, Namulonge, Namanve and Namigavu-Busunju. The committee was informed that the relocation plans have been finalised.

However, the committee was informed by the same officials that Uganda Police Force has not acquired or leased land for the re-location of the personnel, but it has requested the ministries of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Water and Environment and the Agricultural Research Institute – owners of the four sites - to allow it temporarily use the land as PPP completes construction of the staff accommodation.

So far the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has okayed the request for Police to use the land at Namigavu and Busunju but advised Police to liaise with the local government of Mityana District. This clearly demonstrates that PPP has some serious implementation challenges right from the start that could be avoided if it is handled more transparently.

Therefore, the committee recommends that whereas the PPP project is a welcome development and long overdue, the Uganda Police Force should be slow and patient to wait for the PPP law that the Ministry of Finance in response to the parliamentary recommendation said was being reviewed in Cabinet. Until the new law is in place, the current PPP arrangement is likely to cause severe losses to Government and Police like Parliament does not work in anticipation.  

During his Budget Speech, the President promised the country that Government would be tabling the PPP Bill before Parliament very soon. It is our prayer that this is handled expeditiously.

Police reforms

The committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that the reforms in Uganda Police Force be consolidated on matters such as doctrine, force design and levels, logistics, equipment, human resource and funding that is time-bound, measurable and holistic. The committee requires that the Uganda Police Force reports to Parliament on this recommendation within six months.

Human rights

The committee recommends that whilst executing its mandate in maintaining law and order and protecting lives and property, they should fully adhere to the relevant laws and conventions.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, subject to the above observations and recommendations, I beg to move that this august House approves the budget estimates for the votes under Defence and Internal Affairs for financial year 2012/2013 as follows:  
 
Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence; a total of Shs 913,958,651,199 to be disbursed as follows: 
	
•	Recurrent -	Shs 555,191,138,000
•	Development - 	Shs 103,394,430,000
•	AMISOM - Shs 245,273,400,000
•	Taxes - Shs 10,000,000,000

Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs

The total is Shs 9,629,644,000 to be disbursed as follows:

•	Recurrent	 - Shs 8,689,993,400
•	Development - Shs 879,650,640
•	Taxes - Shs 60,000,000

Vote 120 - Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control

A total of Shs 58,428,600,000 and is broken down as follows:

•	Recurrent - Shs 8,892,085,000
•	Development - Shs 49,536,515,000
•	Taxes - Shs 23,000,000,000

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force

A total of Shs 297,780,754,000 to be disbursed as follows: 	

•	Recurrent - Shs 224,148,918,000
•	Development - Shs 73,631,836,000
•	Taxes - Shs 8,724,927,500

Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service

A total budget of Shs 85,274,783,000 to be disbursed as follows: 

•	Recurrent - Shs 73,046,099,000
•	Development - Shs 12,228,684,000
•	Taxes - Shs 2,042,075,000

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There is an extra zero on “Taxes” under Uganda Police Force. You might want to correct it. 

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, thank you for the correction. It is Shs 8,724,927,500.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Mr Chairman, you want to lay a copy of the report on the Table?

Mr MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, permit me to lay the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statements for the financial year 2012/2013. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This has been one big report capturing a wide range of institutions and departments of Government. Thank you for using the time properly. We have been able to cover it.

Honourable members, we will now begin our debate on this subject. 

11.10
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three minutes.

MR AMODOI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I want to thank the chairman -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Toroma, are you a Member of this committee? (Laughter) Please, resume your seat. The rule is clear. 

11.11
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to first of all to congratulate and thank the committee for this wonderful work covering so many sectors. My comment on this report will be on the Uganda Police Force. I happen to represent the constituency of Bunya South, which covers six islands. But when you look at the report that has been submitted, there is a very important item that has been left out and this is the issue of marines. 

Security on the waters of Lake Victoria, especially the area that I represent; first of all, the personnel in terms of Police officers is very inadequate and that is why I stand to support this budget, bearing in mind that when it comes to  itemisation, the minister will consider to deploy some personnel on the waters of Lake Victoria.

I am happy that most of the Police stations in the country are at least provided with means of transport - at least a motorcycle. But when you go to the waters of Lake Victoria, especially on the islands, you find only a Police officer at a Police post without any means of transport. So, you may wonder what kind of security such a person can provide especially where insecurity may occur. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to inform the minister that on a number of occasions when accidents occur on our roads, quite often Police officers are always there to help. But on the waters it is the opposite. You find only civilians trying to assist especially when a boat has capsized.

Regarding hardship allowances; there is a policy that was formulated by the Public Service that the officers who work in hard-to-reach areas should be provided with hardship allowance. But this is not happening for the officers who work in such areas -(Member timed out.)
 
11.14
REV. PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also join the rest of the Members to thank the committee for this wonderful report and for the recommendations they have made. Let me hope that these ministries will adhere to these recommendations.

I want to begin with Defence. I was also touched to realise that quite often they have been experiencing these supplementary budgets against what we normally pass in Parliament, and as it has been reported it ends up affecting service delivery in other ministries. 

So, this recommendation that the committee was assured of no further supplementary requests for wages this financial year, I think should be supported and I think the minister is hearing. It pains me when I realise that much as the defence ministry has done good work in this country, it should also be disciplined when it comes to handling their finances and filling in its own budget.

Secondly, I have been touched by the situation of our hospitals, especially Mbuya Hospital for the Ministry of Defence. Much as we are trying to professionalise the Army and we have a lot of operations in Somalia, Congo, the North and elsewhere, we need a well-facilitated hospital for the Army. We get a lot of casualties and so when we have a pathetic hospital then it does not align very well with professionalisation of our Army. As we professionalise and as we go out for other operations, we also need this hospital to be able to save the lives of our gallant soldiers.

It is true we have many NGOs operating across the country, but at times the way these NGOs operate, they are interested - maybe like when we had an insurgency in the North you realised that most of the NGOs were operating there. But much as we have those affected areas we also have other areas where we need these NGOs to operate from, and that is why they come in to do this work - to supplement what is being done by Government. So, it is good that this time their operations will be checked and even to see to it that they spread even to other areas where they have not reached at all. 

Now we have this oil coming up. You will see most of the NGOs rushing to the Albertine Graben area because of this oil, whereas we still have areas where they can work very well.  

When you come to the Prisons Service, we appreciate the work they are doing much as they have a limited budget. But the problem still being faced by the Prisons Service mainly arises from our courts. They take prisoners to courts in many parts of the country but at times magistrates are not there -(Member timed out.) 

11.18
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their detailed report. My first concern is where the committee is telling us that allocation to finance Police operations has been reduced by Shs 32.2 billion. This is absurd. If we are to have law and order in this country, we need that money because there are rampant cases of crime all over the country. Like in my district Amudat, it is a hard-to-reach area and we have Police there, but they are operating under very difficult conditions. They have two vehicles which have to go round all the sub-counties. Sometimes, they run short of fuel and yet they have to go around all the sub-counties to track criminals. We still have isolated incidences of raids and when manpower on the UPDF side is small, Police re-enforces them but they are sometimes faced with a challenge of fuel. So, that money should not be chopped because they need it.

Then on border posts; I am glad to report that Amudat is one of the places where they are constructing a border post. On the 24th of this month, just last Friday, we were there for doing work with my colleague hon. Margaret Aleper. I saw the building. As a lay person, I feel it is a very beautiful building, but the problem is that sometimes we construct very nice structures, which remain white elephants. I call upon the ministry to operationalise these facilities in this very financial year so that we can have business going on with Kenya. I thank you.

11.20
MR MARTIN DRITO (NRM, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It goes without saying that there is appreciation for the report that lies before us. However, I would like to reiterate that the contribution of our forces in international operations is a noble cause and it has earned us a lot of appreciation.
 
In presenting this, when you look at pages 13 and 14 in the recommendations that have been made, there is an aspect of peace which is very begging. The African Union makes refunds for equipment that we lose in our operations in AMISOM, but what concerns me and other people who have an eye to note is that, these are not reflected in the financial budget of the country. It would be nice if we could be told where these refunds go.

Point number two goes to the Ministry of Internal Affairs especially the Police department. There have been a lot of concerns raised by citizens across the country when it comes to the issue of private firearm licences. Firearm licences are detained in the Ministry of Internal Affairs especially in the Police for years on end. Members of Parliament and ordinary citizens who have applied for firearm licences have not received any indication from the Police department. Some of us have had our papers there for years on end and it smells of inefficiency. It would be nice and professional if we were told exactly how the Police operate in approving these firearm licences. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.23
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the chairperson and the entire committee for the report. When I look at page 13 on AMISOM funding, it is amazing to learn that the Ministry of Defence is seemingly running an irregular account. From the comment here, I would be interested in knowing the basis and justification for this account which is irregularly opened to handle funds and transactions under AMISOM.

Secondly, on page 46, 9.5, budget provisions for the financial year 2012/2013, it is noted that there is a decline in the funding allocations for the Uganda Police Force. Much as I applaud the attempts to enhance the wage bill, there is a significant decline in the non-wage. In the era of terrorist threats, rampant murders in Kampala and around the country, it will be worrying to see such decline in resource allocation unless this House is clearly convinced that there is no reason to worry about this.
 
Therefore, I will be interested in hearing from the chairman. I am sure the technical people must have clarified to the committee why there is a 32.8 percent decline in non-wage and another significant decrease in the development funding. So, I would be glad to know from the respective sectors why this is so, and what assurance is there that we are safe.

11.26
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chair for the report. According to this report, it is evident that as we talk about the security of our country and the different players in this sector, we find that the Prisons and the Police sectors are highly underfunded and yet our expectations as a country of their service are quite high.

My concern is that it is high time we treated these sectors of security as complementing partners in keeping law, order and security of this country. As long as we make the Army a priority over the Prisons and the Police, we are going to see what is happening in the markets that there is sometimes confusion and non-coordination. My suggestion here is that, it is high time that the appointing authority gave two slots to the Police to have their representatives in this House, two slots to the Prisons to have their representative in this House and the lions share goes to Defence so that their welfare is well catered for.

As much as we expect a lot from them, the Police - I have to first of all start on a light note that in the centre, that is the capital here, their visibility is evident, but upcountry, it is still lacking. In a place like Kitgum - I am happy to see the officers here - the visibility of the Police is not evident. Of course, we always say that because of underfunding, but it is high time that you spread the little service even upcountry. 

However, also for the Police to note, as much as we are saying you are underfunded, you must put your priorities right because if you are going to budget heavily for the classified expenditure, including the teargas and leave the welfare of the Police officers unattended to, we shall not get the results we deserve as a country. With regard to teargas, I think you have to cut costs on that and also cater for the welfare of the Police officers. 

On the Prisons sector, I want to say that my biggest concern with the Prisons according to the report on page 41 – I was arrested and taken to Luzira in 2007 -(Member timed out_) 

11.29
MR CARTER ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, thank you so much. This was a well done report. However, I get a little bit uncomfortable when I see that these ministries keep on renting when we allocate them money for accommodation. I think they should get very serious. This thing of renting time and again is more costly than if they would think of constructing at least their own houses. If the PRDP project was not there, I can’t imagine how the Police officers would have got new uniforms like in my constituency. I think as we approve this report, the Minister of Defence and Internal Affairs should do away with this issue of renting. Next time, it should not appear here.

Then we have accumulated domestic arrears. Almost in all these ministries, there are officers of the Army who have worked and worked and their salaries have not been paid and you wonder why and how.

I also have an issue with the immigration and accounting officers working at different border posts. They receive an unquantifiable amount of money. I do not know how that system works; how these people finally account to their big officers from the border posts.

Then the ex-servicemen. Towards elections, I remember in my district they were mobilised. They took pictures; moved to different places; and incurred a lot of expenses that they were going to be considered. If we are going to give them money to clear the pension and gratuity, they should first tell us how many ex-servicemen were cleared. I think that would make more logic.

Finally, on the issue of AMISOM; we are spending close to Shs 240-something billion on the mission to Somalia and that is taxpayers’ money. That is the most surprising thing now. I thought maybe the African Union would automatically meet the cost and not just refund the losses we make. As J.F. Kennedy once said, “Domestic policies can only defeat us, but foreign policies will kill us.” I feel we are spending too much money, and that amount of money could have been reduced to take care of our domestic security interests like giving more funds to the Police and the Prisons officers who are reduced to people who simply run after prisoners but are doing a lot of work. I feel that money spent on the AMISOM is so unrealistic.

11.33
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 14, the committee states that Shs 22.1 billion was paid out in pensions and gratuity of ex-servicemen. In 2010, at the end of the year tending towards elections, my people of Agago District and the people of Pader District walked several and camped in Pader town for two weeks. People were sleeping on verandas in order to remain in the queue. They did not want to get out of the queue for the two weeks because the moment you left the queue, the next day you would find somebody had replaced you – in the hope that payment was going to be effected! They were told monies were going to be put on their accounts for payment of their pension and gratuity. To-date, like the committee has highlighted, the majority of my people have not been paid. Where has this Shs 22.1 billion gone? I want to get a schedule if their committee chairperson could avail this House a schedule of the payments effected. How many people were paid in each district? 

This business of just waiting for election time to come and telling them, “Government is going to pay you” to woo them for votes, this time it is not going to work. I am very sure the delay in verification is because you are waiting for 2016. This time round, it is not going to work. I want the committee chairman to be assertive and I thank them for the recommendation they made on page 15. We request that the ministry works on it very seriously.

On page 35, under Prisons, when you look at sub-section (e) where they are talking about construction and rehabilitation of Prisons, I wonder how many years this NRM Government needs to – if you may need 50, but we are finished now! I do not know from whom you will get the 50 years. But on a serious note, all our prisons in this country have to be rehabilitated. When you go to Agago District, Katonga Prison is dilapidated to the extent that they cannot even afford pit latrines; some people use buckets -(Member timed out.)  

11.36
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to add my voice in thanking the committee for producing a good report. But I have some observations.

One is on page 3 about the effect of promotions. The committee is telling us that there is an effect on our budget. It is true it is a constitutional right for somebody to be promoted, but why is it a problem now? Why is it affecting the budget? I think there is a problem somewhere. 

It is high time this country regulated the issue of promotion in our Police Force. Today in the Police Force, there are some officers who are below 30 years, but have reached the highest rank. (Interjections) Yes, it is youths, but this is a Police Force, which should be a corrupt-free area where you think – to me it is wrong!

Secondly, about selection of officers who go for training. We want to know the criteria the Police are using. That is why we are even getting problems; and the Uganda Police Force today is hiring foreigners to come and regulate the chaos in the country when it happens . We want to know who should be going for training and who should not; at what level; and which qualifications? I think Ugandans should have all this  information.

Lastly, about representation of the Force; my colleague hon. Anywar has talked about it. But Members, it is a serious issue. Why do we have UPDF in this Parliament? –(Interruption) 

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. You asked a question, as to why UPDF is in this Parliament. The answer is that it is a constitutional requirement to have representatives of UPDF in this Parliament. 

MR MUGUME: Thank you, honourable member. But the other question now is, Why did the Constitution exclude the Police Force and the Prisons? We need to rethink about this. There are so many problems in the Police Force, and I think if these officers were represented here, it would help. The other time when I was in Kasese for a bye-election, I was in Katwe –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery this morning, we have the Country Director of New Plan Uganda, Mr Fikru Abebe, who has paid a courtesy call to the Uganda Parliament Forum for Children and this Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, we have exhausted the time allotted for general debate on this subject. I will now call upon the Shadow Minister for Defence who is also holding the portfolio for the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs, followed by the Minister of Defence, Minister of Internal Affairs and then Finance; in that order. You have five minutes each.

11.40
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND SECURITY (Mr Caps Hassan Fungaroo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the saviour you have been crying for; the alternative policy to address the problems, which you have been raising here. I am the Shadow Minister of Defence and Security. I am also standing in for my colleague, hon. Hussein Kyanjo, who is Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs but is away on medical leave. We pray for him to recover quickly. 

I do this under Rule 136 of our Rules of Procedure. What I am presenting here is summarised in three areas:

a)	The general strategic matters on national defence and security; 
b)	Ministry of Defence; AND 
c)	Ministry of Internal Affairs 

When you come to the general matters of national defence and security, you look at the role you play as policy makers and regulators. There are loopholes in the institutional legal and policy framework of the Ministry of Defence and Security including the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

Let us look at the UPDF, Ministry of Defence. The Constitution creates the UPDF in Article 206 of the Constitution, and also Article 209 2010(d) talks about the deployment of the UPDF abroad and within the country. 

However, when you come to the other policy documents of the UPDF, particularly the Defence Policy of the Republic of Uganda which was published in 2003; the White Paper on Defence: Transformation, Publicity, Treasury and Force, there are problems there. These policies need to be revised. They are not in consonance with our Constitution, which is operating under the new setting of multiparty democracy. The Force is supposed to be managed by military under civilian authority. The authority now needs to be regulated under the policies we make. Therefore, we recommend that these policies be revised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Shadow Minister, are you debating the report or some other thing – we are dealing with the report of the parliamentary committee! You are supposed to have submitted that to the committee; right now we are discussing the report of the committee – unless you have a minority report, in which case you should have gone through the procedure. 

We are discussing and the decision we are going to be taking is on the adoption of the report of the committee. Please, speak on the report of the committee. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. What I will say will fit within some sections of the report, but otherwise, it was the alternative policy of the Opposition. But the areas, which I cite here will fit into the report. 

There Police Force and the Prisons Force are established by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda Articles 211 and 215, respectively. However, in the Constitution of Uganda, there is no provision which regulates the deployment of the Police Force and the Prisons Force and their equipment outside Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I need to inform you that over 100 officers of the Police are deployed in Somalia and Sudan and there are also Prisons officers without the authority of Parliament - that is very irregular! Right now, I have information about the welfare of those security officers, particularly the Police, but I have no way of helping them because they went there without my authority. 

We, therefore, recommend that the police who have been deployed outside Uganda be brought back, including the Prisons. And, the Minister of Internal Affairs should bring here a government white paper for the transformation and modernisation of the Police Force -(Interruption)

MS LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What the Member is debating is entitled, “Alternative Policy Statement”. When you look at our Rules of Procedure, Rule 135(1) says: “Each minister shall cause to be prepared and submitted to Parliament a policy statement of the relevant ministry on the preliminary estimates submitted under Rule 137 by the 30th day of June each year”. So, according to this rule, him being a shadow minister, he should have submitted his alternative policy statement by 30th June. I beg for guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, the government ministers are supposed to be under that rule and submit their policy statements by 30th June. And in this particular case, because of the difficulties we had with the past procedures, this year we ordered that the policy statements be laid on the Table of Parliament. The last policy statement was laid here on 5th July, which was five days late, but at least we made an improvement. 

The provision that relates to alternative policies is Rule 136: “Shadow ministers shall submit their alternative policy statement to Parliament by the 15th day of July every year”. This particular document I have received now is dated 27 August 2012. That is why I have guided the honourable member that what we are debating now is the report of the committee; it is not time for any alternative things; that moment was lost. If you never submitted it, you lost your say. Please, debate the report of the committee. 

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with the guidance you have given on Rule 136. But the Leader of the Opposition wrote officially to your Office requesting that the alternative policy statements be presented to Parliament some time later because all the ministerial policy statements to which alternative policy statements would be derived from – because we are supposed to look at the policy statements and make responses accordingly - came much later; and the time given to the members of the shadow cabinet to look at the ministerial policy statements was not there. So, I do not know how you will guide on how we are going to move because most shadow ministers received their policy statements later and they finished the work -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have just guided. The latest policy statement that was submitted to this House was 5th July, five days late and not much later. 5th July was the last ministerial policy statement and that was not even a ministerial policy statement, but a Parliamentary Commission Statement that was presented. It was 5th July and I was chairing. 

The letter from the Leader of the Opposition requested for submission by 15th August, which was rejected by the Speaker. He said, “No, follow the rules,” because it was only five days late and so you had 10 days. The earlier statements were submitted much earlier. But even if it was so, that such a request was made and granted, it could not have been for today, 27th August. Today is 27th August and this document is dated 27th of August, please! Let us not waste time on this. These are the rules we have made. Honourable member, finish and we are not debating this matter.

MR FUNGAROO: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. I am debating by picking points of my interest as you have guided. 

On internal security, we have learnt with concern that whereas the state security is fairly good because the insurgencies in the country have been reduced, the North is relatively peaceful, but human security still has a lot to be desired. There are murders of businessmen and women in the urban areas of Uganda using guns, iron bars and other crude weapons. Lives have been lost in mysterious fires affecting schools and markets. 

A crime report issued by the Police for the year 2011 indicates that on average, 10 people die per day. At that rate, by the end of this year, we shall have lost 3,650 people. The issue of rising insecurity in Uganda needs to be addressed. Our security environment also has threats from the external environment. 

The situation in our neighbouring countries like Congo, for example, has problems and we are aware about that. We recommend that the problem of refugees should be handled properly by the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. We thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, for using diplomacy this time. He called upon heads of state from the Great Lakes Region to find a peaceful solution to address the Congo crisis and, therefore, also safeguard the interest of Uganda security wise.

We recommend that no more military interventions should be made in Congo. Uganda should not deploy UPDF troops to Congo. We are aware of the Operation Lightening Thunder where we deployed troops to Congo to pursue the LRA with support from neighbouring countries and other countries beyond Africa –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you - okay, two minutes. (Laughter)

MR FUNGAROO: With regard to internal affairs, there is no strategic plan for the transformation of the Police Force. Changes that are introduced in the Police Force are done haphazardly and not in consonance with the National Development Plan that was tabled here and published by the Government of Uganda for the year 2012 to 2014. 

We appeal that this act of: One not following professional ethical standards for the Police Force - you see many Police units like VCCU and RRU; different uniforms; Police stations without labels; and this is very confusing! Military men in Police uniforms without Police training – these are spoiling the image of the Police. The UPDF should be in UPDF and the Police Force should be led by professional policemen and women and not mixing them in this manner. (Applause) Brutality of the Police has gone beyond the roof and this is very bad. The Police should be civil and friendly to the people.

Lastly, our Police officers in Somalia should come back. We recommend that due to the many problems affecting the mission in Somalia like controversy over the monthly pay to the UPDF where US$ 200 is deducted from the pay of every UPDF officer, and compensation for equipment and weapons made to the Government of Uganda by AU without reflecting it –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable members, let me guide for now and the future. According to the rules, policy statements and alternative policy statements are supposed to be submitted directly to the committees so that by the time the committee is reporting, it reports on both the government and alternative policies. 

The Opposition should not wait for the ministers’ statements. They presented their manifesto to this country and lost, but they still want to sell it. So, that is their moment of bringing this alternative policy on which they would have won the elections to come to the House and it is shared. You do not have to wait for the government ministers. You are supposed to be a government in waiting and show that you are a government in waiting by presenting comprehensive policies. Otherwise, this thing would have been captured as “Replies to policy statements of the ministers.” They are not replies, but alternative policies and different from the reply to the State of the Nation Address. You submit and you do not have to wait for the ministers’ policy statement – but you are even given 15 days to have a look at it anyway, so that by 15th July, you submit and it goes to the committee. The committee looks at both and they are presented to the House and then you have a right to reply just like I have given you an opportunity now to reply to the issues raised by the committee and that is what you are going to do. 

The final person on this is not the minister but the chairperson of the committee who will have the final say before we pronounce ourselves on this. So, this is the guidance for now and for the future. I thank you. The Leader of the Opposition.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you the substantial one now? (Laughter)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: No, I am the acting, Mr Speaker. I thank you very much for the guidance and we appreciate. We also appreciate the law or Rule 136 which we shall use. In the future, beginning next year, we shall prepare as you have guided. This time round, there was confusion. Ministers presented their statements and some of them even after presenting, the real copies delayed to come to us. While it takes ministers one year to prepare their statements, it is not easy for us on this side without any assistance, to prepare our statements within a few days and have a meaningful response to what has been presented. 

In the past, the practice has been that we shall respond. With your guidance and also with what we had decided a few weeks ago from our side, we shall now prepare our alternative statements beginning with this year. 

So, we want to ask your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that you allow the shadow cabinet a bit of time, five or ten minutes, to respond to the statement by the minister, comment on the committee report and also give additional information that they may have so that the chairperson and the ministers can take them into consideration when they are responding. We are asking you only for this time, and not for the future. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I have guided is that I will give time. When we are closing debate on a particular sector, I will give the first right to the shadow minister because the debate will be on the report of the committee. The shadow minister will make statements on the report of the committee. Depending on the scale of the area, the time will be reasonably allotted. And once he has responded, then we will go to the Government side and they will respond. Then the chairperson of the committee will sum up because it is the chairperson’s report that we are dealing with, and that is what we will approve. It is not the minister’s statement. It is a report of the committee that we are dealing with. Once the minister and the shadow minister have spoken, the chairman will conclude and we take a vote. 

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I stand to seek your guidance. On staffing and welfare of staff, those are issues of the Parliamentary Commission. But if the acting Leader of the Opposition stands on the Floor and says they don’t have staff to help them do their work, when the Leader of Opposition is a member of the Parliamentary Commission, is it that he is coming to report that the Leader of the Opposition is not representing them well to advocate for more staff on the side of the shadow ministers? I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker. Is this the right place for the Leader of the Opposition to raise such issues? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter for now is that the Opposition was this time not able to present their alternative policies to the committees, and they are seeking for an opportunity to have a statement on what is on the Floor. On the other matters, I sit on the Parliamentary Commission and I know how well-serviced the Opposition is. So, I would not have a problem with anything. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue on which you have given counsel to this House needs to be examined a little further. The shadow cabinet and the Opposition should be taken as institutions of Parliament. The shadow cabinet you have here is not a shadow cabinet for FDC, DP, CP or JEEMA. They are shadow ministers of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

The difficulty that we find ourselves in is not new. Because in the last parliament, I was the Opposition Chief Whip and I acted as Leader of the Opposition for more than a year and a half. The difficulty that we run into is of a technical nature. These shadow ministers you see here are members of the sessional committees to which they are shadow ministers. And by our Rules of Procedure, they are part and parcel of the report of the committee. I remember at one time we proposed to have them disengaged from the respective shadows that they are for so that they can be able to have an outside perspective and give watch over the schedules. But we were told that if you want to get more information and insight of the sector, you must be a member. 

This, therefore, puts them in a difficult situation. They cannot stand up and make a rebuttal to the report that they are members of. So, how do we go about this? Because they are members of the committee; they are signatories of that report; and at the same time they want to keep Government programmes on check. How do they come and check their own work?

That, therefore, Mr Speaker, makes us to reconsider. Can we have these shadow ministers outside so that if I am the shadow minister of education, I don’t have to be a member of the education committee? So that I am able to give personal and in-depth analysis and critic the government’s policy document on education from an outside perspective.  Otherwise, we will run into technicalities. How do you, a member of a committee to which you belong, come and critic your own committee. 

You rightly ruled over what the Government Chief Whip was talking about; resources. I know for sure that these shadow ministers are given a stipend of Shs 500,000. What can Shs 500,000 do to make a shadow minister prepare a document? I have been in Civil Service. Civil servants take one year to prepare a policy document that ministers present here. Technocrats prepare departmental briefs on issues and in the end, it is a whole book, which ministers come here to read in front of us even without any input. These are facts! (Applause) 

So, to expect these people with Shs 500,000, to come up with a policy document to the level that the technocrats in ministries produce for these ministers to come to read, I think, would be taking us too far. Let us own it up. These are institutions of Parliament. Therefore, let us come up with an amicable way on how best they can enrich – we can borrow a leaf from the Commonwealth parliamentary practice. We can examine what happens in other parliaments so that these people are not seen to be redundant. They have issues to present. They have alternative policies to present over which Government should be happy about and benefit from their minority positions.  

I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Losing an election comes with a cost, and part of the cost is that you are not in Government. That is the fact. 

The institution of the leadership of the Opposition is the only institution that is parliamentary. We find ourselves in this situation because we have not yet dealt with the law on party funding. Otherwise, the entire issue of shadow cabinet and so on should never be facilitated by Parliament.

If you are talking about other jurisdictions, I happen to be an authority in those areas. The Commonwealth, Zambia, go anywhere; you will not find a shadow minister being given any office in parliament by parliament. It is not there. But we are faced with this situation because we haven’t passed the party funding law. If you want to extend it further, it is actually an irregular way of funding the Opposition through Parliament because that never happens in other jurisdictions. 

So, maybe the government should consider bringing the party funding law so that the parties are funded from outside so that the shadow ministers do this research properly. 

This particular debate we are having now should actually not be necessary because that is cured by the rules. There is a policy statement, which is the government policy statement. Then there is an alternative policy statement, which is from the Opposition. But under the rules, both policy statements must come to the committee. When they have come to the committee, they can have the discussion in the committee. The shadow minister can present in the committee, and then when the committee reports, it reports on both. Such that when we are discussing at this stage, we are only discussing the report of the committee. That is what it should be. 

Whether a shadow minister should be a member of the committee, is not in the rules. It is the choice of the whips, who deploy people to committees. It is not in the rules that the shadow minister must be a member of the committee. So, if you think it is structurally more proper to have a shadow minister outside the committee so that a shadow minister does not sit in that committee, it is your choice really. It is not in the rules. So, I don’t think there is any directive that all shadow ministers must be members of the committee in the sectors in which they are shadow ministers. There is no such directive neither is it in the rules. So, that is the practise. If now you have found that it doesn’t work, change it so that we can improve on how we operate in this Parliament. Please, let us proceed. Defence, you have five minutes. 

12.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee and Members for the contributions they have made towards this report. I will only respond to two issues really, which have arisen from the debate and indeed from the report itself. 

One is on the question of AMISOM. In the course of the debate, it has been alleged that we are using too much money in as far as actions in AMISOM are concerned. I would like, Mr Speaker, to refer to a resolution of Parliament in 2007, which said, our actions for AMISOM are budget neutral, and that is what it is. So, the monies reflected in the policy statement are not monies from the Government of Uganda. They are funds we receive. 

It has also in the course of debate been reflected that the AMISOM account is irregular. Mr Speaker, if we refer to Section 9 of the Public Finance and Accounting Act, you will notice that the authority for this account, which is a special project fund is available and, therefore, is not an irregular account. There is a law to that effect and you can check it. It is Section 9 of the Public Finance and Accounting Act, which authorises the opening of such an account. So, it is not an irregular account.

Thirdly, the committee did recommend that the AMISOM fund should be disclosed as non-tax revenue. I would like to report, that this may not be possible because one, in the last year’s policy statement and the report of the committee, a similar recommendation was made. The ministry took it and sought authority from the Ministry of Finance. We did write a letter explaining this position clearly, and the response was that this is not revenue. These are funds for specific AMISOM activities. So, it cannot, therefore, be declared as non-tax revenue which can be used for any other purpose and, therefore, we cannot. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, thank you very much, General. I have patiently listened to you beginning from the irregularity of the AMISOM account, and I want to seek this clarification from the point of view of the Public Accounts Committee that I chair, where the same issues that you are talking about have been raised by the Auditor-General in the books of accounts of 2009/2010. The irregular nature of the AMISOM funds arises from the fact that these accounts are not operated and managed here in Uganda. There is no way you can talk about a certain account being irregular when the people who are running it are not in Mbuya where the Defence headquarters is, and are not in Kampala. So, the minister needs to convince us about the legal status of this account, unless he is trying to tell me that the competent authority – that is the Auditor–General - is in the wrong. 

There have been a number of exit meetings we have held with your technical staff conferencing with the auditors on this issue. How can you come and tell us that these things are normal? I do not want to go into the details because I have already discussed them with your permanent sectary and there will come a time when I will bring them here on the Floor of the House. So, please, the committee in my opinion is assisting you, and assist us in turn as a country to agree that some of these things are irregular. I agree with you that AMISOM funds are not NTR but on that issue of irregularity, hon. Jeje Odongo, I have known you for a while since 1983. You remember when you were still a second lieutenant? So, please, be yourself! Thank you. (Laughter)

MR FUNGAROO: This is further clarification on a critical issue, which you never talked about; the welfare of the soldiers in Somalia. The UPDF soldiers who returned from Somalia injured and the relatives of the soldiers who died in Somalia have declared intention to take Government to court because of the poor health attention given to them and the lack of payment of their dues. This intention was given to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Defence. What do you say about the cries of the forces who have been used to make money, but their welfare is not taken care of properly? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have two minutes left.

GEN. JEJE ODONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I do not wish to get into personalising these matters, but the fact of the matter is that the account is not irregular. It was authorised by the Auditor-General and there is evidence to that effect.

Finally, let me respond to the matter of the ex-service men. On page 69 of our policy statement, there is information as to how many are involved, how much money, how many have been paid, how many are yet to be paid and how much money is pending to be paid. Further, I would like to inform colleagues that at an appropriate time in the near future, the Ministry of Defence will be making a statement here on the Floor of Parliament to explain the matters relating to ex-service men in greater detail. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

12.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Internal Affairs would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and members of the committee, for their report that they submitted earlier this morning. A number of issues were raised on the Floor of this House, to which I would like to respond as follows:

Mr Speaker, our marine section is still a new unit. We are still building capacity of that section and, therefore, we have not been able to give entire coverage on Lake Victoria and other water bodies in the country. So, as we build capacity, we continue to extend surveillance of our lakes to the extent possible. So, I would like to urge the Member who raised the question that please, we are working on it; we are building that capacity so that we can give adequate coverage. 

The Reverend hon. Bakaluba raised the issue of NGOs rushing to the oil sector. I wish to inform the House that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is working on a new assessment of the performance of NGOs to streamline their performance, reporting mechanism and also how we should monitor their performance. But I would like to take this opportunity to complement the work of the majority of NGOs in Uganda. We have over 9,000 NGOs registered in this country who are complementing the work of Government and we should not really condemn all of them because the majority are doing excellent work according to the mandate and the licences they are given. 

I would like to appreciate the issue raised by the Woman MP from Amudat. It is true that the reductions in the budget on operations will affect us and, therefore, if we come here for a supplementary budget, don’t be surprised. That is what the budget allocation has provided; we have to live with it. However, we have serious operations to undertake and, therefore, we needed these resources to do our work.
 
Hon. Drito, on private arms licensing taking too long; yes it has to take some time because we have to be careful as to whom we give these guns.  Some licences that we have issued before have been abused. People have been killed using the guns that we have licensed. So, we now need to do proper background checks as to whom these guns should be given so that they are given to responsible people who deserve to have them. So, please, allow us do thorough checks, but we shall try to speed up so that they are cleared as soon as possible.
 
On the representation of the Police and Prisons in Parliament. Mr Speaker, this is a constitutional matter. I am sure the Police and Prisons would also like to sit here in this House, but let us use the proper channel of addressing their representation here under the Constitution.
 
Hon. Anywar, you are right. We should be building our own properties. Actually, we are doing so, and we are also looking at private/public partnership in developing our own properties. So, all these things are in line and in some areas we have already started building, especially through the support of the PRDP programme for Northern Uganda and other regions.  That goes with construction and rehabilitation of Police and Prisons units. It is just a question of capacity, but the will and the plans to build them are definitely there. 

A 30-year old promoted to the highest rank. I wish hon. Mugume could have substantiated as to which Police officer of 30 years has been promoted to the highest rank. What we would like to assure you is that Police promotions are strictly on merit and they are approved by the Police authority, which was established under the Act of this Parliament and, therefore, all promotions go through it. If you have individuals who are below 30 years and have been promoted outside merit, please put it here on the Table so that we can discuss it. Definitely I don’t think that exists. You are questioning promotions of young people, but what about Members of Parliament who are 23 years old, why aren’t we questioning it? 
 
The deployment of Police outside is not happening for the first time. We deployed Police in Liberia, Darfur and East Timor all under obligation of the UN Charter.  And if you looked at the authorisation that sent the UPDF to Somalia carefully, it included the deployment of Police officers in that area. Please, let us check carefully before we come here to make utterances without cross-checking for facts.
 
Lastly, Mr Speaker, there are divergences in figures in the chairman’s report, especially in respect to budgetary allocations to Prisons and the Police. I hope we can correct this during the supply period. Thank you, Sir. 


12.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the committee for the report as well as their recommendations. I also want to appreciate that the committee raised a number of challenges, which we shall take into account when we are dealing with the budget. 

However, in the figures, we realised that there are some variances between the figures of the committee as reported by the committee and what is provided for in the MTEF appropriation. Those variances are on account of double counting of taxes. One is for Vote 120 - Citizenship; and Vote 144 - Police, where there is a variance on double accounting for taxes; and the committee has also sought to include corrigendum of Shs 13.1 billion, which was insurance compensation for the Police helicopter. 

On Vote 145 - Prisons, there is also double accounting for taxes, but the NTR for non-wage accounts has also been provided as an appropriation which should not. On the Vote for Internal Affairs, there is also a variance on account of omission of taxes in the report. What we intend to do is to harmonise these figures and correct them when we come to supply.  I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Mr Chairman, you have one minute to say something. 

12.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Milton Muwuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I don’t intend to say much. First of all, I would like to thank colleagues for the great support they have rendered to the security sector, that is, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Prisons Service and the Directorate of Immigration.  I am really grateful!
 
Mr Speaker, like one Member was proposing that Police needs to be represented in the House, it is also a concern of the forces, but the bottom line that we should address is welfare. If at all the welfare is well addressed, these people are not interested in becoming politicians. What is compelling them to suggest so is because of their welfare. So, I would like to appeal to Members to keep supporting the sector. 

Hon. Isabirye wanted to find out the issue of boats – that is the marine sector –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank him for giving way over something that was burning, especially when he said that the Police are not interested in being represented in Parliament because they are not politicians. Is he saying that the Army, which is represented here, is interested in politics? (Laughter)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Lukyamuzi, “the man” for his question. But he should be reminded that the Army is in the House for historical reasons, and it is clear. More so, they are on record for being here as listening posts. That has been raised several times. 

Two months ago, I went to Masindi -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: The honourable member has stated that the Army is represented in Parliament for historical reasons. Under our Constitution, the UPDF is one of the organisations represented here temporarily. Their stay in Parliament can be revised or even scrapped. Is he in order to lie to Parliament by giving his own views as propaganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What the honourable member said is actually confirming what you have raised as a point of order; that the UPDF representatives are there although they were not supposed to be there – that is why you are saying they are temporary. On his part, he says they are there because of historical reasons. So, the Member is in order because there is no contradiction. (Laughter)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I cannot add anything more to hon. Lukyamuzi’s concern. 

Regarding hon. Isabirye’s concern on having marine Police, in the Budget the Uganda Police Force is planning to purchase two long-range interceptor boats under NCR and four small fibre glass boats under JLOS. So, I have to appeal to the Police leadership that is here to consider the interests of the people of Mayuge when you are deploying these boats – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairman, you are addressing the House.

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, I thank you and my colleagues for the support. I pray that a peaceful Uganda should be the quest for all of us, especially when you are distributing resources. Let us all struggle to have a peaceful Uganda by providing resources to the sector. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman, thank you, Shadow Minister and thank you, ministers of Defence, Internal Affairs and Finance. I put the question that the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2012/2013 be approved and adopted by this House.

(Question out and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2012/2013 

12.33
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, I move to present the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2012/2013, in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Before I proceed, I would like to lay on Table the minutes of the committee proceedings and the submissions made to the committee while it was handling the policy statement. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WERIKHE: I would also like to lay a copy of the report on the Table. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, I will go straight to paragraph two of page 1, which talks about the scope. This refers to the votes we are considering: 

•	Vote 017 – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development;
•	Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment;
•	Vote 150 - National Environment Management Authority (NEMA); and
•	Vote 157 - National Forestry Authority. 

Methodology is given on that page, whereby we held meetings with various stakeholders, including Government departments, ministries and agencies.

On page 2, paragraph four; the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.

Budget performance during financial year 2011/2012

The energy sector budget including arrears and taxes performed at 73 percent. This is mainly on account of Shs 207.532 billion, which was appropriated by Parliament, to clear arrears for energy generation subsidy for thermal power, but was not released. In addition, the components of non-wage and donor performed at 61 percent and 48 percent respectively, below the programmed limits.

Mr Speaker, I will move on to page 4, paragraph 4.4: Ongoing activities. These are: 

(a)	Procurement process for the Karuma Hydropower Project;
(b)	Detailed feasibility studies and engineering designs for Isimba Hydropower Project;
(c)	Testing of Nyagak Hydro Power Project; and 
(d)	Detailed feasibility studies for Ayago Hydropower Project, among others.

On page 5, I will go straight to planned activities in financial year 2012/2013. These include:

(i)	Commencement of construction of Karuma Hydropower Project.
(ii)	Compensation and resettlement for Karuma Hydropower Project and interconnection, among others.

Paragraph five of page 6; 

Observations and Recommendations
(i)	Energy Fund

It was observed that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development used funds amounting to Shs 147,137,560,663 from the Energy Fund without the minister’s warrant and an approved budget by the Minister of Finance being laid before Parliament. However, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development realised this anomaly and has written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to have this anomaly regularised. 

The committee recommends that the ministry should always follow the law and the established procedures when accessing money from the Energy Fund.  

(ii)	Karuma Hydropower Project

The procurement process for the engineering, procurement and construction is in the final stages. The ministry has already embarked on compensating the people who are going to be displaced by the dam. Karuma Hydropower is envisaged to produce 600MW. 

The committee recommends that Government expedites the process of compensation and construction of the dam in order to increase power generation in the country. The construction of the Karuma Hydropower Project should take into account preservation of the natural features of the waterfalls.

(iii)	Energy Tariffs 

The committee was informed that Government adopted the cost recovery tariff due to lack of funds by Government to continue subsidising the electricity consumers.

Recommendations

The government removes subsidies in the power sector so as to save funds for the Energy Fund, which can be used to construct more hydropower projects. This would eventually bring the electricity tariffs down.  

The committee recommends that ERA should always consult the Energy Consumers Association and should conduct public hearings in various parts of the country since energy is consumed by Ugandans across the country. 

All stakeholders in the energy industry should always be consulted before tariffs are set. Government should explore ways in which the financing cost can be paid without recovering it from the tariffs. This will help to bring down the electricity tariffs.

(iv)	The Electricity Regulatory Authority Board 

The committee made this recommendation when the acting MD had not been appointed, but now we are told the MD has been appointed and he is now substantively holding the post. 

(v) 	Funding of the Rural Electrification Agency

The committee observed that funding for the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) does not rhyme with the funding available for generation, transmission and distribution. With the switching on of Bujagali Hydropower Plant, Uganda is producing more electricity than current connection to the national grid. The current excess electricity can be consumed if more connections are made.

REA is owed Shs 334,493,484,850 by UETCL. This affected a number of projects, which had been planned by REA to connect various parts of the country to the national grid. The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development releases Shs 34,493,484,850 to Rural Electrification Agency so that they can undertake the projects which had been planned. 

The committee further recommends that Government increases funding to REA so that it constructs more power lines to connect more people to the national grid.  

(vi)	Use of transmission lines

The committee recommends that REA carries out increased monitoring of the concessionaires to ensure that the power lines are well maintained and the materials used are of the required standard. 

(vii) Use of biomass as source of energy 

The committee recommends that Government adopts a multi-sectoral approach to reduce the dependency on biomass especially for cooking.

(viii) Alternative sources of energy

The committee recommends that:

a)	Government gives priority to solar, geothermal and nuclear energy as alternatives to hydropower.

b)	Incentives be provided to attract investors who are interested in producing energy from waste. 

(ix) Vote status for Rural Electrification Agency (REA)

The government financing transfers for rural electrification are largely for counterpart obligations on the rural electrification projects for which Ministry of Energy is the government executing agency and REA is the implementing agency.

The committee recommends that:
 
a)	The accounting officer for Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development allows the Executive Director of REA to perform the duties of REA on his behalf in accordance with Section 8 subsections (4) and (5) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

b)	Government considers amending the necessary laws so that REA can be granted a vote status.

(x) Nakasongola and Jinja fuel storage tanks

The committee recommends that Government -

a)	Stocks the storage tanks to avoid shortage of fuel whenever there are disruptions in the fuel supply, which escalate the cost of doing business; and

b)	Refurbishes and stocks the Nakasongola storage tanks, which have capacity to hold 40  million litres of fuel to increase the fuel stocks in the country.

(xi)National minerals laboratory

The committee recommends that Government establishes a national minerals laboratory so that the quality of minerals in Uganda can be tested from there.

(xii) Infrastructure for mining

The committee recommends that:

a)	Government considers mining as a priority sector and provides access roads and electricity to mineral-rich areas in order to attract investors.

b)	Government should build human resources capacity of the staff in order to carry out the necessary studies and develop the sector adequately.

(xiii) Non-compliance with the licences 

The committee recommends that:

a)	The Department of Mines and Geological Surveys reviews all the mining licences and takes the appropriate action to increase investment in this sector.

b)	The Mining Act be reviewed with the view of having it amended to address the existing gaps.

(xiv) Amber House

The committee observed that despite various recommendations to transfer the ownership of Amber House from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the building is still owned by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The committee was informed that Cabinet has set up a committee to discuss the ownership and management of all buildings owned by Government.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development transfers Amber House to Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 

The committee will also undertake and respect an investigation into the operations of Amber House and submit a report to Parliament at a later date.

Vote 6: Ministry of Water and Environment

Budget Performance 

The budget sector, excluding arrears and taxes, performed at 58 percent. This was generally because of a poor release performance of the donor fund, which performed at 35 percent as indicated in table 3. 

Observations and Recommendations 

(i)	Land titles for water facilities 

The Ministry of Water and Environment, by nature of its mandate, has put up infrastructure in form of valley tanks, dams, gravity flow schemes and irrigation schemes.

However, the ministry has not acquired land titles for these important facilities which have cost Government a lot of money.

The committee recommends that Government expedites the process of acquiring land titles for these facilities to avoid encroachment on the land and claims by other people as owners of the land, which may cost Government more funds in terms of compensations.

(ii)	Commencement fees on undisbursed funds

The committee recommends that Government should always study project designs before signing agreements to avoid payment of commitment fees on undisbursed funds, which increase the cost of the project.

(iii)	Encroachment on wetlands

Encroachment on wetlands is increasing at an alarming rate across the country. Little has been done to protect the wetlands in the countryside, which are necessary for natural purification of water and maintenance of the water table.

The committee recommends, therefore, that:

a)	Government gazettes all the wetlands in Uganda to avoid encroachment through reclamation.
 
b)	The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Uganda Land Commission and district land boards be compelled to stop issuing land titles in wetlands.

c)	The National Environment Management Authority ensures that the environmental impact assessments are adhered to by the developers.

d)	The mandated institutions involved in the ownership of land and land use be harmonised to avoid the current conflicts.

(iv)	Appointment of Managing Director for National Water and Sewerage Corporation

The committee observed that National Water and Sewerage Corporation has no substantive managing director. The position of managing director has been vacant for over six months since Dr Muhairwe’s contract was not renewed in November 2010.

The committee recommends that the Board of Directors of National Water and Sewerage Corporation expeditiously appoints the managing director to enable the corporation to operate effectively in accordance with the law.

(v)	Provision of water to water-stressed areas

The committee recommends that Government draws a plan on how the provision of water to the various parts of the country is lined up. The plan should also show the various types of technologies that the ministry intends to use.       

(vi)	VAT on water 

This has been -(Member timed out­­­.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Five more minutes.

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee recommends that Government drops the proposal to re-introduce VAT on water, which will reduce access to safe water especially by the poor.  

(vii)	Rain water harvest 

The committee recommends that the ministry develops a plan to fund rain water harvest as a matter of priority.     

(viii)	Climate Change 

The committee recommends that Government expeditiously finalises the climate Change Policy and others. 

(ix)	Water for production 

The committee recommends that the ministry takes over the sites and constructs the valley tanks so that the communities can have access to safe water.  

(x)	National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) 

We move on up to page 28. The committee recommends that NEMA increases inspection of projects to ensure compliance and should cancel all certificates where the developers have not complied. This will go a long way especially in urban areas where wetlands have been encroached on by developers. 

(xi)	Ban on importation and manufacture of plastic bags

The committee recommends that Government implements the ban on polythene bags and saves the environment from destruction. 

(xii)	Monitoring of the Albertine Graben 

For NEMA to effectively monitor oil and gas activities, there is need for equipment to carry out sampling, analysis and reliable transport for the field officers. 

The committee recommends that Government provides funds urgently to NEMA to enable the authority recruit enough staff to monitor the increased activities in the oil producing areas. 

(xiii)	Funding of NEMA

NEMA is underfunded hence we recommend an increase in their funding. I will move on to page 31.

(xiv)	National Environment Fund 

Whereas the National Environment Management Act gives the Minister of Finance powers to levy taxes to deter bad environmental practices, URA continues to remit the proceeds to the Consolidated Fund instead of to the National Environment Fund as required by Section 88 of the Environment Act. 

a)	The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance complies with the NEMA Act; and

b)	The Ministry of Finance accounts for all the collections so far made and how much has been remitted to NEMA.

(xv)	National Forestry Authority

Lack of forestry regulations 

The committee recommends that Government develops and prepares new rules and regulations to guide the operations of the forestry sub-sector. 

Unplanned harvest of forests 

The committee recommends that Government sets up forestry committees at a lower level to help in safeguarding the forests.
 
Funding for NFA

The committee recommends that NFA should promote technologies that emphasise sustainable forest harvest schemes to ensure continuous availability of forest resources and also raise some funds to support their activities. 

Surveying of forests 

This should be done in order to determine which areas belong to forest reserves. 

Further, the committee recommends Government recruits more environmental protection police from the current 150 to about 300 to increase patrols to stop illegal harvesting of forests. 

The committee recommends that NFA clearly marks the land left for the locals; that is on page 37; and forest audits should also be considered. 

The committee recommends that the Auditor-General carries out a forestry audit to ascertain the number of forest reserves. 

Encroachment on forests 

The committee recommends that local governments provide alternative land for forest development and those who have encroached on the forests be prosecuted in accordance with the law. NFA undertakes its mandate to regenerate all the degraded forests.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker, subject to the above observations and recommendations, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the budget estimates for Votes 017,019,150 and 157 as follows:

Vote 017 – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development

Recurrent expenditure:	Shs 7,902,820,000
Development expenditure: Shs 1,496,663,645,000
The above total is: Shs 1,504,566,465,000.

Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment

Recurrent expenditure:	Shs 7,083,688,000
Development expenditure: Shs 277,259,155,000
A total of: Shs 284,342,843,000.

Vote 150 - National Environment Management Authority (NEMA)

Recurrent expenditure:	Shs 4,709,986,000
Development expenditure: Shs 1,270,000,000
A total of: Shs 5,979,986,000.

Vote 157 - National Forestry Authority

Recurrent expenditure:	Shs 3,767,508,000
Development expenditure: Shs 4,490,000,000
Non-tax revenue: Shs 12,199,113,000
A total of: Shs 20,456,621,000.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for a very elaborate presentation.

Honourable members, in the gallery today we have Mr Mike Lowes, Editor of the Hansard of the House of Lords, United Kingdom. He is currently on a visitation programme with the Department of Official Report here at the Parliament of Uganda. Please join me in welcoming him. You are welcome! (Applause)

Honourable members, that is the report of the committee and as we agreed we will have some limited discussion on the subject, which will take 45 minutes. It is now coming to 1.00 O’clock so we still have good time. 

12.58
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of this committee for a very elaborate, detailed report they have given. I am concerned about two issues.

One, is about the wetlands being filled with murram every other day and yet the responsible ministers are here, and all this is done under their watchful eyes. There is a high level of impunity in this country. You do not need to reach outside Kampala for you to know that day and night, heavy trucks, 10-tyre lorries, are being filled with murram everyday and being offloaded to dry up wetlands. This is all being done under the guard of our Police officers and senior military officers. What a shame! When will we know and begin to accept that the environment the present generation is enjoying now belongs to the future generations? And here we are saying, “Give us money.” To do what with this money if you cannot even effectively use the little which has been given to you? You are here, “Oh you see, what can we do?” The laws are in place. We have given you all the laws to use. When will this country ever wake up and have the Generals arrested for violating the environment? You go to this other place in Industrial Area; day and night. Go to Kiwanda. Sure, what are we up to? Can we walk the talk? There is this company called Tirupati. You go to Kyebando; they have blocked all the water channels. One of these days, should calamity befall Kampala, even you the ministers who are here, I do not know where you will run. That will be the only time when you get to know that abuse of the environment is something we abhor. 

Honestly, we do not need money. Money is not everything, but let the Generals respect themselves. They are called Generals because we are the people who pay their salaries. Therefore, they are Generals because we civilians are there, but if everybody is going to say, “I am Afande so and so,” where are we going? 

Secondly, deforestation of gazetted forest areas. I say this as Chairman West Nile Parliamentary Group. Arua used to enjoy clean, fresh air being purified by Barifa Forest. For the last two years, a General in this country who is well-placed has cleared the whole forest using a gun. What a shame? And he wants to put a hotel and my brother hon. James Baba -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, did you say he cleared the forest using a gun?

MR WADRI: He used a gun to give him protection. (Laughter) I can name this person, Gen. Salim Saleh. Yet in the last Parliament, the Ministry of Environment - and that time I remember vividly, it was hon. Jesca Eriyo who tabled the report here -(Member timed out.)

1.02
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the team for the report they have presented to us. I have looked at the recommendations and I think a good number of them are okay. I want to support what the chairperson and the committee have brought. 

I have some few issues I want to raise. One is on the issue of the tariffs of electricity. Many times when bills are taken to consumers, it looks like there is more of estimates than the actuals of what the consumers are supposed to pay. I hope this will be looked into because it is giving the consumers a hard time. It is making most people not to consume electricity because of the way they are charged.

I also want to touch on the issue of rural electrification, which has not reached many places. I think it is so slow and I hope the minister will take this into consideration. In some of our places, most of the areas have not benefited and also the line we have is so old that it cannot even accommodate - especially in my district of Serere. I hope the minister will look into this. 

I want also to touch on the issue of water. By now, this country would not be struggling to produce food for the country and even for the market. But you realise that there is nothing like water for production in this country. Irrigation is not planned anywhere. In some of our regions, we would be expecting fruits to be produced throughout the year, but we do not have irrigation and I am not even seeing it anywhere in this budget. I expected to have seen it. It is high time Government at least tried one irrigation scheme for our people to benefit from it. 

I want to support the committee, especially on the issue of VAT. Last financial year, we removed this VAT. I was surprised when the minister came up with it this time again. I do not know what criteria they used for bringing it back. And, before we could even handle it in Parliament, it has already been introduced and the consumers are already paying. I thought they had to first wait up to today and then see whether Parliament approves it or not. Already, consumers are paying for VAT. I want to strongly support that recommendation that VAT should not be introduced because we want water for everybody. Once we introduce VAT, it is going to be very expensive for our consumers yet we want our consumers to have clean water.  

Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you saying they are enforcing the tax provision before the tax law is passed?

MR OCHOLA: Yes, it is already there. Consumers are already paying for it. It is so disturbing! We had expected to have it afterwe had looked into it at Parliament, but it is already being enforced -(Member timed out.)

1.06
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two or three issues. First of all, I want to thank the chair of the committee for a fairly good report. 

But I have a comment on the issue of the Shs 147 billion, which was paid from the Energy Fund without a warrant and without a budget. Recently, we had problems in the Office of the Prime Minister, and now we are having the chair of the committee telling us that the system, although in place, is not being followed. Yet, the way it is handled in the report is so lightly. It must be noted that when you fault the rules, you destroy the programme.

Secondly, the issue of Amber House. I am surprised that the Ministry of Energy is fighting the Ministry of Finance for having probably a title in the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Finance happens to be the finance controller of Government.  Therefore, they keep all the assets. I do not think we should be squabbling over these small things. The money for the building still belongs to the country. What we should be arguing about is probably how that money, which is coming from the property, is utilised.

Last but not least, two days ago, I was watching television and Mr Zimbe, who I think is the CEO of Umeme, was talking about electricity tariffs. He said that they are going to change the way they have been billing for electricity usage and base the charges on the dollar rate from month to month. I would like the minister to comment on this because I do not think that is acceptable. We earn in Ugandan money so we pay in Ugandan money. You cannot now be asking Ugandans to peg our salaries onto the dollar because we cannot afford it. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

1.08
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT  (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work well done. My concern is on the recommendation given by the committee on page 10, where it recommends that Government increases funding for REA so that it constructs more power lines to connect more people to the national grid.

Mr Speaker, in Pader District, we have power lines connecting Lira to Kitgum and it is benefiting part of the district. But along that line, there are two areas with serious problems: In Corner Kilak, the business people and the local people did all that they were required to do in order to be connected to the national grid. But it has taken so many years without these people getting power. 

Early this year, the people lost their patience and rioted. They cut down the poles along the power line from Lira to Kitgum. It was an act that we all condemned, but sincerely speaking, the people had lost patience. So, I appeal to the ministry to speed up the process of connecting the people of Corner Kilak to the national grid. 

The most serious case is in Pajule where we have a health centre IV. Mr Speaker, this is the only major health facility that is offering services to the people of Pader District. Unfortunately, this health centre has no power. The district has done all that was required to do. They have paid a lot of money to make sure that the health centre is connected to the national grid. But it has taken so many years and the health centre still has no power. So, I appeal to the ministry to do all they can to make sure that the people of Corner Kilak, more especially, Pajule Health Centre IV is connected so that the people who benefit from the health centre are served properly. 

1.11
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the good work they have done. My concern is on the licencing of the private tree planters. I can see on page 36, the committee is saying that the people who were licenced did not plant according to the schedule. But I do not know whether the committee went on to find out whether the National Forestry Authority helped those private tree planters in as far as protecting them in those areas allocated to them. 

For example, in Mubende, people are invaded every day by the so-called veterans who claim that the land belongs to them. So, much as you want them to plant, they need your protection to in order fulfil what the licence permits them to do.

Mr Speaker, on Vote 019, I can see the planned activities for the financial year 2012/2013. There was a GFS (Gravity Flow System), which was put in the budget statement. But now, I want a clarification; was it an error that Ngomba Gravity Flow System in Lugalama sub-county, Ntungamo District, was not under the planned activities in this financial year yet it was in the budget statement? I want clarification on that.

I also want clarification on the achievements – on page 25, they say that the authority restored Kinawataka, Lubiji wetlands in Kampala; Kyengo and Rubale wetlands in Ntungamo; and Muhanga Wetland in Kabale. I want clarification because I come from this place. I know that wetland in Rubale; it is invaded and I do not know what achievements they are talking about. Did they indeed restore that wetland, because as far as I am concerned, that wetland has been encroached upon? 

1.15
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the presentation of a good report, which is also detailed. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the Minister of Energy and congratulate her for the completion of Nyagak Mini Hydro Power Project, which I understand is now being tested and is going to be commissioned on the 15th of next month. 

Mr Speaker, you know how long this Nyagak took to be completed. But I want to add that it is not enough for Nyagak to be complete. The people of West Nile want to see distribution of power. They want to see the transmission lines being extended from Paidha, where this Nyagak is to Nyapeya-Zombo-Zeu-Malawi??????/; then Zombo – Atiak up to Vvula and Maracha. Then Nebbi - Nyaravulu to Pakwach then Nyaravulu, Parombo and Pangimulu. 

Right now, the power which is being tested is only consumed in Arua Municipality, Nebbi Town Council and Paidha Town Council. So, we would like to see that power is distributed to the villages of West Nile. 

Secondly, the 3.5 megawatts, which is being produced by Nyagak is not enough for the whole of West Nile Region. The people of West Nile need the region to be connected to the national grid either from Gulu or Lira. Sometime back, we were told that the consumption of the West Nile Region is even less than three megawatts. But we have our sons and daughters in the Diaspora who would like to come back and develop the region, and industrialise the region, but they cannot do it unless we have power –(Member timed out.)

1.18
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At the same time, I wish to thank the chairperson of the committee for this report. However, my concern goes to the planned activities for the financial year 2012/2013. 

I wish to thank the government for the completion of the power line from Nyanzi to Kiganda in Mubende District. However, according to the contract, that power line is meant to stop in Mubende town, but as I talk right now, the stoppage is in Kiganda. As I was going through the report, I was expecting the committee to have included the continuation of the power line from Kiganda to Mubende in Buwekula Constituency.

Secondly, there is a public outcry especially in my constituency. We have the umeme offices in Mityana District. People are travelling from Mubende, Kibaale and Kyenjojo districts just to pick an application form for the installation of the electricity for domestic use in their houses. To make things worse, people are complaining as to why when  somebody has defaulted, the officials from Umeme have the mandate to come and take all the solider wires and at the same time, to make the defaulter travel from these respective districts to make payments in this office of Umeme. You find, for example, that somebody owes Shs 30,000 but because of the transportation costs that amount to Shs 20,000 and the when you add on the Shs 30,000, while at the same time you are meant to pay somebody to come and install the electricity from Mityana. I wish the committee puts that into consideration.

Secondly, even last financial year when they gave us a recommendation to deal with water installation and making sure that they construct the dams, in my constituency, Buwekula, we have a very long dry corridor which has pastoralists, but I do not know what strategy the ministry has because my people are really struggling and as I talk right now, most of the cows are dying and we do not have water. The water these people are using is also being utilised by animals. I wish that the committee also travels to these areas -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. I will have the Member from Kotido, Toroma and then Bukonjo County East.

1.23
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for this good report. I do acknowledge the achievements of the Ministry of Energy in the year 2011/2012 on the completion, commissioning and connecting the district headquarters of Napak, Moroto, Nakapiripirit and others to the national grid. However, up to now, there is no light in these district headquarters. I would wish that as they talk of the completion, this process is expedited so that light is provided because I do not know how long it takes just to provide light when the whole process is completed and commissioned. 
On page 11 of the report, I agree with the committee recommendation that Government should give priority to alternative sources of energy. For instance, Karamoja is endowed with a lot of sunshine for seven to eight months in a year. It is also endowed with a lot of wind and I wish Government invests in this area so that this energy can be tapped to provide the energy needs in this part of the country. On the same issue, I would wish that the investors interested in investing in the solar energy can be encouraged and supported by Government. 

I also want to comment on the provision of water to the water-stressed areas. The committee has clearly indicated that the Ministry of Water does not have any clear plan on this. I am particularly concerned about the Kailong Dam, which has taken 20 years to be completed in Kotido District. Year in, year out, money is appropriated for this Kailong Dam, but nothing is visible about this dam and engineers come around and pretend when the committee is visiting that they are managing the dam and that they have a few things to do, but up to now, we do not have water in this Kailong Dam. Can the ministry explain to us in this House, why this Kailong Dam has taken this long to provide water to the people of Kotido District? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member from Toroma. The honourable member for Bukonjo County East is a Member of the committee and so will not speak.

1.25
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to join the rest of the Members in thanking the chairperson and his committee for this report. I have a few issues.

The first is on the issue of the piped water. When I looked at this report, I saw one of the areas of my constituency here and the ministry reliably informed the committee that the construction of this piped water is already done and is awaiting commissioning. However, Mr Speaker, the piped water in Magoro is not complete. Actually, I was waiting for an opportune moment to bring up this issue because my constituents were telling me, “We see piped water here. People are digging the place, but we are not seeing anything.” I want to emphasise realistic point of view that the committee must go and visit this area and find out what the problem is. I heard from reliable sources that one of the people in charge of this project signed for Shs 260 million for buying the generator, but run away with the money, and so, I interest the committee in finding out what happened.

The second is on the issue of electricity. I have seen on page 3 that it has already been completed and commissioned in my district - I actually see it at the district headquarters. I would request the Ministry of Energy to extend this electricity to my constituency as well, because it is going to be a very big disservice to me considering that it is just a distance of 10 to 15 kilometres away. 

The third is on the issue of importation and manufacture of plastic bags. I would request that the Government of Uganda invests in an institute in Nakawa that is in charge of research and innovation. When I visited that institute, I saw our brothers from Rwanda and other neighbouring countries taking knowledge from there and they now use banana cuttings to make these bags that are actually very good as they do not contaminate our soil. I think if Government put some money there, we would be better off other than importing polythene bags, which destroy our soils.

The other is on the issue of NEMA. I think NEMA must stick to its regulations. They say, “This is an area, which must not be touched,” and the following day we see lorries ferrying big stones and soil to fill that area. The following day you see a very big building being put up. I think that is not good! 

Lastly, -(Member timed out.)
 
1.29
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. My issue of concern is on page 22, about provision of water to water-stressed areas. Late last year, the Minister of Water wrote a memo - I guess to all Members of Parliament - asking us to point out issues concerning water in our areas. I thought that probably this was meant to inform the policy statement as they are planning to have water extended to the different areas of this country so as to ensure more access to clean water. 

It is surprising at this point that the committee actually notes that the ministry does not seem to have any plan of having water reach water-stressed areas. I would like the minister to explain what is happening; and on top of that, we are expecting to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. What is it that we are doing? Are we in charge?

On page 23, I would like the chairman of the committee to explain what he means on (vii), the last sentence. I don’t seem to understand it: “The ministry has not given little attention to rainwater harvest”. Probably he meant something else. If we are going to adopt this document, I think we need to have the correct meaning on statements. 

I would also like to comment on the issue of polythene bags. We very well know that Uganda is an agro-based country, and agriculture is both crops and animals. In my constituency, which I guess also happens all over this country, kaveera kills animals. When an animal swallows a kaveera, it is very easy for that animal to die. For most of our people that is what they are depending on. Apart from spoiling agricultural soil, we are losing animals at the same time. We are also having people in the villages using kaveera to cover food. No wonder there is an increase in the rise of cases of Cancer. Kaveera are used to cover matooke; kaveera are used to cover any kind of food. We are having medical complications because of this! 

I do not know why this situation has continued to persist. Even after declaring that the ban has been put in place and it should be stopped, I do not understand why this is going on when it is causing such a high risk to all of us; our constituents, our animals, our agricultural soils. Can the minister explain what is happening?

Mr Speaker, as I end, I would like to comment on the issue of rural electrification. I would expect that these lines are put strategically so that they can supply district headquarters, sub-county headquarters, hospitals and schools. But what I notice, especially in my area, is that the lines are just on the road. You do not see how it benefits the citizens. What is -(Member timed out.)

1.33
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. My concern is on page 12, and it is about our fuel reserves. We have lamented time and again about our fuel reserves, and I am taken by surprise to see that the government is running away from its role of managing the fuel reserves. 

When you read the last paragraph on page 12, where the committee observed that there is no law in place for public/private partnership, this puts Government shares in such partnerships at stake. We all know how this country suffers; how business comes to a halt when it comes to fuel shortages in this country. I, therefore, want to agree with the recommendations made by this committee on page 13 that indeed it should be the government’s role to manage and re-stock these fuel reserves. If we leave them in the hands of the partners they are talking about, then I don’t think we shall be solving this problem.

My second concern is on page 23, and it is about rainwater harvesting. When you take Masaka Road - some of you have seen this seasonal lake, towards Kyazanga Town. I always wonder when I look at this seasonal lake, can’t Government really do something to harvest this water because this is one of the water-stressed areas? Is Government really incapacitated to collect this water? Why do we continue lamenting about this water problem when we have such water, which we can harvest for our people to use? 

I, therefore, want to agree with the committee that the ministry should develop a plan to fund this area. Otherwise, if Government keeps an eye on this water which is collected and wasted, I don’t think this problem will be resolved. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

1.36
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Early in 2010, the then Minister of Energy, hon. Hillary Onek, visited Agago District and promised that the sub-counties of Lapono, Paimol, and Omiya Pacwa connecting to the State Minister of Foreign Affairs, hon. Oryem, would be connected to the national grid. But to date, there seems to be no indication that these lines will be connected. I want the minister to clarify that. 

Secondly, I also learnt from some reliable sources that the poles being taken for connections from Kitgum to Lamwo District are not treated. This is a very serious case. You know the dangers associated with connecting the national lines to poles which are not treated. So, that should also be checked and I want clarification from the minister. 

We would also request that the ministry looks at connecting the major health centres. In my district, the health centre of Arum, which is very far away from any power connection, would be considered because it is the only health centre III, and Agago District does not have any hospital. So, this health centre III could be connected because the next line is very close to the health centre.

Finally, on water for production. When I was growing up, we used to hear about dams and mini-irrigation schemes, but we have not seen any in my district under this Government. I wonder whether they have any plans to provide water for production, especially in water-stressed areas like Agago District, because we border Karamoja and we rear cattle. We also want to grow crops during the dry season. So, provision of irrigation systems would really go a long way in making sure that we combat food insecurity in that part of the land. 

Last but not least, I want to find out whether the ministry has plans to encourage tree planting not only by private owners of big lands, but by citizens of this country because the country is being depleted day and night? We are burning charcoal here and there and everyone of us uses charcoal including Members of Parliament, and you know the implications of using charcoal against planting trees –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we close, I will have the shadow minister in charge of this sector and then I will have the ministers in charge of Water and Environment; Energy; and Finance, in that order. 

1.40
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr John Ken-Lukyamuzi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the report, but nevertheless, I would like to lay on Table my official response as Shadow Minister in charge of Water and Environment. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda is one of the countries whose environment has a lot of relevance to the economy and, therefore, any mess we make of the environment will negatively impact on our economy. So, Uganda should have a climate change policy. I am surprised that as we go towards the harvesting of oil, while we have an oil and gas policy, we do not have a climate change policy. It is important for us to adopt a climate change policy so that we are able to control the production of oil without destroying the environment. 

As if that was not enough, just recently in Ndeeba - and I am an MP for Ndeeba - there was a big demonstration which paralysed every activity in the town and the people there whom I represent were saying that they paid for their timber to the knowledge of the National Forestry Authority, but up to now, whenever they make any attempt to ferry their timber across the city, they are stopped. So, I am seeking to know from the government and the ministry for that matter why my people should not ferry their timber when they have already paid for it with the knowledge of NFA? 

Mr Speaker, I am greatly alarmed by what is happening to our wetlands. Uganda has already signed the RAMSA Convention justifying the protection of every wetland. As we speak, nearly every wetland today is being occupied or is destroyed. And the story is that the people occupying these wetlands are veterans. Did these people go to fight in Luweero so that they could come back and destroy all the wetlands? The story on the destruction of wetlands must be clarified by Government today. If you cannot clarify it, you would rather keep away from Government so that business continues.

Mr Speaker, I was with the former Minister for Water and Environment and we inspected Bugolobi area wetlands and Luzira. A number of wetlands that impact greatly to the water quality of Lake Victoria have been destroyed and are being destroyed. Now that the government has employed the Environment Police, what explanation can you give us that you cannot protect wetlands in Ntinda, Bugolobi, and Luzira? Tell us now or else we are going to paralyse the government activities also, in a scientific manner in terms of reaction. 

Mr Speaker, I will now go to the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. The acting managing director of that corporation has been in office for over a year. According to the government regulations, he is not supposed to stay beyond six months. Why are you not appointing a new managing director? I want an answer today. There is no space for postponing the answer. 

The report talked about water shortages. The ministry should initiate a fund to address water harvesting in an official manner. The water which we get through rains around Central Uganda, for example, is enough for us to even get a share to transfer to Karamoja. There should be a programme to tap rain water and in terms of biology and health, rainwater is the safest water. It is even safer than the tap water from the National Water Sewerage Corporation. 

I now go to Mabira. Mr Speaker, I wish to report that Mabira is in danger. I recently conducted a tour in my capacity as shadow minister for water and environment and what I saw is alarming. The story I got from the person responsible for Mabira was that at night, Government agents, whom he did not specify, come with security personnel and they cut down these trees and run away. When they try to intervene, they are chased away by armed men. Government should explain who those agents are because they are there. One of them was arrested and he has got a case at Luzira court. I made sure that I saw that case recording and at an appropriate time –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, your time is up. For purposes of the records of this House, which I am in charge of, I would like to correct the record. Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi at the beginning said he is the MP for Ndeeba; there is no such position in this House. He is the Member of Parliament for Rubaga South. He also represents Ndeeba, but he is not the Member of Parliament for Ndeeba. (Laughter)

1.45
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The views of the Opposition on this sector are as follows: 

We are in the process of producing commercial oil and gas in this country and you know the predicaments and associated effects of oil production. As a country, the oil companies are running more ahead of us in terms of preparation on how they are going to carry out this production and this is very sad because as a country, we are supposed to guide the oil companies who come to do business in our country. There is no evidence that as a country, we have already put in place all the mechanisms that a company coming to work with us will have to follow. For instance, we are just in the process of finishing our policies. These are policies which are supposed to completely have been put in place in light of how we are going to protect our environment, and on how our people are going to benefit, so that any company coming to do business in the oil sector would have to follow. As per now, we already have so many companies which have already been licensed with oil arrangements in place living a lot to be desired and hence, letting our people miss out on this. We want as a country always to be proactive and not reactive in terms of how we prepare to benefit from our country. 

Mr Speaker, as we talk, in the areas where oil and gas has been discovered, there is an outcry because of the poor arrangements we have in place. The land owners where these activities are supposed to operate are not compensated adequately, and to make matters worse, not even early enough.  The assessments on their land are done but the payments come a year after and the value is not up to the market prices. This has left our people wondering whether the oil discovery is a curse or a blessing. 

We have a lot of controversies with Umeme surrounding Amber House. I am happy that the committee has highlighted. However, to emphasise, we in the Opposition would like to let the country know that if such controversies were designed to loot the country, they should not have occurred. We entered this agreement when we knew what Umeme was supposed to do. We have covered up the issue of Amber House and government ministries are playing tricks. The Ministry of Energy rents its own house while the Ministry of Finance is not making this clear. These are some of the unnecessary controversies that are ripping off the country’s funds.

The issues of loyalties should be made transparent without leaving any doubt to the beneficiaries. I have to rush because the five minutes are too few. 

Colleagues have already alluded to the fuel reservoirs. It is true that we in the Opposition are concerned about that. We have been wondering, since the Eighth Parliament, why a country which has fuel storages does not use them. We visited these storage places in Jinja with the committee in the Eighth Parliament and we were told that the original fuel which was stored there had been looted by army officers. We recommended that they should be used to store fuel for emergency so as to control prices during scarcity, but up to now Government has not done that. 

We would like to emphasise that fuel is key; its availability and cost impacts on so many commercial and survival activities in this country. They should, therefore, take it as a priority so as to stabilise these prices and even store the fuel so as not to have unnecessary shortages or hoarding by some funny company owners. I was a victim recently when I had to buy fuel. Upcountry, people are buying at skyrocketing prices. (Member timed out.)

1.52
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are two things here in the report concerning the Ministry of Energy, which I think are important to us and we should emphasise. The report says that the ministry spent Shs 147 billion without permission from Parliament or anybody. We would like to know who sanctioned the expenditure and what is going to be done. The committee has not given a strong recommendation; it is just saying, “in future”. When someone has used about Shs 150 billion and you are just saying “in future”! How about the one who spent it now? What have we done about it? 

Secondly, the ministry also diverted Shs 36 billion which was meant for rural electrification. When the rural electrification department had advertised and identified contractors, they discovered that the money had been diverted by the ministry. We would like to know why this is being done and what are the sanctions? Who diverted the money? (Member timed out_)

1.54
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I just want to thank you very much for your professional stewardship of the House. I want to thank the chairman, hon. Werikhe, and his colleagues on the Committee on Natural Resources for the excellent report. I also thank members for their constructive contributions. 

This report is excellent. I can say this, Mr Speaker; if I were in the shoes of the members of this committee, I have no doubt in my mind I would have made similar recommendations. They have made excellent recommendations and we agree with most of them. (Applause)  

When I look at the report, you begin with achievements. The ministry has recorded achievements for the fiscal year 2011/2012 under the leadership of hon. Maria Mutagamba, my predecessor, whom I would like to thank for her leadership in the ministry for the last 12 years. I would also like to thank colleagues that she has worked with and whom I am working with, Flavia and Betty. I call them Flavia and Betty to emphasise the note of team spirit with which we have started to work in the ministry.

Paragraph 6.5 outlines the planned activities in fiscal year 2012/2013. I would like to assure you, Mr Speaker and members of this House, that we will execute these planned activities with a degree of professionalism and commitment. There are other activities which I am sure will come in the course of implementation, some of which you have already mentioned on the Floor of the House. 

The committee made recommendations and observations. If you look at page 20, these observations and recommendations are outlined. In responding to the recommendations, it is very important to begin from observing one of the most binding constraints limiting the management and utilisation of nature based resources. I really want your attention, Mr Speaker, because this is a very important point. I saw hon. Wadri passionately presenting the issue of wetlands and hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi on climate policies. I have grown up with him so I fondly refer to him as “Ken the Man”. 

Let me mention this point. The vision of this country is transforming the country from being predominantly peasant to a modern economy. However, utilising nature based resources is going to remain a real challenge because as the population increases and the livelihood continues to depend on agriculture and land, the propensity to encroach on wetlands and forest reserves is going to be a real challenge. It is going to be a challenge involving even Members of Parliament. (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I once was the Shadow Minister of Environment and Water. The honourable minister is the one in the docket of protecting and conserving the environment and water sector. Is the honourable minister, who is entrusted with conservation of the environment and water sources, in order to be the one advocating for the likelihood of their destruction? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have listened very carefully to the minister’s statement and to my recollection he said that as long as we are going to rely on agriculture and with the increase in population, the new challenge in this country will be pressure on the environment, wetlands and forests. That is my understanding of what he said. He is, therefore, perfectly in order to say what he said.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. What I was basically saying is that we need to accelerate the transformation of the economy so that some of the issues you are raising can be answered. 

I also want to emphasise the recommendations and the observations that you have made. I genuinely commit myself to ensuring that those which are implementable will be implemented without fear or favour. However, I wish to add caution that in this challenge that I have pointed out, I need your cooperation. Some of the encroachment on wetlands – I dare not say, but you will find these are your voters. Definitely, I will be throwing them out and some of you will be defending them on the Floor of the House. So the point I am emphasising is mutual cooperation and support in implementing these programmes. Due to time constraint - (Interruption) 

MR YOKASI BWAMBALE-BIHANDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for giving way. Honourable minister, you have said that we may not be able to handle the challenge due to population pressure. Kampala people do not practise agriculture; I do not think it is because of the population pressure that people are encroaching on wetlands. I think it is just lack of proper planning and implementation of the law.

The second issue I am seeking clarification on is the issue of the kavera. This Parliament passed a law banning the production, importation and usage of the same. Now, why hasn’t this regulation been implemented? Is it also because of the population pressure?

The other issue on which I am seeking clarification regards the protection of the river banks and lake shores. A law was passed in this House for protecting the flora and fauna on the shores of our lakes and river banks. Surely, is it because of the population pressure that this also cannot be implemented? The issue is that we still act in a very primitive way – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating, honourable member?

MR BWAMBALE-BIHANDE: No, I am seeking clarification, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) Yesterday, a member from Ntoroko brought up an issue of national importance and she was talking of rivers bursting their banks and the lake overflowing. This is just because we refused or failed to implement that law on protecting the river banks and lake shores. So, that is why you are in Government, so that you can address those challenges. Like hon. Lukyamuzi said, I am seeking clarification - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Bwambale. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Only time constraints limit us, but I hope we shall have time again to engage each other in this debate. Therefore, let me quickly state the position of the ministry on various observations and recommendations. 

Observation number 1 was on land titles. This is on page 20 of the report. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You may use one minute to conclude.

PROF. KAMUNTU: With one minute, Mr Speaker, can I ask you to allow my colleague, hon. Flavia Nabugere - (Interjections) - I do not have the time. So let me quickly then say that I agree with the recommendation on commitment fees on undisbursed funds. The ministry is going to study designs so that there is no delay on disbursed funds.

The recommendation on encroachment of wetlands is on page 22. I agree with the recommendation; the process of gazetting wetlands must be done. On appointing the managing director for National Water and Sewerage Corporation, I also agree that we should do it expeditiously.

Provision of water to water-stressed areas; I agree and this will be done. I totally agree with the recommendation on rain water harvesting. You can imagine houses with corrugated irons sheets across the country harvesting rain water; we would save women and children from walking long distances to collect water on their heads. 

If I had time - God put brains in our heads and stopped addition of fats merely for your brain to think, not to carry water and fetch firewood. It is a total embarrassment. So I need your cooperation so that we can harvest rain water for animal watering, irrigation and household use. This is possible. We only need the will and determination to do it and we shall have it.

On climate change, I totally agree. The fundamental duty of a minister is determination of policy. This is it and we are going to have this policy in place shortly, hon. Lukyamuzi. About NEMA - (Member timed out.)

2.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Flavia Munaba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Colleagues, I wish to thank the committee chairperson for the report and good recommendations they have made. I just want to give some little clarification on some of the processes that are on-going in the Ministry of Water and Environment. As far as protection of forests is concerned, the rules and regulations to guide operations of the forest sub-sector have been prepared and are in the office of the Solicitor-General to be finalised and approved.

On the protection of the natural resources, we have talked about the environmental protection force being only 150-strong but the design is for 600-strong. The fact that they have to be trained to respond to environment and natural resource issues keeps the process on-going. We cannot just put people on the ground out of the blue; they have to be trained. 

On the recommendation by the committee to demarcate the forests and wetlands, this process has begun; demarcation is going on. The struggle in this process is contending with the animosity or the resentment of the local communities, which arises due to misconceptions about land ownership. People still believe that they own wetlands by right of the Constitution and that they own land by right of the Constitution.

The other point I need to comment about is the demonstration in Ndeeba where forestry traders have to transport their timber. There are guidelines as to how timber must be handled and treated and what requirements have to be fulfilled. Because the traders are not complying, that is why there are those conflicts. They need to comply with the guidelines of NFA.

We talked about the wetland protection in the rural areas. The biggest pressure on wetlands has been in the city, in Kampala, especially from traders and the Ministry of Water and Environment. The environmental protection force has had to concentrate on trying to prevent the encroachment in the city because this encroachment is even more damaging since it involves construction of warehouses and - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. For future reference, honourable minister, Prof. Kamuntu - for purposes of this House - we really do not mind how you call each other in the ministry but for as long as you are in the House, the rules dictate how you refer to colleagues. You refer to them as “honourable” and their surnames. So in this case, you should be saying, hon. Munaba or hon. Bigombe. So the “Flavias” and the “Bettys” would remain in the office. (Laughter)

2.11
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to you for the support you have given my ministry over the last one year. In particular, I want to thank the chairperson, the vice chairperson and members of the Committee on Natural Resources with whom we have interacted as a ministry on a regular basis. 

Mr Speaker, I now wish to focus on the issues raised by the committee and honourable members -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have six minutes, honourable minister.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the Energy Fund, the Shs 147 billion was utilised for construction of an extensive rural electricity programme covering areas which have not been served for a long time in the districts of Alebtong, Ntoroko, Napak, Nakapiripirit, Amudat, Moroto, Kaberamaido, Dokolo, Amolatar, Katakwi, Kamwenge, Kakumiro, Kyankwanzi, Kabale, Mityana and Mubende. 

In addition, these resources were also used to construct service transmission lines to transmit power from Mpanga small hydro station to the newly constructed sub-station at Kahunde, and the lines that will transmit power from Buseruka and Kikagati small hydro stations. The Energy Fund resources were also utilised to carry out a feasibility study of Karuma Hydro Power Project and packaging of the project, which is to commence construction soon.

The source of the money was part of the accumulated reserves carried forward from funds appropriated from the financial year 2009/2010 as part of the Energy Fund. During the year 2010/2011, there was no budget appropriated; the reserve was the only source available, and the old appropriation of the previous year available on account was therefore utilised. The Minister of Finance advised that the extra resource should have been separately requested after the close of the financial year following the audit observation. The money saved on the Energy Fund for the year 2011/2012 was, however, appropriated, and utilisation of the existing balances on the reserve account will be requested and laid before Parliament.

On Karuma Hydro Power Project, Government is committed to quick settlement of this issue. The funding for compensation of the project affected persons is available. The Chief Government Valuer has already issued the valuation report and payment for the project affected persons will be based on the rates approved by the valuer.

I wish members to note that disclosure of the compensation amounts for the project affected persons has already been done. Over 90 per cent of the people are in agreement with the Chief Government Valuer’s rate. A disputes resolution committee has been put in place with an office in Karuma Trading Centre, and bank details for the project affected persons are being obtained so that payment proceeds.

On the energy tariff, each time there is a need for tariff adjustments the regulator consults energy consumers associations and also conducts public hearings. We, however, take note of the need to conduct public hearings in the various parts of the country. This will be implemented in future.

On the Electricity Regulatory Authority Board, as the chairperson of the committee mentioned, a substantive chief executive officer has already been appointed. The issue of reviewing the board of the regulator will be undertaken in accordance with Section 9(2) and 9(3) of the Electricity Act.

I will now turn to the funding for the Rural Electrification Agency (REA), the Shs 34.5 billion. I have consulted with my colleague, the Minister of Finance, on this issue and she has agreed that these funds will be released as soon as financial resources are available. On the issue of increasing funding for the Rural Electrification Agency, I entirely agree with all of you, honourable colleagues, on this recommendation because our plan is to achieve a bigger target for rural electrification.

On the use of transmission lines, the supervision and enforcing compliance of the concessionaires is done by the regulator. For the Umeme concession, the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Ltd also participates. On the part of the Rural Electrification Agency, the agency is charged with developing new rural electrification infrastructure and it has to ensure quality work by the various contractors. This is well enforced. Where there is need to address unsatisfactory work, the contractors are compelled to rectify the faults.

On the use of biomass as a source of energy, we welcome the recommendation of the committee and we will adopt it. However, I wish to point out that my ministry has in place a programme for efficient utilisation of biomass. The programme focuses on training of trainers to help in the dissemination of the various technologies. (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPTY SPEAKER: Two more minutes.

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, on alternative sources of energy, I want the honourable members to note that our policy is to increase the country’s energy mix as opposed to the original hydropower dominance. So, issues of solar energy, geothermal, nuclear are other alternatives that are among the key priority energy sources that Government is considering.

On the vote status of the Rural Electrification Agency, that role is handled by the Ministry of Finance and we have communicated to this effect. Meanwhile, the accounting officer of my ministry has already delegated the executive director of the Rural Electrification Agency to perform the duties on his behalf.

On the Jinja storage tanks, the tanks are being refurbished and the mechanical parts being fixed. We expect the refurbishment to be completed by end of January next year and the testing by end of February next year. So, we hope that the facility will be restocked beginning of March next year. In addition, we are engaging the Ministry of Defence in refurbishing and stocking of the Nakasongola storage tanks. 

On the issue of Amber House, we have taken note of the recommendations of the committee and the Ministry of Finance has initiated the process of trying to hand over this building to us. For your information, in Amber House we are currently there as tenants, so there is need for this process to be finalised.

For colleagues who have expressed the need to have electricity connected to their rural areas, efforts are being made. Once we can have adequate resources, we will endeavour to ensure that electricity reaches every corner of Uganda and our target is to have electricity for all by 2035. So, the more resources we have, the better. 

My sister from Pader talked about the Corner Kilak electricity line. I will request that you discuss with your people to allow work to continue because if they had not destroyed the existing line, by next month the work would have been completed. So, I am appealing to you to actually engage the local people to allow - (Member timed out.)

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report that generated a lot of recommendations but also highlighted some challenges in the sector. 

Most of the issues raised have been answered. Increased funding of REA will be attended to by Government. Amber House Ltd has been answered.

The issue of VAT on water is very important to this country. The ministry, in generating this idea, thought that we would generate about Shs 21 billion, which would be used to re-invest in rural water supply and that was the whole reason. This matter will be handled when we table the Finance Bill, which is before this Parliament.

On the issue of National Environment Fund as provided for by the NEMA Act, we are aware that there is a NEMA fund, which is supposed to be allotted. However, there is also a conflict of laws because it is the Uganda Revenue Authority that is mandated to collect all revenue. So, as a ministry, we are harmonising these laws which authorise other agencies to collect revenue with a view of resolving the conflict and solving the matter. (Member timed out.)

2.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to correct the record. On page 23, under VII, the last sentence under that paragraph, we should delete “not” before the word “given”. So, it should read, “The ministry has given little attention to rain water harvesting.” That is how it should actually be captured.

I would like to also assure colleagues who raised issues about achievements and ongoing activities particularly from Ntungamo and Katakwi. We captured what the ministry gave us but I think in our oversight role, we will as a committee - that is actually in our schedule of plans - travel to these places to verify what the ministry has told us.

I would also like to appreciate the input of our shadow ministers namely, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and hon. Beatrice Anywar. Most of the issues are also actually captured by the report. Nevertheless, they are members of the committee and we are going to harmonise.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and honourable members of the House on behalf of the Committee on Natural Resources for the input and contributions. We are going to continue working together so that we play our oversight role together with the Executive to implement the recommendations. I beg to report and move. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statement on the budget estimates for the financial year 2012/2013 be approved by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, I want to get some guidance from you or from the House. One member here raised the issue of VAT on water which they are charging now, and there were bills laid before this Parliament, the Finance Bills and VAT. We have not pronounced ourselves on those Bills and Parliament has not taken a decision on that. Is it procedurally right for National Water and Sewerage Corporation or Ministry of Finance to charge VAT when Parliament has not pronounced itself on those Bills? I am moving under rule 113(a) of our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that I asked that question myself and I was throwing the question back to the House. It is a simple principle of taxation. There is no taxation without representation. If you want to know the basis of this, it is part of what caused the American Revolution - taxation without representation. It is irregular, it is illegal and it is unconstitutional. (Applause) Appropriate steps should be taken to remedy and correct this problem.

The House is suspended to 3.30 p.m. to proceed.

 (The House was suspended at 2.27 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 3.41 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to: 
Ms Kiiza Winifred 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have the singular honour of receiving you to this Parliament - receiving you again. (Applause) It is again my honour to extend to you the Constitution, which you have just sworn to uphold, a copy of which you had been using just a few weeks back in this House. (Applause) I now also have the honour to give you the updated Rules of Procedure, which you have not used in this House. These two will help you to engage again with your members. You are welcome. You can sit on either side of the House. (Applause)

Honourable members, please resume your seats. Hon. Kiiza, the task which befalls you is enormous. Together with your other colleagues from the region, there are problems and you should be part of the solution. There are problems in Kasese. It has come to the attention of this House many times. Petitions have been received from Kasese. Some violence has been in that district. You should be part of the solution with the support of this House. So, we welcome you again to this House. (Applause)

The House is basically almost as you left it - (Laughter) - except now you know that during this period of the year, we are engaging in the budget. That is what we are doing presently. So, you are welcome again and engage like you have always done in promoting the unity of this country and in particular helping the people of Kasese come together and focus on national development. You are very welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, the Inter-denominational Parliamentary Fellowship invites all Members of Parliament to a breakfast meeting. The theme of that meeting will be, “Leadership witness in a fast changing world.”  The venue will be the Members’ Lounge. It will be on the 30th day of August, 2012 starting from 7.00 a.m. to 9.00 a.m. The guest speaker will be Dr Michael Cassidy, founder member of AEE, and the Most Reverend Archbishop Henry Luke Orombi. Breakfast will be served. Come all of you to attend this particular meeting. 

Honourable members, in the gallery today we are honoured to host pupils of Kalongo P.7 School located in Agago County. They are represented by hon. Okot John Amos. Please join me in welcoming these children that have come to observe the proceedings of the House. You are very welcome. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT OF THE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

3.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Sylivia Ssinabulya): Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Committee on Education and Sports derives its mandate from Article 90 and 155 of the Constitution, and provisions 138 and 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. In line with this mandate, I now have the honour of presenting, for your consideration and adoption, the report of the Committee on Education and Sports in respect to the policy statements and budgetary provisions for the fiscal year 2012/13 covering the following votes: 

•	Vote 013, Ministry of Education and Sports headquarters;
•	Vote 111, Busitema University; 
•	Vote 132, Education Service Commission; 
•	Vote 136, Makerere University; 
•	Vote 137, Mbarara University of Science and Technology; 
•	Vote 138, Makerere University Business School; 
•	Vote 139, Kyambogo University; 
•	Vote 140, Uganda Management Institute; 
•	Vote 149, Gulu University; and 
•	Vote 500, series of local governments.

Mr Speaker, the procedure is outlined on page 1 and on page 2. We also have the highlights of the committee report and since members have copies, they will look at the highlights. We have the sector mission on page 2 and the vision statement of the ministry. On page 3, we have the budget performance for financial year 2011/2012. The pages that follow have the achievements for the financial year 2011/12. 

On page 5, we have the challenges, and I want to highlight some of the serious challenges which have faced the sector. One of the major challenges is sustaining increased access to education without compromising quality. The sector also continues to face challenges of inadequate resources for remuneration of teachers, construction of classes and teachers’ accommodation. It also faces a challenge of shortage of science teachers mainly in rural areas and also increased absenteeism of teachers and pupils. 

Pages 6 to 8 highlight the planned outputs of the financial year 2012/2013. On page 8, we have the unfunded and underfunded priorities of the sector in financial year 2012/2013. These include:

i. 	Special needs education services.
ii. 	Support to establishment of constituent colleges and public universities.
iii. 	Sponsorship scheme and staff development for Masters and PhD.
iv.	Operational support for public and private universities.
v.	Assessment and technical support for health workers and colleges.
vi. 	Operational support to government technical colleges.
vii. 	Training of secondary science teachers and instructors.
viii. 	Support to national sports organisations.
ix. 	Support to ministerial and top management services.
x. 	Construction of government buildings and administrative infrastructure.

On page 22, I want to highlight the unfunded priorities for all public universities in financial year 2012/13. Government has failed to fully fund the following activities: 

•	Teaching and training support services; 

•	Research, consultancy and publications; 

•	Administration and support services; 

•	Construction and rehabilitation of government buildings and administrative infrastructure; 

•	There is need for more resources for infrastructural development and ICT infrastructure; 

•	There is inadequate recurrent non-wage funding to cater for students welfare and utility bills; 

•	Staff recruitment levels in all universities are 50 per cent and government universities also continue to face challenges of NSSF contributions. 

•	Finally, there are issues of fencing of university campuses. Universities do not have money to fence off their campuses. 

I want to go to the sector observations and recommendations on page 24. 

Vote 013, Ministry of Education and Sports Headquarters 

Pre-Primary and Primary Sector

1. 	The committee observed the lack of inspection and technical support rendered to the pre-primary section, which is largely privately operated hence compromising quality and standards. 

	The committee recommends that Government enforces inspection and technical support to the pre-primary sub sector in order to guarantee quality and standards. Government should also ensure that the inspection department is adequately funded to perform its activities.

2. 	The committee observed the lack of infrastructure in most of the education institutions; where they are in existence, they are gravely dilapidated causing health and safety hazards. The committee recommends that Government prioritizes construction and rehabilitation of infrastructure by providing adequate Capital Development Fund (CDF). 

3. 	The high rate of teacher to pupil ratio, at a maximum of 1 to 104, leading to congestion and ineffective learning and teaching, and accentuated further by lack of adequate teaching and instructional materials, was also noted. The committee recommends that more teachers be recruited upon lifting of the ban on recruitment. Government should also ensure that schools have adequate teaching and instructional materials. 

4. 	The committee also observed the neglect of teachers’ welfare at primary and secondary levels accruing from poor remuneration, which is often released late, coupled with lack of teachers’ houses. This has led to relegation of the teaching profession and its treatment as casual employment. The committee recommends timely release of teachers’ salaries and realistic salary increment that is commensurate to the rising costs of goods and services and inflation.

5. 	Observation was also made on the inadequate capitation grant paid to primary schools of Shs 7,000 per pupil per year and the fact that it is not all remitted as budgeted for. The committee recommends frequent assessment of the capitation grant to accommodate the rising cost of goods and services and for total release of budgeted funds. 

6. 	The committee further observed the enormous discrepancy between the capitation grant for primary schools, Shs 7,000 per pupil per year, and secondary schools, Shs 41,000 for USE government and Shs 47,000 for USE private, per student per term. The committee recommends a study to scientifically establish the unit cost of delivering education per child. 

7. 	The committee observed the lack of teachers especially in rural based schools due to a ban by the Ministry of Public Service on recruitment of teachers. The committee recommends an interim measure of recruiting for replacement of vacant positions while waiting for the ban to be lifted.

8. 	Note was also taken of lack of feeding of pupils in primary schools as one of the major factors leading to the high school drop-out rate and absenteeism. The committee recommends to Government to impact upon local governments to make and enforce by-laws obliging parents to feed their school going children as already stipulated in the Education Act.

9. 	The committee noted Government’s slowness at orientating and training relevant stakeholders and implementers when introducing new programmes and policies. Thematic teaching, for example, has been misconstrued to mean omission of English language as a subject at lower levels and concentration of teaching in local languages. The committee recommends to Government to prioritise consultation, orientation and training before introduction of new programmes as this will minimise unwarranted errors.

10. 	The committee also made an observation on the current parameters used to grade primary schools, which are based on pupil enrolment. This has become obsolete with the introduction of UPE. So, the committee recommends review of the parameters for grading primary schools. 

11. 	Note was also taken of lack of adequate support to schools for children with disabilities. Recommendation is made to Government to draw up a comprehensive road map geared towards support of children with disabilities and institutions catering for those with disabilities.

Universal Post Primary Education and Training and Universal Post Ordinary Level Education and Training (UPPOLET) 

The committee made a number of observations and one of them was late remittances of capitation grants to schools - primary, post-primary, tertiary and higher institutions of learning - making it virtually impossible for schools and institutions to operate. The committee was also informed that because of this, some schools have had their accounts closed by banks due to failure to maintain a minimum account balance. Recommendation is made to Government to make timely remittances to facilitate realisation of planned activities and outputs. 

On page 28, number 7, the committee observed that some teachers who have taught for many years have never been confirmed or promoted due to lack of funds in the sector to monitor and capture the required information for action. The committee recommends that funds be availed to capture data that is required to take action so that confirmation and promotion can be effected.

Note was also taken of Government’s failure to recruit enough teachers for UPPOLET in the financial year 2012/2013 contrary to the ever increasing numbers of students. Government’s conception of recruiting teachers on part time basis due to lack of funds for the Education Service Commission to carry out the recruitment is not sustainable. The committee recommends that Government allocates funds to facilitate the recruitment of teachers for UPPOLET in the medium term to enhance quality of education.

The committee observed that contrary to its recommendation in the MTEF report that teachers’ salaries at all levels be increased by at least 30 per cent and eventually in the medium term to 100 per cent, they were increased by only 15 per cent. This increment is nominal and insignificant given the inflationary rates and the ever rising costs of goods and services. The committee therefore reiterates its earlier position that teachers’ salaries be increased by 100 per cent in the medium term in order to make a meaningful difference, given that teachers are the backbone of our society. (Applause)

The committee also observed inconsistency in the percentage of increment of teachers’ salaries contrary to Government’s pledge of 15 per 0cent. In the Circular Standing Instruction No. 1 of 2012, increments are seen to vary between six per cent and 15 per cent. The committee recommends that the 15 per cent increment be applied across the board in order to standardise the increment for teachers in all salary scales.
		
Note was also taken of the Scheme of Service which was carried out in primary schools although it was not implemented in financial year 2011/2012. The minister had pledged to roll it out to secondary schools in the financial year 2012/2013 but funds have not been provided for it in the budget of this financial year. The committee recommends to Government to provide more funding to expedite implementation of the Scheme of Service to both primary and secondary schools in the medium term to avoid low morale among teachers, which can eventually affect quality and standards of teaching.

The committee also made observations on low staffing levels in Primary Teachers’ Colleges (PTCs) and National Teachers’ Colleges (NTCs) and also the inadequate capitation to NTCs and PTCs. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Five more minutes.

MS SSINABULYA: I thank you. Let me move to the National Council of Sports on page 33. The committee observed the lack of an updated enabling Act to guide the National Council of Sports and widen their mandate to match with the changing times as the current Act was last reviewed in 1964 and limits the council to amateur sports. The committee recommends and urges Government to amend the Act and the minister to sign the statutory instrument giving National Council of Sports a wider mandate to accommodate and match the new sports era. This will in turn translate into improvement in the sports sector.  

The committee also noted with concern the inadequate funding to the National Council of Sports to support the 47 sports federations and the low investment in the sports sector by Government. The committee recommends adequate funding, support and investment to the National Council of Sports to facilitate its planned outputs.

The committee also recommends and urges Government to explore a legal framework to constitute a commission or authority to be known as the National Sports Authority. This will also clearly outline and spell out the roles and functions of the commission or authority and hence ensure an attuned working environment. Further issues relating to lack of support by Government towards talent identification and counselling services as observed by the committee in (3) below should also be addressed.

I now want to move to the recommendations on public universities. Mr Speaker, the committee noted, on page 35, that all public universities are faced with the challenges of low staffing levels, which stand at unacceptable levels. Some universities operate with less than 30 per cent and in that range of staff establishment, notably Mbarara University at 28 per cent and Busitema University at 38 per cent. The committee strongly recommends the urgent recruitment of at least up to 50 per cent of staff levels in all the public universities, with the provision of an adequate wage component to facilitate the payment of their salaries.

The committee observed the inadequate funding of students’ welfare for public sponsored students necessitating the university administrators to utilise Non Tax Revenues (NTR) to top up for government sponsored students. It was noted that the feeding unit cost per student per day was fixed at Shs 2,000 while universities topped up ranging between Shs 1,500 to Shs 3,000. 

The committee, noting the financial implication of the feeding and living out unit cost per student in all public universities, recommends the review of the unit costs across the board with a view of revising it upwards as its inadequacy has been observed.

I want to bring out the observations the committee made on page 37. Observation 6; the committee established that Shs 30 billion was transferred to the education and sports sector for State House scholarships, formerly controlled by State House. 

The committee further noted that the Ministry of Education and Sports lacked Shs 13 billion to kick start the student loan scheme in the academic year 2012/2013. 

The above scenarios are compounded by the lack of a legal framework for the student loan scheme to guide the sector in the implementation of the scheme even with earlier provisions for fast tracking the student loan scheme.

The committee also noted the parallel operation of sponsorship programmes under the Ministry of Education and Sports inclusive of State House. Note was also taken of Government’s indebtedness towards private and public universities accruing from fees from State House sponsored students. The committee could not ascertain the total amount but for Makerere University, State House owes the university Shs 2.8 billion for the financial year 2011/2012. There are many other universities that State House owes money.

The committee reiterates the earlier recommendation by the former social services committee to withhold any further releases of funds to the student loan scheme secretariat until justification is made to that effect. The committee in the foregoing observation recommends that Government pays off the debts accrued by State House sponsored students to the various universities and the balance be used to kick start the student loan scheme in the financial year 2013/2014.

The committee further recommends that instead of operating the parallel sponsorship programme for universities, the minister should expedite the legal framework for operationalisation of the student loan scheme. 

The committee, in view of the above, recommends that Parliament ring fences Shs 30 billion awaiting the institutionalisation of the legal framework. In line with this, much as the ministry lacked the Shs 13 billion, the committee thought that if part of this Shs 30 billion could be put aside for kick starting the loan scheme, the absence of money, which has been identified by the Ministry of Education and Sports, could be solved. When we calculated what Shs 30 billion can do, we realized that if Government sponsors a student with Shs 4 million at university, the Shs 30 billion could sponsor an additional 7,500 university students. 

Therefore, the committee requests this House to approve the proposed budget for the Ministry of Education and Sports, Vote 013, on condition that the following resources are ring fenced: the Shs 1 billion for the student loan scheme secretariat and Shs 30 billion for the State House student sponsorship.

In view of the above, the Committee on Education and Sports requests for a month to resolve the issues of the student loan scheme and also provide an exit strategy for the current State House sponsored students. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommends that the budget for the following votes be approved as follows:

Vote 013, Ministry of Education and Sports 

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 149,513,158,000. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 247,582,831,000. 
The total for Ministry of Education and Sports, Vote 013, is Shs 399,175,989,000. 
	
Vote 111, Busitema University 	

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 12,629,389,000. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 1,577,520,000. 
The total for Busitema University, Vote 111, is Shs 14,206,909,000. 
	
Vote 132, Education Service Commission 

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 5,075,551,000. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 1,949,655,000. 
The total budget for Education Service Commission is Shs 7,025,206,000. 	

Vote 136, Makerere University 	
•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 59,620,324,000. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 21,659,345,000. 
The total budget is Shs 81,279,669,000.
 	 	
Vote 137, Mbarara University of Science and Technology  

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 10,683,421,000. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 4,028,769,000. 
The total for Mbarara University of Science and Technology is Shs 14,712,190,000.
 	
Vote 138, Makerere University Business School

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 5,644,935,000. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 2,800,000,000. 
Makerere University Business School total budget is Shs 8,444,935,000.
 
Vote 139, Kyambogo University 

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 21,118,223,000. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 422,850,000.
The total is Shs 21, 541, 073,000

Vote 140, Uganda Management Institute

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 423,848,000.
•	Development expenditure, Shs 1,500,000,000. 
The total proposed budget for Uganda Management Institute is Shs 1,923,848,000. 

Vote 149, Gulu University

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 12,902,295,000.
•	Development expenditure, Shs 1,150,026,000. 
The total proposed budget for Gulu University is Shs 14,052,321,000. 

The total amount for appropriation of the education and sports ministry and universities is Shs 562,362,140,000.
 
Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg that Parliament approves this budget. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, for the very good exposition on a very long subject. You have been able to manage the time very well. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, let the records also show that these pupils from Kalongo Primary School are represented by two members of Parliament, the hon. John Amos Okot and also the hon. Judith Franca Akello. (Applause) I was reading from a text and I should have done that when I introduced them. 

MR DAUDI MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I noted that the pupils from Kalongo were taking serious note to see whether all their Members of Parliament were here. Obviously, hon. Franca Akello is seated on the other side and they could not see her. I just want to assure the young pupils that hon. Akello is only seated on the other side. If she had been seated on this side, she would have been more visible. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate is open. The rule is three minutes and we do it in 45 minutes. I will give preference to the members who have not contributed on this particular debate. I will start with the member who has his students in the House, the hon. John Amos Okot. (Laughter)

4.23
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.  Thank you so much, chairperson of the committee. I am privileged to be the first to debate on this motion. 

The first point that I want to raise is on page 24 where the committee mentions the teacher to pupil ratio. When you see the huge number, this undermines the quality of the education that we are supposed to get especially in the remote countryside compared to the centre. Because of that, we are crying because of unemployment. I think the government and the ministry should try to push the numbers up so that most of these professional teachers who are not employed can get a chance to also be employed. 

The second point is about the teachers housing. It is good that the chairperson of the committee was trying to jump some parts, but I think it is important to emphasise in this report that these teachers need shelter. These teachers need housing close to the schools so that they commit more time to the school. Most of the teachers do not stay in the school premises simply because there is no housing. I wish this had been included in this report so that the ministry builds teachers’ houses.

The other point that I want to make is about the increment of the teachers’ salaries. We were trying to do the calculations. At the beginning, Mr Speaker, if you recall, last year it was the teachers that brought up this issue of the salary increment.  Unfortunately, it has been said that this will be across the board for all civil servants. However, if the increments were to remain in the docket of teachers, I think the increment would have been beyond the 15 per cent.

I propose that we do this so that teachers who are doing donkeys work - even those ones who have arrears – are included. This would motivate and encourage them, especially those in the UPE schools. When you compare the two - the private schools and the UPE schools for the government - definitely you find the quality of education in UPE schools a bit low. Who can bring that quality up? It is the teachers who need to be motivated. 

Given the cost of living currently, an increment of something like Shs 280,000 cannot help to sustain a teacher who does not subsidise his efforts by going for agricultural activities. I would wish - (Member timed out.)

4.28
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the education committee for presenting and tabling a very wonderful report. However, I would like to note the following issues which I would like her to clarify: 

On page 25, there are various recommendations; one of them is regarding a commensurate increment in the salaries of teachers. I would be very grateful if the chairperson of the committee told this House what parameters can be used to arrive at the commensurate salary because as it is now, it remains hanging. In the past, for those who are a little bit older than us and were here in the 1960s, they tell us there used to be a unit cost; there was a basis on which Government would arrive at some of these salaries.

Secondly, on capitation grants’ disparities, the committee is recommending that a study be taken to arrive at the most feasible capitation grant. However, recently this Parliament approved money for a commission of inquiry into the Ministry of Education. I would believe that the findings of this commission would give us, among other things, the commensurate capitation grant or the unit cost that is most feasible without Government again spending more money on this.

Further to this, the Auditor-General from time to time keeps observing and making recommendations about the commensurate capitation grant that is feasible enough to be paid. I want the chairperson of the committee to tell us why she is recommending that we do another study.

Lastly, on NTR, I want to know from the committee chairperson how the committee is arriving at this NTR. I note that there are many disparities between different institutions that are planning for NTR. My basic understanding, Mr Speaker, is that most of these institutions’ NTR comes from fees paid by private students, and I notice that some institutions that have more private students are budgeting less NTR. (Member timed out.) 

4.32
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. I would like to comment on teachers’ salaries. The ministry concerned needs to enhance teachers’ salaries. 

The committee also talked about lack of supervision and I concur with them. In most schools in Uganda, there is lack of supervision. However, when I looked at the committee report, especially on pages 4 and 7 where they had a sub-heading about guidance and counselling, there was nothing mentioned about it. My suggestion is that children, especially those in primary schools, need psychosocial support in the area of guidance and counselling so that the dropout rate of the girl child can be reduced. 

As you are aware, we have senior women teachers in schools but they are not equipped with guidance and counselling techniques in order to help their students and help them remain at school. Apart from that, the senior women teachers also have a lot of lessons to teach. I appeal to the ministry to let the senior women teachers have less teaching loads so that they can concentrate on retaining the children in school and for psychosocial support. 

When pupils are in upper primary classes, puberty sets in and when it does, sometimes the pupils are not able to cope with it effectively. The girls especially, when they start going through menstrual periods, end up dropping out of school. As Members of Parliament, we have talked about the need for sanitary towels to be availed to the girls in upper primary and for the senior women teachers to be equipped so that they can help them. 

Maybe if we had counsellors in schools, the rate of striking might also drop. This happens because we at times do not listen to the adolescents. If we look at schools that have counsellors like Gayaza High School, you do not hear about strikes. Let us have school counsellors in all schools to help our children. We could ask the senior women and men teachers to do this job.
 
On page 22, you talked about fencing the university. Before we fence the university, could the ministry tell us about the report of Makerere University wall which was built three years ago and fell within a week? (Member timed out.)

4.36
MS GERTRUDE NAKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for taking time to identify the challenges facing the education system in this country. When you look at their findings, they are all aimed at improving the quality of education in the country. 

My concern goes back to the teachers’ salaries. You will excuse me because I totally disagree with this 15 per cent. Regardless of that meaningless 15 per cent, the teachers have for the last six months faced a suspicious exercise of deletion of names from the payroll. There is an outcry, especially in my district and the surrounding ones, where teachers have not been given any answer as to why their names are being deleted. This has added more disappointment to the 15 per cent increment which had already discouraged them. Could either the chairperson or the Minister of Education clarify on this? 

Another concern is about the recruitment of teachers. As we have heard, the teacher to pupil ratio is embarrassing, more so in the primary schools. Recruitment was revised in 2004 – it seems there are no researchers to update the ministry about the increasing number of pupils. 

The committee also observed that there is a need to improve physical education in schools but also highlighted that there is lack of competent physical education teachers. I disagree with that statement. The point is that physical education is not lacking because of lack of competent teachers. During training in PTCs, teachers are trained all round. What is happening is due to lack of facilitation. Morale is down; most of our teachers are now not healthy enough to teach physical education because they are 100 per cent de-motivated. So, we need to improve on their facilitation so that they become healthy enough to teach physical education well. 

On the issue of grants, they said that every pupil is given Shs 7,000 per annum, which is true, but it was left hanging. (Member timed out.) 

4.40
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson and the committee for a job well done. 

Teaching is a profession that has made all of us. We are all here today because of teachers. I would, therefore, urge Government to continue improving on the salaries of the teachers. I would like to thank the committee for the 30 per cent proposed increment, which will eventually take us to 100 per cent. However, career development should be made one of the priorities for the teachers. Those who have joined the teaching profession at low levels should be supported to develop their careers. This will definitely motivate teachers, so that we can achieve the quality education that we have longed for in this country. 

As we develop these teachers, I am aware of teachers who have upgraded from Grade II or III up to the level of university degrees but they continue to earn the meagre salaries of Grade III teachers. This de-motivates teachers. I believe salary increment will motivate our teachers and will lead to improved quality of education. Recently, we had teachers demonstrating over poor quality of education in this country; teachers are taking endeavours to develop themselves. Basically, I think the report is trying to address this.

Concerning private students in government universities, universities have limited funds and yet they have government sponsored students who seem to be overstretching the private students who are paying very high fees. I think we should increase funds to these universities so that government paid students do not deprive private students of their contributions. Why should they pay high fees? (Member timed out_)

4.43
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for coming up with such a comprehensive report. I also thank the ministry for such a good performance vis-à-vis the resources allocated to them year upon year. 

We sit in this House and lament over several issues. Kiprotich recently brought us a gold medal and we made statements on this Floor. However, this statement does not even reflect any single sentiment that was expressed by members in this House. The necessary resources for the high altitude training centre are not reflected here. 

I would like to congratulate the committee on the recommendation of 30 per cent increment on remuneration of teachers. This is in cognisance of the fact that Government has recommended 15 per cent increment. My prayer is that the Minister of Finance concedes and looks for this money so that the teachers are given the little to go on as we look for more resources.

On page 35 of the report, when you look at the staffing of universities, Busitema is staffed at only 28 per cent while the others are at 38 and 30 per cent. That means that we do not have requisite teaching staff in these universities. Now, if we do not have enough and we expect the graduates to come and help us move to the next stage, it leaves a lot to be desired. Actually, it sends shivers down my spine. These staffing numbers are equally reflected at all the institutions of learning; for example, the number of teachers available in the primary schools within my municipality is insufficient. We have been writing for three years now in a row that we need to be allowed to recruit more teachers but there was a ban on recruitment. I am glad that the ban has been lifted and I hope that these staffing gaps can be filled.

This report has left out the issue of land grabbing from learning institutions. My former school, Kitante Primary School, last month was in the newspapers because part of its land was taken and now others want to take the rest of it. In Tororo, Oguti Primary School playing field was allocated to investors and we lost that land. I am glad that this report calls for the surveying of the land; let it be compulsory so that these institutions have their titles. We have heard of land grabbing in all institutions of learning. Recently, there was something about Kyambogo University in the newspapers. I would like to urge the Ministry to take this report seriously and put in place titles for these institutions. (Member timed out.)

4.47
MR YOKASI BWAMBALE-BIHANDE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for this brilliant report, although I am worried. Why am I worried? The committee has observed a lot of shortcomings in the ministry. If you look at the observations, everything is negative - “The committee observed Government’s late remittances… The committee observed that funds allocated to the sector are not commensurate… The committee further observed reluctance…” Everything is negative. I am really worried, Mr Speaker.

One African president once said that education in his country was like a spare tyre; unless the main tyre gets a puncture, you will not even notice that you are carrying a spare tyre. That was the late Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire. When I look at these observations, I am worried that we are taking education as a spare tyre. 

That aside, I am worried about the seed secondary schools. There has not been any mention of them in this document. The intention of calling these schools “seed secondary schools” was because at some point, they would germinate and sprout. Unfortunately, they are not going to germinate. Emphasis was put on science education but when you visit all these seed secondary schools, what they call laboratories are actually stores for reagents and chemicals. I have two in my district; they do not have a laboratory but stores where chemicals are kept. Even if you raise the salaries of science teachers but have not equipped them to teach sciences, you will just be wasting a lot of time. I call upon Government to put emphasis on construction and equipping these laboratories if we want to move forward with sciences.

The other issue concerns the policy passed by Government of having a secondary school in each sub-country. Unfortunately, we still have many sub-counties without secondary schools. I come from an area with a very rough terrain that walking from one sub-county to another can take at least two to three hours. You will find that if there is a secondary school shared by three sub-counties, the time put in by the students to sit in class is less than eight hours a day because most of the time is spent on walking to school. So Government should go ahead and implement this policy. (Member timed out.)

4.51
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am looking at page 25 of this report, bullet 7, where USE allots Shs 41,000 per student. When you look at this figure, it is very small; it cannot even sustain a student for one month let alone buy laboratory equipment, stationery and other requirements for the student. Some schools try to add some money for the students through PTA so that at least they can learn better. However, when they do so, students run to the RDC and then the RDC writes to the headmaster and the headmaster is threatened. So, you find that even parents who are willing to contribute to this Shs 41,000 are also being demoralised.

I would have loved the committee to critically look into this problem in secondary schools. Some secondary schools have even pulled out of USE because of this problem - the government is forcing them and saying that the Shs 41,000 should only cater for the students and the parents should not add any extra money. If you look at other schools, those that are performing well, even Government schools, they are charging over Shs 900,000. So by simple arithmetic, I would have loved the committee to recommend a certain figure and not to leave it hanging by talking of inflation. Give us a figure like Shs 200,000 for a USE student in the budget.

When you go to bullet 28, it refers to an interim measure of recruiting and replacing vacant posts in the secondary schools. The committee has not actually given us the guidelines of what a headmaster can do when there is a ban on recruiting teachers. We all know that in most schools, science teachers especially are not actually available. You find a headmaster trying to recruit a science teacher from another school so that he or she can get some science subjects taught in his or her school. So these head teachers down there are actually suffering. I would challenge the education ministry - You know these things are happening there but you do not even have the means and courtesy to try and solve these problems. Parents there are actually getting problems with the education system and we should be able to see that these education problems are solved.

When you go to page 25, you are aware that a petition was brought to this august House about the increment of teachers’ salaries. At that time, even 15 per cent had already been earmarked to increase their salary. The committee has come up with only 30 per cent and those teachers wanted 100 per cent. At least you should give them 50 per cent if you - (Member timed out.)

4.59
MR GEOFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the criteria of selecting secondary schools. For us who represent rural areas, we have a problem; you cannot find someone giving land to Government to establish a secondary school and yet in urban areas, you find a lot of private schools which have minimum standards for selection being considered. I suggest that the government comes in to identify land for these poor peasants to have secondary schools. The same applies to technical schools. 

When you look at the syllabus of secondary schools, people leave school when they are half-baked because they have no skills of agriculture or practical work. The same applies to primary schools; when you look at the syllabus, it does not encourage gardening. Children are given punishments to go and dig and after that, they take digging as a punishment. So, I would like the ministry to put emphasis on practical work especially skills. 

When you look at schools in rural areas like Kassanda North, you find there are no chairs. The classes are not even constructed. There are no latrines. Maybe because of corruption, the latrines are given to people who do not have the spirit of education and they just carry out poor construction and you find them collapsing.

So I would like to appeal to the government to consider rural areas when you are establishing secondary schools. The policy is good, that each sub-county should have a secondary school, but when you go to rural areas, you cannot find people who have enough land to give it to the government. All the land is used for farming.

Mr Speaker, you are aware that teachers are doing more work than mere servants; they do parental work. They should be given some little money. However, when you come to secondary schools, for example, they are becoming selective and saying “we consider sciences first”. These people also do the same work they do when they are serving in education. Personally, I do not want to identify people taking different subjects -(Member timed out.)   

4.59
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for a job well done. 

It seems this report is full of lamentation. I want to start by looking at page 8 where they are talking of assessment and technical support for health workers and colleges. I thought this is Ministry of Education; why are they giving assessment and technical support for health workers? I want to find that out.

If you go to page 26, the committee further observed that the 30 per cent increment was for science teachers. I am glad they mentioned that it is very discriminatory; for instance, in my district, Maracha, a number of schools do not have science teachers and yet we are emphasising that children should be encouraged to study sciences. It seems there is a deliberate move to bar Maracha from producing doctors and engineers. (Laughter) I am trying to encourage the rural schools to look for teachers, for whom I am looking for sponsorship, so that they can teach in these schools. 

On page 33, they are encouraging the minister to sign the Act for National Council of Sports. I have always found this a repetition - the job done by Ministry of Education and the job done by the National Council of Sports. I do not know why these two are working together. We had this problem in London with the sports people not being looked after very well. If it was a private organisation, we would be able to discipline them but now here is our whole ministry which was not looking after these people very well. They need to consider that seriously too.

On page 35, they are making recommendations for recruitment of teachers. In Maracha, it is very pathetic; the whole district does not have the adequate number of teachers for these schools. I do not know why they are calling these schools part of the schools in Uganda here. We do not have teachers. 

I have not seen something about government aided schools. There is one of the sub-counties which did not have a government secondary school. The community organised themselves to put up a secondary school and since 2005, I have been pestering the Ministry of Education to take up this school because the community cannot afford it anymore. I do not know whether the money is not there, but I hope during this financial year they will consider taking up at least one school in this sub-county because we need those children also to be educated. Please, this is my sincere submission for Maracha District. Thank you very much.

5.03
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to speak on this important subject. First of all, I also wish to thank the committee for the work they have done. The education ministry and the activities covered are very wide and, therefore, it is not very easy to cover all them. 

Over the weekend, I met some teachers in my constituency in Kiboga and they had a complaint. They were recruited in the last financial year, about six months ago, and they told me that up to now, they have not made it to the payroll. The teacher I was speaking to told me frankly that he was almost starving to death and basically, he was just living on the mercy of other people.

I also note the same problem when teachers and other civil servants are transferred, but especially teachers, from one station to another. Somehow, they are dropped from the payroll and it takes time and effort to be put back, sometimes up to four months. During that time, they are suffering and that also affects their performance. I would like to request the Ministry of Education together with the ministry concerned, the Ministry of Public Service or whoever is concerned with the payroll, to streamline these procedures for transfer and accessing the payroll for the new civil servants.

In Kiboga District, there are many government schools which were given only four classroom blocks. At the moment, some of these schools are teaching up to seven streams but they only have four classrooms. I really request Government to put more money into upgrading these schools so that they are given more structures. 

In addition, I notice that the committee pointed out so many issues in the education sector. My take on this is that it seems that the government is over stretching funds. The funds available have been spread out thinly to support so many projects, to support so many pupils and so many things. So, my advice or take on this would be that it is time for the government to try and match the capacity of the government to supply to the country’s population. 

In my view, maybe the government also needs to look at supporting population control programmes so that the funds or the resources we have as a country are able to match the demands on them. What I see in the education sector is that the resources the government has do not match the demand on them. (Member timed out_)

5.06
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for a good report. I have taken time off and observed that in the sector reports that we have so far passed in this august House, most of the unfunded areas are core areas that drive service delivery. I am wondering if this is an intended design by the Ministry of Finance to keep the areas for service delivery unfunded and to deny Government, which they are part of, to deliver services to those that they are intended for. 

When we go to page 23, unfunded vote priorities for financial year 2012/2013, there is school monitoring and inspection. In the report, the committee has made several observations and several recommendations urging Government to increase funding. On page 24, for example, the committee report says, “The committee recommends that government enforces inspection. Government should also ensure that the inspection department is adequately funded.” But they have already observed that it is under the priorities that are unfunded. Now, what do they mean by “adequately” when they have not even thought about them? This is where I think that the Ministry of Finance or maybe the committee should have reallocated within the same budget to fund these areas which are very crucial and beneficial in service delivery.

I would have been happy to see the committee come out strongly on the issue of hard-to-reach areas. Year in, year out, this august House has recommended that affirmative action should be taken to ensure that those teachers in hard-to-reach areas are motivated and they get incentives. We held a workshop with the Ministry of Education Minister and the technocrats. We told them there is no way you can keep the teachers in Ssembabule, Rwebitakuli, and you anticipate that they will remain there when they are not funded. That is the reason you are seeing so many ghost teachers whose names are reflected twice; they are in an urban school and a rural school. I would have been happy to see the committee come out strongly on this issue. I am perturbed. 

We have raised a lot of concerns about vulnerable people and now in this sector, we are talking about the vulnerable children, the children with disabilities, and their environmental aspects in the schools, their dropout rate and the girl-child dropout rate. I do not see anything strongly referring to the facilities to improve the special needs programme to ensure that in each school, it is mandatory to have restrooms that fit the environment of these vulnerable kids of ours. I would have been happy to see some money allocated to this programme in every school for vulnerable kids. 

The girls are dropping out because of failure to have sanitation. We have talked about this in this Parliament, and Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) came up and made recommendations. I am, therefore, perturbed to see that this report did not say something about this. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery today we are honoured to have pupils of Moyok Bright Primary School located in Kween County, Kween District. They are represented by hon. Chekwel Lydia and hon. Chemaswet Kisos. You are welcome. (Applause)

5.12
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support this motion and make some observations.  The first is a question. I was very happy when I started looking at the list of universities until I realised that the university in West Nile was not listed here. I have discovered that the reason it does not appear here is because Cabinet has not okayed its establishment. The ministry has not brought any resolution to Parliament to establish the university. I am asking, why? If possible, can they bring that resolution so that we approve that university and it operates like any other university in the country? 

The teacher to pupil/student ratio is very unfair. I support the recommendation which suggests that teachers should be recruited, but I want to emphasise recruitment of science teachers. Last term, I had two strikes in Zombo District at St Aloysius College Nyapea and Jangokoro School. One of the major reasons for the strikes was that there were no science teachers. The whole of St Alyosius College Nyapea has only one chemistry teacher for S.6. Now, what type of education are you giving to a student, to a son, to a daughter whom you would like to be somebody in future? I know the government emphasises sciences, so we would like to encourage the ministry to please give us science teachers in our schools so that our children can become something. 

I support the committee recommendation for a study to scientifically establish the unit cost of delivering education per child. Honestly, what can Shs 7,000 per pupil per term, Shs 41,000 for secondary education per term, Shs 47,000 for students in private schools per year do? It cannot do anything. I support this study and wish it could be done as soon as tomorrow, so that we know whether the government cannot give all this money which amounts to the cost of educating a child, so that we can do cost-sharing. We have to be bold about it because this pronouncement has made parents very lazy. Parents think the government has taken up all costs of education yet there are problems. Even when schools, parents or even teachers try to put a mere Shs 1,000 for something, they cannot. It becomes a case and they run to us, Members of Parliament, to help even with that Shs 1,000.  (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are beginning to draw to a close and I am going to take Kanungu, Nakapiripirit, Kilak County and Buvuma District and I will go to the middle. We have gone beyond the 45 minutes. We have actually done one hour and 20 minutes because of the importance of this subject. 

5.15
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. The observations the committee made are paramount. I would like to say something about the inspection. You realise that most of our districts have only one inspector of schools and the district has many schools, and maybe the means of transport are not always very easy. So, this inspector is overwhelmed with work. I suggest, if possible, that the government employs at least two or three more inspectors in a district. Maybe they can manage to inspect these schools effectively and bring them to a certain level. It is a great challenge, especially in my district, Kanungu. The fact that it is very mountainous, you find moving in one sub-county to inspect all the schools impossible. The government could help us on that issue in order to improve our primary and secondary education respectively.

Also, on page 25, the committee observed poor feeding in these primary schools. It is a problem. In the meantime, the parents should do something but there is a great challenge in our homes; poverty is doing a great job. People are digging but I do not know what the Ministry of Agriculture is doing about this. Our extension workers are no longer very effective the way I used to see them those days. The way they are digging and harvesting has really changed. I believe if the ministry teaches our people about modern methods of farming, maybe many homes would have food and this food would help the parents have enough to give to the children when they are going to school. This would solve the feeding problem.
 
There is also a complaint by an honourable colleague about hard-to-reach allowance. I want to add that there are some town councils which have been created recently, but those town councils are still in rural areas. Though they are town councils, the quality of those town councils is lacking. The hard-to-reach areas allowance for those teachers was removed. I pray to the ministry and the government that in the meantime they maintain that hard-to-reach allowance because although those town councils have been created, the areas have remained the same; everything has remained the same. There is nothing big so far which has been added. (Member timed out)

5.20
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for having given a very commendable report. However, I have some observations. One is on the number of tutors in the colleges. I used to be a tutor in Moroto PTC and I represent Moroto. Since that time, the tutors are still very few. This has got an impact on the students, especially during the time for school practice, which has also been highlighted in this report. During the time for school practice, these tutors supervise students for the whole day and if there are many students, it is very hard to supervise. 

This leads me to the point that the time for school practice has been reduced, which has a very negative impact on the teachers when they go out to teach. That is why if you can observe clearly, these days the teachers in primary schools sometimes even fail to teach these pupils in English. You find a teacher saying “she” instead of “he”. Because of this, I advocate that the government tries to give funds, which the committee has recommended.

The other observation is the issue of inspection and supervision at all levels. If the schools are not supervised, there will always be problems. Sometimes when the pupils go to school, they are asked to pay extra money because there is no supervision and nobody follows it up. So, there is a need for the education sector to be supported in terms of supervision. 

On remittance of funds, the USE funds are not remitted timely. This also has got a negative consequence and it leads to poor results. These children attend classes daily and there is need to support them. 

The other issue is support to these so called seed schools. I have a seed school in my constituency in Moroto District and this seed school has no qualified teachers; those who are there are S.4 leavers. That is why a child from upcountry cannot come and compete with children from these reputable schools in the city. That is why our children continue to be watchmen, guards and do other low cadre jobs; there is no quality in our education. The people who are teaching these pupils are not qualified. (Member timed out.)

5.24
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, this is my maiden speech as a Cabinet Minister – (Laughter) – a shadow minister. I appreciate the committee for the wonderful recommendations. 

Before I go on, I would like some information from the Minister of Finance and the chairperson of the committee. Last year, the social services committee made a recommendation, which was discussed in this august House, that the money for schools be released on termly basis. Up to now, the Ministry of Finance continues to release the money for USE schools on quarterly basis. To our dismay, since this year started schools have only got the UPE funds this month, during the holidays, when the children were no longer in school. That is why last term most schools were not running effectively. I would like to get clarification on that from the minister. 

Secondly, Madam Chairperson, – (Interjections) – your recommendation was very clear. You made a recommendation that teachers’ salaries be increased by 100 per cent in the medium term. I do not know what you mean by the medium term. Teachers were demonstrating, going on strike, for salary increment. Last year, the social services committee recommended for a minimum of 30 per cent and Government is talking of 15 per cent! So, I seek clarification on that from you, Madam Chair of the committee. 

Another clarification I want to seek is about Northern Uganda. In Acholi sub-region, we have over 7,000 children that are affected with the nodding disease and are no longer going to school. What plan does the Ministry of Education have for these children? Some have stayed home for two or three years without going to school.

Madam Chair –(Interjections)- When I talk of Madam Chair, it means I am addressing the chairperson – (Interjections) – Sorry. Okay, through the Speaker. Thank you so much. If you look at the capitation grant, especially for USE schools, it was agreed in 2007 that each pupil will get Shs 47,000. The private schools, under partnership with Government, were raising complaints that the prices of the commodities have changed and Government should increase the capitation grant. Up to now, those schools have never received any answer from the ministry. I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Finance to explain this briefly. The government is giving only Shs 7,000 for each primary school pupil for each year. Sincerely, that is being unfair. For primary schools, it was agreed that since the UPE programme started around 1996, we should make adjustments for our schools to run effectively.

Finally, there is a notion going around that Government is giving free education. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my due apologies. I thought the honourable member had just decided to sit in front; I had not known that he had become a shadow minister. (Laughter) Congratulations, honourable member. 

5.28
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chair for her presentation but I also have a few highlights. 

One, I would be very happy if she gave a bigger percentage to laboratories in different schools, since it is a Government policy that science subjects should now be compulsory. How do you expect students to pass without a laboratory? I would expect a bigger budget for that in all schools in Uganda.

Secondly, I have not heard any vote for coding of schools, primary and secondary. I would wish that in every financial year, we have more schools receiving government support. Since I have not seen it, what is the plan of the ministry? 

I also challenge the Ministry of Education that if it wants to serve this country, let it look at the poor people of Uganda. If a school is to be aided by Government and parents have laboured to give land, according to their guidelines now parents must also process the title. Is that fair for Ugandans? Processing a land title requires money. If they do not have money to pay for their children’s fees, how can they pay to process a land title? I appeal to the ministers of finance and Government at large to be fair on this matter. 

That is partly why we have the teacher to pupil ratio high. One school in a sub-country serves about four sub-counties and the population becomes big. We should put up a reasonable number of government aided schools to eliminate congestion in schools. This also applies to my constituency in Buvuma. You find only one secondary school with O’Level in a whole district. Is this the Uganda we want to live in? I want to urge the ministry and Government at large to balance schools because education is for all of us and we all need it. Let us have regional balance in terms of districts and sub-counties. 

I would also be very happy if the committee came up with a recommendation to review the policy of education. How can you say that there is no value for money whenever a child repeats a class? We have too many people in the ministry and even in Government who are running private schools but if a child is unable to go to the next class, that child is advised to repeat. But this automatic promotion in pursuit of value for money shows that there is nothing we are doing – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was supposed to be the last contribution. We have taken one hour and 30 minutes on this debate. I am going to use my prerogative for as long as you agree with me that we reduce the time to two minutes. So, if you agree that we reduce the time to two minutes, I will allow the members from Padyere County, Kalungu County East, Serere County, Busia Municipality, Kooki County and Nyabushozi only. 

5.32
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, thank you so much and I will be very quick –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two minutes. 

MR ANYWARACH: Two minutes are really short. I am very grateful to the committee for their report. Last Sunday, I attended a church service where a pastor was preaching that he hates married men who time and again keep notebooks in their pockets for all the wrongs that their wives have committed. For any wrong, he notes down the date and what you have done and so on. I think we should not proceed on that kind of precedence. However, as we see from the report, my areas of concern are:

One, we have Muni University that has never been reflected in these reports. Our Government committed itself that in 2012/2013 Muni University would be taking off. Prof. Christine is even already in the acting position of the Vice-Chancellor.

Two, I thought that some reports should have really been about what you call the thematic curriculum in primary schools. That is the most difficult curriculum. In 1975/76, Amin thought it wise and changed from the thematic curriculum to a general curriculum, but later on we thought it wise to go back to the thematic one. The problem is where a school is established in an area that has a multiplicity of tribes, which language should be used as the local language for teaching the children up to P.4 as required by the thematic curriculum? That is why our schools are not performing very well. 

Three, standards of secondary schools are dropping. There are some secondary schools like Nyapea College where the standards are dropping. What is Government doing as a matter of urgency to raise the standards of these schools that are falling to the gallows?

Finally, there are secondary schools in which only a few teachers who are appointed access the payroll. Erusi Senior Secondary School in my constituency is a victim. You find a teacher is appointed and he is coming from Teso and so on and he only uses the school in order to access the payroll and later on, he decides to go to another school. When you complain to the ministry, you find the ministry officials have connived with the teachers in endorsing the transfer letter that the teacher writes. That is – (Member timed out.)

5.35
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief. I want to thank the chairperson for the extensive work that has been done in the committee. 

I also want to comment on BTVET. I realise that on page 4, achievements were listed and Government paid capitation grant for a total of about 10,000 students. You realise that at that speed, we may never reach where we want to reach if we want to vocationalise our schools. I want to suggest that the policy be opened for these secondary schools that can afford to include vocational education and technical training. There are already some schools that are doing it on their own, and I also think there are parents who can afford to pay for it in secondary schools.

Secondly, on page 28, concerning teachers’ salaries, it is not very clear and I need clarification from the chairperson. What message do we go with in regard to the increment of salaries? Is it 30 per cent, 15 per cent or six per cent? There are varying figures and therefore we do not understand it. (Member timed out.)

5.37
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and her team for the work that they have done. 

I have issues to raise on the matter of salaries and general remuneration of the teachers. There must be a big problem in the Ministry of Education. Apart from just having low pay for the teachers, there are also many teachers who are not accessing their salaries. Recently, I was meeting with teachers who were complaining that they have taken over one year without receiving their salaries. In this dotcom era, you fail to understand why the ministry is failing to handle this payroll. I think that there is something wrong somewhere and the Ministry of Education should liaise with the Ministry of Public Service and make sure that we do not see these problems again. It is a meagre pay and on top of that, for the teachers to go without salaries for one year and six months is so bad.

We have another problem with the issue of midday or lunchtime meals in many schools. I am happy that the committee gave a recommendation of at least a meal if we are to realise good education standards. However, we have had experiences where political interference, especially from the highest office of the Presidency, has become a problem when local governments have made by-laws to at least force the parents to contribute to the lunch for their children. They are the ones who produced these children but the President comes to your area and says, “Who tells you that my parents should pay money for lunch?” He claims pupils should pack lunch. In my home area, if you mingle atapa in the morning plus emagira, you cannot keep it up to lunch time for anybody to eat. The best way is for the parents to contribute some money such that there is lunch for the children, if we are to see better results. This political interference should be minimised. 

There is a land bonanza in this country that is affecting these primary and secondary schools and government institutions of learning. It is not coming from anybody but the ministers and the President, and I think it must stop. Let us leave the schools and institutions to have these pieces of land. Today, we are looking for land and it not easy to get land and yet we have land in these institutions and we feel we should continue expanding education. (Members timed out.)    

5.40
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament. I want to take this opportunity to thank the entire committee which prepared this report. Some members are saying that the committee is lamenting but it is not. I feel that they are saying exactly what is on the ground. The recommendations that they are making are what is supposed to be done by Government.

The first is about the increment of teachers’ salaries. They recommended 30 per cent but the teachers had wanted 100 per cent. By the way, 30 per cent of Shs 200,000 is only Shs 60,000. So what can an increment of Shs 60,000 do? It is really nothing. We are talking of percentages but in real figures, we should look at that amount. Honestly, if it is 100 per cent, then it is only Shs 400,000 a month. They have children who go to the same schools like ours, their problems are the same, we go to the same markets for food and everything is the same. Honestly, I recommend 100 per cent increment. 

Mr Speaker, I agree with the committee that Government should lift the ban on recruitment. We have UPE and so many students are going up to secondary school and yet we do not have teachers. In Busia Municipality, I have only one secondary school, that is, Busia Senior Secondary School. Busia Senior Secondary School has got only three teachers for HSC, who are arts teachers. One teaches divinity and economics and the other teaches history and economics. So, in a nutshell, it is divinity, economics and history that the students there study. I have only one science teacher teaching biology and chemistry. I do not have any teacher teaching physics. Now, you can imagine that. It is really terrible. 

It is good that Government lifts the ban and we recruit more teachers. That school is supposed to have 19 teachers for A’level but there are only three; can you imagine that? In lower secondary, there are supposed to be 63 teachers but I have only 32. The classroom to pupil ratio is one to 150. Now, how are we going to – (Member timed out.)  

5.43
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for the good report. However, I have some few issues to seek clarification on. 

Firstly, I need to be clarified on World Teachers’ Day. Why is it that the government is not gazetting this day? I believe that if this day is gazetted, it would provide a platform for teachers to share challenges and perhaps good practices and we would do away with a lot of riots and demonstrations that we are experiencing in Uganda. 

Secondly, I also need to be clarified as to why Grade V teachers who upgrade to degree level do not get any salary increment. Is it because we are looking at a degree as something that adds no value to teaching standards? I need to be clarified on that.

Thirdly, I would want to talk about motivation of teachers. Sincerely speaking, our teachers are unhappy. Often times, I try to interact with some teachers in my constituency and some of them tell me that they go to class just for the sake of going there. Honourable colleagues, I want us to recall that when these teachers are unhappy, they will not do any work in class. There is a saying that “telling is not teaching and listening is not learning.” So, we need to pay these teachers so that they can do a very good job for our pupils. When we have poor UPE, we are likely to have poor USE. This also leads to poor post-secondary education, poor university education and poor human resource. So, we need to pay our teachers very well so that we can have a very good human resource.

Lastly, I want to comment on the government policy that emphasises that each sub-county must have a government aided secondary school. In my constituency, I have one community secondary school called Kacheera High School. This school has been there for the last 15 years. However, to my dismay, there are sub-counties which have more than two secondary schools which are government aided. The ministry should have a plan whereby – (Member timed out.)

5.46
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to draw your attention to page 23 of the report and I want to thank the committee for a wonderful job done. 

I am perturbed about the unfunded vote priorities for the financial year 2012/2013. School monitoring and inspection; if schools are not inspected and are not monitored, how do we expect to get results? This is very absurd. You remember the importance of inspectors in our old days. Inspectors were respected. You would see a teacher with his preparation book and the inspector would come and sit behind the class, noting every step the teacher takes. That is why education was more effective.

Secondly, teacher recruitment at secondary school level was another unfunded priority. If there are no teachers being recruited, how do we expect to proceed, Mr Speaker?

Education and sports management inspection is very important. We recently saw the honour and glory that Kiprotich brought to this country. If that activity is not funded, then how do you expect to proceed in order to get more Kiprotichs and more medals?

On USE, teachers’ houses construction; where do you expect teachers to sleep in order to prepare for the next class? In my constituency, we do not have houses for teachers. I visited Buhweju, my colleague can bear me witness, it is the same situation and I am sure it is the same situation everywhere. The Ministry of Finance and that of education should do something about this.  

The other unfunded priority is secondary school teachers’ wages and services. If we want to motivate teachers and get quality education, even for government schools, let us find some commensurate wages so that these teachers are paid and motivated to feel that they are respected for the services they render to our children in this country. 

Finally, lack of proper housing and lack of inspection incapacitates education. I would call upon the ministry concerned to find funds, even if it means reallocation, so that we address this problem. 

5.49
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also join my colleagues to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. I have observed in this report that they did not talk about early childhood education, which is very important in this country. This is one of the reasons why primary pupils lose hope in education and why we have high dropout rates in schools.

Secondly, on observation 7, Government pays Shs 7,000 per pupil per year at primary level and for secondary level, between Shs 41,000 and Shs 47,000 per student per term. What is the logic behind this and yet we need a firm foundation for education in this country? When you are constructing a house, you need a firm foundation on which to construct an excellent house. It is in primary school that the foundation of education is built, why do you remit less money to these schools?

I have heard nothing about workshops, Continuous Professional Development (CPD) or refresher courses for teachers and yet there has been an introduction of new approaches to teaching, like the thematic approach. These new approaches are not favourable to our teachers and pupils.

On the recommendations, I also thank the committee for the work well done and I pray that this report be adopted. Thank you.

5.51
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION (Ms Franca Akello): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think this is the reason I do not sit on the Frontbench. It is because of this facility. (Laughter) It is too short for me, so the other one is more favourable. 

I would like to start by thanking the Ninth Parliament very much for according this committee a status of its own. When it was under the Committee on Social Services, it was not receiving the attention it required. So I thank each and every member of this House who finally supported the bid for having this committee stand on its own.

I also want to thank the chairperson and her members for work well done. You have really done a very good job. My only problem is that we make very good recommendations in this House - I remember in the last financial year, we made very good recommendations especially on the plight of the teachers regarding their welfare and remuneration. The committee, together with myself as the shadow minister, had recommended for at least a 50 per cent increment of the salaries of teachers, but it seems nothing is done. 

I really want to thank God that the Minister of Finance is here. She might have to explain why the Ministry of Education is proposing a 10 to 15 per cent increment and not a 30 per cent increase like the committee is proposing. On this note, therefore, I would like to say that even the 30 per cent that the committee is proposing is not yet adequate although they alluded to the fact that in the medium term, it will be increased.

I want to draw the attention of the House to the specific votes. When you look at the vote allocations, ranging from the ministry headquarters to the specific universities and other institutions, you realise that we tend to allocate much money to the recurrent budget. For Busitema University, for example, we are giving Shs 12 billion to recurrent and only Shs 1.5 billion to development. For the other universities like Makerere University, we are giving Shs 21 billion to development vis-à-vis Shs 59 billion for recurrent, and so on. This indicates that we are committed to recruiting and paying a lot of staff usually almost to do nothing. 

When you look at the money we allocate for development, it does not indicate that we are committed to develop the education sector. I want to request that this Parliament, and especially the Minister of Finance, looks at this as a serious matter so that we increase funding for development.

Mr Speaker, allow me to go to the specifics. I know I do not have enough time to talk about the specific issues but to begin with, I want to emphasise the importance of inspection and supervision. If you look at the money we allocate to supervision and inspection, even salaries of inspectors of schools are much lower than salaries of head teachers, for example. How do you expect the head teacher to respect an inspector of schools who oversees the school? Assuming I am the head teacher and the inspector of schools comes to supervise, how do you expect me to respect that inspector of schools when I earn more than that inspector? We need to improve on the funding for inspection, not only to facilitate them but also the remuneration and the motivation that we give them.

On capitation grant, this has been a repetition. I remember in the last financial year, this Parliament pronounced itself and suggested that it is pushed from Shs 7,000 per year for primary to at least a minimum of Shs 10,000. (Member timed out_) 

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. First and foremost, I want to appreciate the committee for its good observations and recommendations. Indeed what I am going to do is to make some responses to my colleagues’ contributions and a few clarifications on the report.

I will start with the teachers’ houses. The Ministry of Education of course recognises, seriously, the need for teachers’ houses as a measure to reduce absenteeism and for motivating them. The only snag that we have is funds. However, the ministry is continuing to allocate some funds mainly to cater for the hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay areas. As we continue getting more revenue, this entire item is on our minds, and it is also in the NRM manifesto that we have to construct houses for the teachers. We shall continue with that even beyond 2020.

An issue has been raised about land grabbing. Indeed, it is hurting us. I visited Soroti, Tororo, Mbale, and Kampala is worse. They are mostly targeting land that belongs to sports sites. If you look at the people concerned, there are of two types, that is, the local government and the land commission. We are trying our best to see that for the land that belongs to our ministry, we access the land titles and we are in charge of them. Otherwise, as per the current situation, the land commission will do something without your notice and the local government will sit there and allocate land the way they want.

An issue has been raised about construction of laboratories and equipping them. Indeed, I agree with the member who raised this point and I would like to clarify. A number of interventions have been implemented; for example, all contributions under African Development Bank and World Bank go to construction of labs, which come with the package of equipping and providing all the science equipment. This is now what is taking place because you cannot talk about having a science teacher without the necessary equipment in place -(Ms Franca Akello rose_)- I do not know if they will add more time. I will take it at the end after exhausting my five minutes. I will note it.

Members talked about streamlining the transfers and the teachers appearing on the payroll. This is a very serious matter. Personally, I participated in researching about it and it has contributed to ghost teachers. Indeed, it is something that we are putting emphasis on because it does not stop there; even some of those who are dead or absconded remain on the payroll. These are some of the factors that we need to look into very seriously. 

Mr Speaker, I am trying to rush so that I utilise the five minutes. On the release of capitation grants, the ministry has agreed with the Ministry of Finance that these funds should be released on termly basis instead of the quarterly basis so that funds are received in a timely manner. This is what we have agreed with the Ministry of Finance and I hope it will be maintained accordingly.

On the issue of establishment of schools per sub-county as was raised by my colleague there, it is the ministry’s desire but the problem is funding. The will is there and we shall reach there.

Mr Speaker, let me quickly turn to the report. When you look at page 26, as I said earlier, the recommendations and observations are good but an issue has been raised by the committee: “The committee observed that contrary to the Public Service Negotiation and Dispute Machinery, teachers have been denied the right to negotiate for their remunerations.” The committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development takes charge. What is remaining here is the role of the Ministry of Public Service to come with an agreeable CBA so that teachers can start negotiating for their own salary. Otherwise, in as far as the recognition agreements are concerned they were signed some time back. 

On page 33, the committee observed the lack of an updated enabling Act to guide the National Council of Sports and widen their mandate. I am glad to tell you that a Cabinet memo on draft principles for the new Bill has been developed and discussed by top management and is about to be tabled before Cabinet. (Member timed out.) 

6.03
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope the clock is just starting to tick now. We join the other members in appreciating the committee’s report and the recommendations therein. We shall keenly study the recommendations to see how to address them within our constrained framework. 

Clearly, the financial implications of the recommendations of this sector, if put together with all the other sectors that we have been involved with, are way beyond our current means. So, this gives additional impetus to our ministry’s priority to grow the cake. While we talk about how to allocate the existing cake, we want to see how to grow the cake. 

I have no doubt that there is consensus between the Executive and Parliament on this matter, that the fastest way to get our resources up is by focusing expenditure on the productive areas to make sure that at this time next year, we will have more money to spend in education. However, as we speak, the education sector already commands the biggest share of this budget. It commands over 15 per cent of the budget, at par with works and above energy, which is at 13 per cent. So, even though the budget is infrastructure focused, education is still the highest spending sector. We, therefore, need to work more with the sector to ensure that there is increased efficiency in the use of existing resources.

For recruitment, whether there is a general ban on the recruitment in order to free resources for salary enhancement, recruitment on a replacement basis is allowed. For inspectorate, our view is that this is a very important function and the ministry, within its limited constraints, has provided Shs 2.4 billion for this purpose in financial year 2012/2013. We look forward to the Ministry of Education and Sports to give more priority to this activity in the coming years through allocating additional resources through its MTEF.

Mr Speaker, there are a few errors in the budget allocation on pages 42 and 43. Under vote 013, the report has omitted gross taxes of about Shs 2,080,000,000. The correct total for development expenditure is, therefore, Shs 240,662,831,000. 

Under Vote 136, Makerere University, the report has omitted external financing of Shs 14,366,545,000. The correct total for development expenditure, therefore, under this vote is Shs 36,025,890,000. 

On page 35 of the report, there is a recommendation to go up to 50 per cent staffing levels for public universities. While we appreciate the committee’s recommendations, there is need to optimise the utilisation of internally generated funds of the universities, given the budget constraints. This will help in supplementing funds from Government. 

Page 27, late release of capitation grants; starting from last year, these funds are remitted directly to school accounts and on a termly basis as said by my colleague. So, where there is a school that is receiving its grants late, it means we have not got their proper account numbers and we ask them to rectify this. On page 28, items 9 and 10, we would like these to be dealt with by our colleague from the Ministry of Public Service.
 
On page 29, the unit cost for PTCs; we shall take up this matter with the Ministry of Education and Sports to examine the financial implications. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Madam Chair, you have one minute.

6.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Sylvia Ssinabulya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable members, for giving support to this committee. I must note that a number of issues which members have raised were captured in the report but we did not have sufficient time to cover them – you only gave us 15 minutes. So, I request members to read the report and the policy statement. Most of their concerns are catered for in those documents.

The most important requests that this committee made are to do with the State House Loan Scheme, the Shs 30 billion that had been shifted to the Ministry of Education and Sports. The committee strongly requests that this money should be ring fenced. The committee, given time, after passing this budget will work with the Ministry of Education and Sports to see how this money can be more efficiently utilised.  

I am glad the minister has said that the ministry should look at efficient ways of utilising the available resources. We strongly stand by our recommendation that this Shs 30 billion can cater for 7,500 students if we are to pay Shs 4 million for each student per annum at university. Therefore, the ministry should not talk about lacking funds to kick-start the students’ loan scheme when this money is available. 

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank members of my committee for the work done. I beg to report and move that the report be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chair, would you like to lay a copy of the report on the Table. 

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the report on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it as such. Honourable members, the question is that the report of the parliamentary Committee on Education and Sports on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2012/13 be adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for sitting up to this time. Tomorrow, we should start on time. When we start on time, you have more time to engage in the debate but when we start late, we have less time to engage in the debate. So, the earlier we come, the more time we shall be allotting to the speakers. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.11 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 29 August 2012 at 10.00 a.m.) 
