

Tuesday, 14 August 2018

Parliament met at 2.21 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

Mr Lokii Peter Abrahams

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lokii, I welcome you back to the Tenth Parliament. You were here before but representing another constituency. I would like to inform you that the situation is still the same; on my right hand side are members of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) and on my left hand side are members of the Opposition. The independents and the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) representatives are also there. We welcome you and wish you well.

Again, I would like to give you the instruments of office - the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which should be your guide and the Rules of Procedure, which will assist you in doing work both here and in the committees. Congratulations.

Honourable members, I believe the other candidate is walking around the corridors. When he comes, he will take the oath. 	

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will begin by amending the Order Paper to permit the Minister of Internal Affairs to make a statement to this House.

Secondly, you recall that the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, in his communication on the 8th of August, informed you that I will give you communication regarding some of the changes made by the Opposition leadership in Parliament, specifically those that he did not handle on that day.

On 6 August 2018, my office received communication signed by the Secretary-General of the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) Party notifying the Speaker of the changes made regarding the leadership of the Opposition in Parliament. The communication, among others, informed my office of the proposed changes to the backbench commissioners representing the Opposition and the Member of Parliament representing the Opposition on Uganda’s delegation to the Pan African Parliament. On 9 August 2018, my office received a letter from the Chief Opposition Whip, hon. Ssemujju Nganda, in which he requested for space on the Order Paper to designate new chairpersons and vice-chairpersons on various standing committees of Parliament that are required by law to be headed by the Opposition in Parliament.

Honourable members, I have had time to consider all the above matters in light of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Administration of Parliament Act, the Protocol to the Treaty Establishing the African Economic Community relating to the Pan-African Parliament and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Therefore, I would like to make the following ruling:

The proposed appointment of hon. Francis Mwijukye to the Parliamentary Commission

Honourable members, the Parliamentary Commission is established by Article 87A of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and section 2 of the Administration of Parliament Act under the laws of Uganda. The composition of the commission is prescribed in section 2 of the Administration of Parliament Act and rule 11 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to include four backbench Members of Parliament. Section 2(2c) of the Administration of Parliament Act and rule 11(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament require that the four Members of Parliament serve for a period of two and a half years. The four backbench commissioners may leave or be removed from the office of commissioner as prescribed in sections 2 (2c), 3, 4 and 5 of the Administration of Parliament Act.

In the case of hon. Mwijukye, his appointment appears to be a replacement of hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who is the current nominee of the FDC on the commission, as required by the Act and our rules. In such a situation and in light of section 2 (2c) of the Administration of Parliament Act, the appointment of hon. Mwijukye cannot be effected since hon. Cecilia Ogwal has not served the two and a half year period as prescribed in section 2 (2c), which I will quote below:

“The four Members of Parliament referred to in subsection (2) shall hold office as members on the Commission for two and a half years.”

Except where a commissioner vacates the commission in circumstances prescribed in Article 83 or where he or she is removed by Parliament for inability to perform the functions of his or her office arising from infirmity of body or mind, misbehaviour, misconduct or incompetence as prescribed by the Administration of Parliament Act, a backbench commissioner who is elected to the commission is entitled to serve for two and a half years. Therefore, the removal of such a Member before the expiration of the two and a half years is not tenable. 

The Proposed Appointment of Hon. William Nzoghu to Uganda’s Delegation to the Pan-African Parliament (PAP) 

Article 2 of the Protocol to the Treaty Establishing the African Economic Community relating to the Pan-African Parliament establishes that Parliament. Article 4 of the protocol and rule 4 of Appendix D of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda prescribe the composition of the Pan-African Parliament and require each member state to be represented by five Members of Parliament.

Article 4 of the protocol and rule 4 of Appendix D of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda further require the representation to be reflective of the diversity of political opinions in the member state’s Parliament. The term of Members of the Pan-African Parliament is prescribed in Article 5 of the protocol and rule 4 of Appendix D of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. These provisions require that the Members’ term runs concurrently with the term of Parliament; in this case, five years.

On whether the Forum for Democratic Change can replace Uganda’s representative to PAP, they should have regard to Article 5 (4) of the protocol and rule 4 (2) of Appendix D of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, which outline the circumstances under which the seat of a Member of the Pan-African Parliament becomes vacant. Article 5 (4) is reproduced below: 

“The seat of a Member of the Pan-African Parliament shall become vacant if he or she:
dies;
resigns in writing to the President of the Pan-African Parliament;
is unable to perform his or her functions for reasons of physical or mental incapacity;
is removed on grounds of misconduct;
ceases to be a Member of Parliament;
is recalled by Parliament;
When Uganda withdraws from the African Union.”

In the circumstances, a Member of the Pan-African Parliament may only vacate his or her term upon the occurrence of any of the matters prescribed above. It is, therefore, clear that once a Member of Parliament has been elected, such a Member serves a period of five years, except for the circumstance prescribed in Article 5 (4) of the protocol and rule 4 (2) of Appendix D of the Rules of Procedure occur.

Since none of the circumstances provided to the law has occurred, the designation of another Member to replace our delegate to the Pan-African Parliament, without fulfilling the conditions of Article 5 (4) of the protocol and rule 4(2) of Appendix D, is not tenable.

Changes in Leadership of Standing Committees of Parliament

Honourable members, I have considered the Rules of Procedure and I am alive to the provisions in rules 155 to 159 and I wish to guide as follows:

The proposed changes affect all the four accountability committees, affecting all the chairpersons and vice-chairpersons. Honourable members, whereas the FDC party is empowered under rule 157 to make changes to the leadership of standing committees, I believe the timing of these changes is not favourable to the smooth operations of those committees and especially parliamentary business. 

Honourable members, as you are aware, it is through the accountability committees that Parliament performs some of its critical oversight functions. These committees are currently handling or finalising reports on various complex matters pending before them. It is my considered view that changing their leadership at this point would delay the reporting on those matters. 

In this regard, I have written to the Chief Opposition Whip suggesting and requesting that the FDC party reconsiders its decision on this matter, in order to afford the current leadership of these committees time to report back on all matters pending before these committees. These committees should report back before the expiration of their tenure, and in any case before December 31. 

Honourable members, I also need to remind you that we have already agreed in the Business Committee that the Second Meeting of the Third Session, which will commence after Independence Day, will be dedicated to the consideration of reports from these accountability committees, among others. Therefore, that is my request to the FDC party.

Honourable members, you recall that on July 27, I urged committees to expeditiously handle business before them, especially the Bills. I further noted that all the Bills have spent over 200 days in the committees. This is clearly in contravention of rules 140 and 215 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

This is therefore to put all chairpersons on notice that with effect from August 15 this week, the following Bills will be placed on the Order Paper for consideration of the House:

The National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill
The Sugar Bill
The Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Bill
The Investment Code Bill
The Minimum Wages Bill
The Mental Health Bill
The Indigenous and Complimentary Medicines Bill
The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill
The Data Protection of Privacy Bill
10. 	The Human Rights Enforcement Bill
11. 	The Sexual Offences Bill
The Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous Amendment Bill 
The Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill
The Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill
The Supplementary Appropriation Bill
The Uganda Wildlife Bill
The Cooperative Societies Bill
The National Environment Bill
The Supplementary Appropriation (No. 2) Bill
The Security Interest in Movable Properties Bill
The Administration of the Judiciary Bill
The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill

Therefore, please get ready. We shall have to start considering those Bills.

Honourable members, on 12 April 2018, hon. Anna Ebaju, the National Female Youth representative, presented a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to inquire into allegations of sexual violence in institutions of learning. The motion was debated and Parliament unanimously agreed to institute a select committee to investigate allegations of sexual violence in the institutions of learning in Uganda. These are the terms of reference:

To study the causes and extent of the vice of sexual violence in institutions of learning in the country and its negative effects on the population. 
To study and review laws against sexual violence in Uganda.
To study the policies available for the management and control of sexual violence in Uganda.
To study the measures that have been put in place to address sexual violence when it occurs.
To study any measures that have been put in place to create awareness on sexual violence in institutions of learning. 
To study the procedure of receiving, investigating and resolving complaints on reports of sexual violence in institutions of learning.
To study the support services accorded to victims of sexual violence - counselling, medical services, etc.

In terms of scope, the committee shall sample at least three institutions of learning, representing primary, secondary and tertiary institutions in the following regions of Uganda:

The central region in Buganda.
The eastern region (Bugisu, Bukedi, Busoga, Karamoja, Sebei, Teso).
Northern region comprising Acholi, Lango, Madi and West Nile. 
The southern region comprising Kigezi and Rwenzori.
Western region comprising Ankole, Bunyoro and Tooro. 

The committee will report back to Parliament with their findings and recommendations within a period of two months. This is the composition of the committee:

Ms Robinah Rwakoojo – Chairperson
Mr Gideon Onyango – Member
Ms Mary Kabanda – Member 
Mr Kisa Stephen – Member 
Mr Anthony Okello – Member 
Ms Sarah Kityo – Member 
Mr Anywarach Joshua Carter – Member 
Mr Katusabe Atkins Godfrey - Member 
Mr Mwine Mpaka – Member 

We hope that they can start work sooner, rather than later. 

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Iganga Technical Institute. They are this side. They are presented by hon. Andrew Kaluya and hon. Brenda Asinde. You are welcome. (Applause) 

We also have a delegation from Kotido District. You can see them in their attire. (Applause) They have come to witness the swearing in of their Member of Parliament, hon. Abraham Lokii.

Honourable members, last Friday, I was in Kaberamaido with the Members of Parliament from that area to commemorate the occasion of the abduction of our children in 2003. Many children were abducted by Joseph Kony but those who returned are facing stigma. They have been ostracised and they have not been able to complete school. Those who have children do not get support for the children. Some are sick and some need orthopaedic support. The school itself has not been rehabilitated since that incidence. 

We are working out a strategy to establish those who have not come back and ask the Government to help us find them. I met a mother there who told me she is from Mbale and she is counting on us to find her children. There was also another woman who had three children; all of them were taken and they have never returned. So, it has raised frustration, and I hope a motion will be brought here so that we can discuss how to support them. 

However, on your behalf, after listening to and seeing their situation, I told them I would come and appeal to you to contribute another Shs 1,000,000 each so that we can give Shs 200 million to the SACCO of the girls and the other Shs 200 million to build them a dormitory as we wait for Government to handle the other issue. Thank you very much.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

Mr Asuman Basalirwa

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Basalirwa, welcome to the Tenth Parliament and congratulations on your election. On the right side are the members of the NRM who you will find friendly. On my left are the members of the Opposition and the independents are in that corner. The UPDF are somewhere in the middle. With time, you are going to get to know all of them.

I would like to hand you the instruments of office - the Constitution, which should guide you in doing your work. You will also be expected to learn the Rules of Procedure so that they help you in carrying out your work in the committees and plenary. 

I am aware you are a Member of the Opposition, so you will sit on the left side of the House. The Leader of the Opposition will assign you two committees, a standing committee and a sessional committee, where you will serve during this session.

Some Members had issues of national concern to raise. Hon. Turyamuhweza, you have two minutes.  

2.47
MR FRED TURYAMUHWEZA (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by appreciating Government for providing road construction units to almost all the districts in Uganda for proper maintenance of community access roads and district roads. 

I also would like to remind ourselves that the district roads and community access roads are supervised by district engineers and their technical teams. Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that quite a number of districts, including Rukungiri, are suffering due to lack of proper supervision of these roads because the teams do not have transport. It was assumed that this equipment would be delivered accompanied by pickups to assist the technical teams supervise the road construction. They do not even have fuel. This has led to most of the road construction projects not to be done professionally or the good work done to go to waste as there is no continued supervision and proper maintenance.

Madam Speaker, I, therefore, pray that Government provides the district engineers with vehicles and fuel as a matter of urgency. This will help them move freely in all parts where we are carrying out roads construction and maintenance, to ensure Government continues getting value for money. I wish to remind you that we are soon receiving heavy rains, which will see most of the roads deteriorating again. If they are not supervised, we shall continue losing money and lacking good road networks in the country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We ask the Minister for Works and Transport to update us on the plan for supervision by the Uganda Government engineers.

2.49
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am here before you on a matter of national importance concerning insecurity in the refugee camps in Moyo District in general and West Moyo County in particular. 

Madam Speaker, since January 2018, we have had incidences where both nationals and refugees have been abducted, kidnapped, killed or displaced from their homes in the refugee camps. We have had reports of cattle rustling, stealing of motorcycles and robberies taking place. A clear example is the beheading of a doctor at Afogi border point in Moyo District early this year. Other examples include the killing of a boda boda cyclist, killing of a Sudanese army general, and the killing of a refugee in Palorinya Refugee Settlement. In the latest incident, which happened on Tuesday last week at Pagirinya Refugee Camp, a councillor called Margaret Bunia, representing the people of Laropi Subcounty in Moyo District, was lynched by a mob because she was a pastor, preaching the word of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

I am happy that the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, the Minister of Defence, and ministers from the Office of the Prime Minister are here. I pray that they set up both day and night patrols in the refugee settlement areas, and mobilise, sensitise and educate both the nationals and refugees about the importance of peace and security. They should also carry out an audit of all refugees in the settlement areas. They should embark on a serious disarmament of all refugees carrying guns, and check the porous borders both at the exit and entry points. The police and army should also be equipped with all the necessary logistics like vehicles, fuel and manpower. Thank you very much.  

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Minister for Internal Affairs to first tell us whether there are guns in the refugee camps and how they are going to manage them if they are there. Also respond to the other issues raised by the honourable member.

2.53
MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. On the 5th of August this year, heavy hailstorms destroyed nearly a whole subcounty in my constituency and left many people homeless, and crops and property destroyed. The situation now requires Government attention. As a Member of Parliament, I could not help but I believe that we have a ministry that can intervene. 

Many times, we have had such disasters in Budaka and we have followed all the due processes through the district disaster team. However, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees has never responded to any of the disasters we have had in the district. That leaves our people wondering whether they are part of Uganda. When other areas have small disasters they benefit; why are ours ignored? The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees under the Prime Minister’s Office should respond –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is required to establish the events in Kameruka Subcounty, Iki-Iki County of Budaka District and give us a feedback.

2.55
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Article 32 of the Constitution is about affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups. I rise on a matter of national concern regarding the educational challenges in Ik County.

We have five primary schools, three of which are community schools. However, we have been pushing for coding them in vain. Right now, we have over 1,500 children loitering because they cannot access education. 

Secondly, I have an issue to raise about the status of Kaabong Hospital, which takes in over 1,087 people including our neighbours from South Sudan and Kenya. Kaabong Hospital has no ambulance, the maternity wing does not function, it does not have power or water, and worst of all there is a lot of negligence and patients die every day. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a discussion about some of these minorities after the presentation of the equal opportunities report. We shall, therefore, expect a memorandum from the Government. 

Can the Minister of Education and Sports tell us something about the children who are loitering because there are no schools?

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are aware of what is happening in Ik County. We have got a plan to make sure that all the parishes have a primary school. When money comes, priority will go to that part of Karamoja.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nauwat is disagreeing with something.

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You recall two weeks ago, the Committee on Equal Opportunities presented a report on marginalised communities including the Ik, Tepeth and Pokot. That report was not debated because the line minister was not around, and you were passionate about it. 

The minister now seems to be coming up to address the issue of the Ik alone and yet we have the Tepeth and the Pokot as well. Are we proceeding rightly in this regard? Parliament pronounced that it was not only those communities that the committee presented but there were others like the Batwa and many others that are also marginalised. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we expected you to come and respond to the report from the equal opportunities committee. It touched on some of these issues. We want to hear solutions for the marginalised communities. 

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, we have been invited to appear before the Committee on Equal Opportunities and we are set. Otherwise, all the marginalised groups are provided for in our plan and the Ik is one of them.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports and I had a bitter exchange with the minister. They managed to get funds for schools like St Mary’s College Kisubi, Namagunga, Trinity College Nabbingo and Buddo, which are well established. They were giving them over Shs 500 million to continue establishing themselves and yet these schools are charging over Shs 1,000,000 per student as school fees. I asked him how he could give money to those schools when Kaabong was suffering. Any good educationist must first deal with primary education before dealing with the other levels.

In our budget, there is no money indicated for these districts he is talking about. Honourable minister, are you telling this House the truth? You are giving established schools money while you deny schools that are in Kaabong, Amudat and others, which are suffering, yet you are an educationist who is running schools. Universal Primary Education (UPE) is failing. Can you explain that?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the budget cycle is about to start. If the minister is avoiding dealing with the minority communities, it is our responsibility to ensure that they are provided for.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, in the Committee on Education and Sports, we requested the minister to get back that money from first class schools. When they are grading schools to give them classes, they deal with those ones which are private. A school like St Mary’s College, Kisubi does not need money from Government.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it seems you are smuggling what is in your committee report into the plenary. You should report formally here.
 
3.02
MS BETTY ENGOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern with respect to the disappearance of a primary 4 schoolboy named Okello Ivan. 

He went to wash his clothes along the Nile riverbank on 11 August 2018. He was attacked and killed by a crocodile. Up to now, his body has not been recovered – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, order!

MS ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, time and again, honourable members have raised issues on the Floor of Parliament regarding wildlife attacks on Ugandans in their respective communities. The Government has not clearly come out on how to handle this matter.

My humble prayer is that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should come up with immediate measures on how to curb this anomaly. Otherwise, we will continue to lose life to wild animals and the victims are never compensated by Government. 

I also call upon the committee – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we move on, join me in welcoming a delegation from Bugiri Municipality. They came to witness the swearing in of hon. Asuman Basalirwa. There they are. (Applause)

Honourable members, as we ask the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to handle that, the reason Okello was washing his clothes there is because there is no water in his village. How are we handling the budget for water in our communities? For me, that is the bigger picture. Of course, hon. Kiwanda, we do not want crocodiles to finish our people, but there is that issue of water. That is why he was washing clothes near the river.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Madam Speaker, I was here answering the same question last week when we had issues in Namayingo District over crocodiles. My senior minister, the honourable Prof. Kamuntu, had gone there over the same issue.

I wish to mention on this Floor that the issue of human-wildlife conflict is on the increase. I have just interacted with the Member of Parliament from Dodoth West where we have elephants in Kopoth, Kapedo, Karenga and all those areas. Last time when I visited West Nile, we also had issues in Difule; Madam Speaker, you remember the petition they brought here the other session. 

We are coming up with a comprehensive plan on the mitigation of the human-wildlife conflict. I requested, on this Floor, that we should be given some time to come up with all the necessary measures. On the issue of crocodiles, we are now constructing cages and digging boreholes around the riverbanks so that people do not confront crocodiles. When you visit those places, you see naked people swimming in the river where crocodiles are. You wonder how a crocodile can leave that person who is already naked and they brought themselves. (Laughter) So, these are some of the issues that we need to address. We are coming up with a comprehensive plan on the mitigation of the human-wildlife conflict. 

3.07
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three short issues of national importance. 

First, I have been interacting with my Local Council III (LCIII) and Local Council I (LCI) chairpersons who have informed me that they are required to pay money in order to be given stamps. These were procured centrally at the district, but they are required to pay between Shs 40,000 to Shs 80,000. I had a small discussion with some of the big people at the district. 

The chairpersons are concerned because they earn annually. In 12 months, they are paid Shs 120,000. My worry is that once these chairpersons are subjected to paying for the stamps from their personal money, then the people who will go to them will face it rough. I also wonder if those who cannot afford the stamps will have the power to perform their duties.

My prayer is that the Minister of Local Government should look into this issue and facilitate the LCI chairpersons to operate. This might even be happening in other districts as well. 

Secondly, I have been discussing with the district leadership and they say that they have not received our money for this quarter, so work is not moving. My prayer is that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should tell us why we do not have money to extend service delivery.

Finally, for about three weeks now, the country has been suffering because of low prices of agricultural commodities, especially maize. I personally raised this issue here. Later, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives in conjunction with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries said that Government had earmarked Shs 100 billion to buy maize. My people have sent me to ask where the money is so that they can take their maize there. We have kept it but some of our children are coming home without reports. We are in – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be able to tell us where that money is, how it will be accessed and who is eligible. 

The Minister of Local Government is not here but the ministry was due to issue guidelines on LCIs.

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kamusiime who has mentioned the issue of maize prices. Many Ugandans depend on maize. We took time here to deliberate and the ministers promised that this matter was going to be handled, and we applauded when we heard that money was found. When we heard that Shs 100 billion had been earmarked, all farmers also heard this and everybody said that our Parliament is working.

Madam Speaker, unfortunately, the other week, we saw the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development addressing a media conference, saying that this money will be put in commercial banks for businessmen to borrow. The problem was not liquidity among businessmen; the problem was oversupply of maize. That is why maize prices went down, following the free market forces. When we hear the ministry telling us that at a particular time, that money is going to be put in banks, there is no way the people of Kassanda are going to access that money. There is money for agricultural facilities –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have made your point. Okay, I will give you half a minute to conclude.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, if we want this money to make an impact, there should be regional centres where the traders can sell their maize at Shs 700. The trader will look for maize from the farmers at a slightly better price. However, if you start telling our farmers to go to the banks and start borrowing money from there when the problem is not liquidity, we call it a joke, Madam Speaker.

We need the Shs 100 billion that was earmarked. Let us know the centres where the traders can sell their maize in Busoga, in the central region, in the north as well. We need to know where the Government is going to give better prices than those in the market. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are stakeholders in this issue and there are principles of equity involved. If the money is in Kampala, how will the man in Kitgum be able to access it?

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY, TRADE AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES) (Mr Fredrick Gume): Madam Speaker, it is true that the prices of maize have declined. We are also aware that the forces of demand and supply are at play. Government’s intervention is to provide money not to the farmers to buy maize from themselves, but to provide money to those capable enterprises like the Uganda Grain Council members, cooperatives – those that have storage facilities -(Interjections) – Madam Speaker, I beg for your protection.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. We need information on this issue. 

MR GUME: Entrepreneurs that are capable of purchasing maize shall have the opportunity to do so, and in doing that, the money will be accessed in all regions at the various banks. That is the arrangement – (Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, this is very interesting. When the minister talks about that grain company, these are 10 companies belonging to very rich people in Uganda, including Salim Saleh. 

When we talk about Shs 100 billion, we are looking at people in Kalungu, Masaka, Kassanda, Kamuli, among others. Gen. Salim Saleh has a big company, and the people that reach him are not the kind from Kalungu. Honourable minister, do you have cooperatives in Kalungu? Do you have silos in Kalungu, where this maize is going to be stored? 

I would like to support what hon. Nsamba has said; let us have those regional areas where Ssewungu Joseph and his family, and the people of Kalungu can sell their maize for a better price. When you talk about companies owned by Gen. Salim Saleh and other people of his class, I do not agree with you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think we need clear information about where the money is - which particular banks - the conditions, and who can access the money. 

MR GUME: Madam Speaker, I have received clarification from an honourable member and I would also like to put the record clear here. I have not mentioned Gen. Salim Saleh; you mentioned him. However, I would also like to be got right; the money will definitely be distributed to regions. When the operationalisation is done, we will be able to come and inform this august House how to access the money from the various centres within the country and within the regions. Thank you.

3.17
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. Fish business is a major activity of the people of Busia District, in particular Busia Municipality. I have stood on a matter of national importance because the UPDF marine enforcement unit impounded vehicles and boda bodas of the fish traders, and it is almost a year now since this happened.

The UPDF marine enforcement unit claims that the vehicles that were impounded were carrying immature fish. However, for almost a year, the vehicle owners have never got any seizure note and have never been taken to court. Most of these vehicles were secured from loaned money. This has led to the collapse of the fish business not only in Busia but almost in the whole country. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is to the minister in charge of deploying the UPDF marines. The challenge prevailing in the whole country should be addressed because the purpose of Government is to make sure that people’s businesses move on well. It is, therefore, the prayer of the Member of Parliament and his people that they are informed where these vehicles are: 

UAR 667L belonging to Nekesa Betty. It was impounded on 22 December 2017.
UAR 589S belonging to Sebalija Ronald, which was impounded in Jinja.
UAY 101Y belonging to Sebalija Ronald, which was impounded in Mbale.

Madam Speaker, all the vehicles I am mentioning were impounded last year, 2017. This year, UAQ 530T – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Defence, hon. Noah Mutebi raised the same issue about two weeks ago. He raised it in respect of Nakasongola. Lorries have been there for two years and there is no access to the owners. Many Members have raised the issue of impounded cars. It is a countrywide problem, honourable minister. You are due to come here with a statement on hon. Noah Mutebi’s issue, but it is similar.  We now have the same issues in Busia, Bukoto, Kasese –

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Internal Affairs should put up guidelines for fish operations in this country. Anybody who puts on uniform can impound fish and sell it anywhere without telling people the procedures of their operation – (Interruption) 

MR ONYANGO: Thank you, my brother, for giving way. We have a very big problem in Busia. This does not only apply to vehicles; we also have so many motorcycles and bicycles that have been impounded by the Uganda People’s Defence Force soldiers. 

I would like to inform you that we have a roadblock at Busitema manned by the UPDF and it has now become a centre where bicycles, motorcycles and vehicles are impounded. They are kept for about a week and after that, their whereabouts cannot be traced. It would be necessary to have the responsible minister take keen interest in the UPDF operations at the checkpoint in Busitema because the situation is not good. The other week, a boda boda stage was dismantled because they were suspected to be the source of information to the local leaders. That is the information I wanted to give you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when will you come to us with a statement; there is a pending statement requested for by a Member from Nakasongola around the same issues of impounded lorries? When will you present that statement because this is now recurrent?

3.23
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will have to gather information on all these issues that the Members have raised, investigate them and come with a joint statement. I would like to request for a space of three weeks. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Can I ask the affected honourable members to write to the minister indicating the vehicles, the owners and all those details so that we can get a full statement.

3.24
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding alleged corruption. 

I watched Bukedde Television over the weekend and there was a story on how medical workers at Mulago National Referral Hospital, especially at the Uganda Cancer Institute, extort money from patients. Madam Speaker, by the time a Munyole from Butaleja reaches Mulago, it means they have gone to Mbale Referral Hospital and maybe Jinja for treatment but things have failed. That is how such patients end up at Mulago.  However, medical workers are extorting money from sick people, ranging from Shs 150,000 to Shs 3,000,000. 

Madam Speaker, my humble prayer on this is that the Minister of Health comes out and states if it is the Government’s official position that money be extorted from sick people. The ministry should be clear on this or else investigations should be carried out and a report be tabled on the Floor of Parliament. 

The other matter is about the alleged corruption and reappointment of Madam Justine Bagyenda. We read and watched stories in the media that she was involved in scandals, which are still being investigated under the office of the Inspector General of Government (IGG). However, the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has instructed that she is reappointed.

Madam Speaker, the image of this Parliament is going to be tainted. I would like to beg that the finance minister withdraws that name so that her issues are first sorted out. Even if the board has to consist of five people, the four can proceed with business for a while. That is my humble prayer, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As the Appointments Committee of Parliament, we have not received that letter concerning Mrs Bagyenda. I have been hearing about it but I have not yet received it. 

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable Member of Parliament from Ik raised the issue of Kaabong Hospital. I would like to say that what he stated is true regarding the sinking maternity ward. I visited Kaabong myself in March this year and witnessed this problem; the building is actually sinking. We are trying to find funds in the next budget - because we had already planned for this financial year - to address the sinking ward in Kaabong Hospital. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of the ambulance is our biggest challenge. Kaabong Hospital actually has an ambulance but the challenge is maintenance. The ambulance is actually there parked due to lack of funds to maintain it. So, allow me to inform this House that this is one of the issues as to why we are coming up with a national ambulance service - a standalone service. This will be a service away from the hospitals and we will take care of these ambulances from the centre.

On the issue of Uganda Cancer Institute, I would like to say that payment of money under the table has been a problem. Time and again, we have been interfacing with the teams at Uganda Cancer Institute but we had failed to get the culprits until we had to ask - The journalists were also involved in this and so the undercover reporter was actually known to us and we are happy with what transpired. 

As we speak, the three staff that were caught red-handed by this journalist - she actually gave in the money before reporting the story - have been interdicted. Therefore, we are coming up with measures to deal with this. It is clear that this is tertiary care and radiotherapy services are supposed to be free. However, due to the numbers, there have been people who want to jump the queue and of course in that way, the bribes come in. 

This is a matter that we are going to address. Uganda Cancer Institute is now an autonomous institution. The board is going to sit on Friday and we should be able to inform the country on steps to be taken going forward. We also want to establish a private wing for those who have money and want to pay for private services; you pay your money and then you can be attended to separately. Otherwise, we have patients coming in from not only Uganda but also from Rwanda, Congo and other countries. All the money paid does not go into the Government coffers but into the pockets of some of the health workers. 

3.30
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On 31 July 2018, there was a serious accident that occurred on Kabale-Kisoro Road. Thirteen people died on spot and 29 were hospitalised. As we talk now, 10 more people have died. Therefore, a total of 23 people have died because of that accident. Unfortunately, when it occurred, Parliament was not sitting and my colleagues and I were not able to bring it up on the Floor. The people who were involved in the accident were travelling from hon. Sabiiti’s constituency and the accident occurred at a place called Kanaaba. 

We have written to the Office of Prime Minister to render some assistance to the families that lost their loved ones but no response has come through yet. Two months ago, a similar accident involving a bus occurred on the Gulu-Kampala Road. Many people died and Government came to their rescue. We too are requesting that the same be extended to the families of the people who died on 31 July.

Secondly, it was shameful that there were no ambulances to take the people who had been injured from the scene of the accident to the various hospitals in Kisoro. Therefore, I call upon the Minister of Health –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Office of Prime Minister can respond to the needs of Kisoro in an equitable manner as they did to the other recent victims. Hon. Muhindo, although the matter you are raising is captured in the statement, you can still raise it.

3.32
MR HAROLD MUHINIDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance. 

You are aware that campaigns have been going on in Arua for the election of the Member of Parliament for Arua Municipality. Yesterday, those campaigns turned violent. I would like to condemn the acts of violence during such a campaign. I have learnt that two people lost their lives. I would like to send my condolences to the families that lost their dear ones.

Madam Speaker, as the practice is, when there are campaigns, people will want to support their colleagues. I would like to mention that some Members of this House went to support their colleagues. However, the information I have is that hon. Gerald Karuhanga, hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Ssentamu Kyagulanyi, hon. Gonahasa and hon. Francis Zaake were arrested but their whereabouts are not clear. Unconfirmed reports indicate that hon. Kyagulanyi is currently detained in Bombo Barracks. 

My prayer is that the police comes out and tells us where the honourable Members of Parliament are because as of now, we do not know where they are. Secondly, justice should be accorded to the Members of Parliament to ensure that they are not manhandled outside of the law, so that we see what happened very well. Thirdly, I pray that hon. Kyagulanyi, if indeed he is detained in Bombo, a military institution, be arraigned in a civil place where justice –(Interruption.)

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I would like to give my colleague more information about what happened yesterday. Two people were killed, as he has stated, and one of them was the driver to a Member of Parliament. 

Further, as a former journalist, I am concerned about the journalists who were arrested for reporting the incidents that were happening yesterday. The police said two journalists were arrested. I saw a press conference held by the Regional Police Commander (RPC) of Arua, a one Musinguzi, indicating that 38 people were arrested including –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you have already asked your question. The minister is here; he is going to make a statement. Let us have hon. Ongom to first raise her issues before we ask the minister to make a statement.

3.36
MS JOY ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports is organising a national secondary schools Music Dance and Drama (MDD) festival for 2018, with a theme focusing on Vision 2040 - “Harnessing Young People’s Potential for Uganda’s Social Economic Transformation.” 

Madam Speaker, this festival will be hosted in Lango sub region and in Lira particularly. It is going to be held from the 27th of August to 1 September. This festival will attract 20 teams comprising of 500 participants from Kenya, and 60 Ugandan teams comprising of about 3,900 participants from across the country. However, Parliament is not aware of this.

Madam Speaker, after inspection of the host schools and institutions, their facilities were found not to be adequate. They now want the host schools to expand the stages, buy carpets, curtains, stage and floodlights, improve on the sanitation, and to give the schools a facelift. Considering the limited budgets of the schools, I would like to know from the Minister of Education and Sports what they are contributing towards this arrangement and when they are going to do that. At what point are they going to make - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Education and Sports, when will you tell us about your plans for the national MDD festival?

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have very many plans at the Ministry of Education and Sports and one of them is that national MDD festival that involves primary, secondary schools and other tertiary institutions. At an appropriate time, I will come back and give you all the details about these activities.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I now invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to make a statement before we go to other items. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.40
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for this opportunity to make a statement in relation to the situation that happened in Arua Municipality last evening.

Yesterday, 13 August 2018, was the final day for the campaigns to elect a Member of Parliament for Arua Municipality, following the assassination of the late honourable Col Ibrahim Abiriga, which occurred on the 8 June 2018 at Kawanda in Wakiso District. During the three weeks of campaigns, from 23 July to yesterday, the situation was generally calm and peaceful, giving an opportunity to all the candidates to freely canvass for support. 

This peaceful atmosphere continued to prevail until yesterday, 13th of August at around 6.30 p.m., when supporters of candidate Kassiano Wadri, together with other members from outside Arua Municipality, led by Members of Parliament hon. Robert Kyagulanyi, hon. Francis Zaake, hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Gerald Karuhanga and former Member of Parliament Michael Mabikke, obstructed and violently attacked the presidential motorcade. This happened at Prisons Cell in Arua Municipality, and during this time, one of the vehicles bearing the Presidential Coat of Arms had its hind screen shattered. At this point, security officers intervened to contain the situation and they indeed halted it from further escalating. 

It is important to note – (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to interrupt but I do not see the statement on my iPad. The Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda require such a ministerial statement to be given to us in writing.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I ask the Clerk to upload that statement so that Members can read it before debating. Let us hold on for it to be uploaded while we do something else. Let us go to Item No.4. Is hon. Silwany here? This is the second time he is absent. Let us go to item No.5.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 35 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, which deals with oral questions. On the 8th of January, I sent my urgent question to the Minister of Health –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, rule 35 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament is about laying of reports by the Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter)

MR MAJEGERE: I meant to say rule 46, Madam Speaker. On 8 January, I sent a question to the Minister of Health regarding three health centres II in my constituency, which were built by Government in 2010 but up to now they are not operational.

Madam Speaker, the office of the Government Chief Whip even sent a copy to the minister on her phone in addition to calling her. I even came back here and the Deputy Speaker, who was in the Chair, ordered the Minister of Health to answer the question but the minister never took the Deputy Speaker seriously. The office of the Government Chief Whip again called the minister and she told the officer who called her that I should go to the ministry. I have been to the ministry several times. 

Madam Speaker, I do not get votes from these three parishes because those health centres II are not operational. As far as I know, this is my work station. By going to the minister, we are being courteous but we are not mandated to go the ministers to do our work. Therefore, is it procedurally correct for the minister to show that arrogance that – (Interjection) - Yes, I am at pains, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question will be put on the Order Paper tomorrow, since it has been out there for a long time. Come and answer it, please. He says he sent it in January.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Achieng Opendi): Madam Speaker, I wonder who hon. Majegere was referring to when he talked about the Minister of Health because I have interacted with him and I have made statements here regarding the three health centres that he is talking about. I did indicate – if we checked the Hansard – (Interruption)

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, the rules are clear. I wrote a question for oral answer. The minster is supposed to give an oral answer. Even the Deputy Speaker advised her to give an oral answer. Those health centres II have been there for over eight years. Why can’t she bring an oral answer?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have the matter will be put on the Order Paper tomorrow so that the minister can answer.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES (UDPF)

3.40
MAJ. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Reference is made to a letter, AP 116/26401, dated 30 July 2018, from the Office of the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda about relocating Lt Gen. Ivan Koreta, who was formerly designated to the Committee on Tourism. Noting that the Member showed interest in serving on the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, which was initially designated for another Member, I therefore re-designate as below: 

The honourable Lt Gen. Ivan Koreta will now serve on the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the honourable Maj. Susan Lakot will serve on the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to designate. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those changes be approved by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala Kiyingi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report on the renovation of remand homes and rehabilitation centres under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, for the period 2015/2016 as well as 2016/2017. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The report has been sent to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for perusal and report back. Please take note that you are required to report in the second meeting of the third session. 

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Free Zones (General) Regulations, 2016, Statutory Instrument No. 68.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the instrument is now available for your perusal and utilisation. 

The Minister for East African Community Affairs would like to respond to the issue raised by hon. Macho. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS IN RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. MACHO GEOFFREY ON THE ARREST OF UGANDAN WOMEN TRADERS ON THE BUSIA - KENYA SIDE OF THE BORDER

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I stand to answer the question that was raised by hon. Macho concerning the Ugandan women traders who are arrested in Kenya during market days and their subsequent imprisonment. I rise under rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

This statement will provide an update on the current status of the East African affairs at the Busia border, what the Ministry of East African Community Affairs is doing to handle such situations, the commitment by the Government of Kenya and the way forward.

The Ministry of East African Community Affairs is aware of the 40 girls from Uganda who were arrested in Kenya on 8 June 2018 at a place called Bumala, Korinda Town, approximately 20 kilometres into Kenya. The girls were found in three different vehicles, all destined for Nairobi, Kenya. Fourteen of the girls were under age – they were below 18 years. They were of different tribes. There were three Samia girls from Bulumbi – 

MR MACHO:  Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. When you look at the Order Paper, you realize that the Minister of State for East African Community Affairs is not proceeding well. My submission on that day concerned women who are cross-border traders, who cross from Busia-Uganda to go and sell tomatoes, pawpaws, pineapples, etcetera, and are arrested in Kenya. It was not about those who were arrested in Korinda because Korinda is very far from the border. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the Minister of State for East African Community Affairs is proceeding well.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what he is going to say. Minister, are you going to address the traders’ issue?

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, when the Member raised the question, he did not mention the Ugandan women who were arrested in Kenya. The Ministry of East African Community Affairs is aware of the people who have been reported to have been arrested between Kenya and Uganda. I am reporting on the people whom the Government of Uganda and the Government of Kenya are aware of and are on record as having been arrested on either side. Madam Speaker, we even have the names of the people who were arrested and for whom we have made interventions, as a ministry, to have them sorted out at a bilateral level.

What the Member of Parliament is raising could be hearsay and I have to stand here and say that as a ministry, we are not aware. He should probably give us the names of these women and we investigate, just as we investigated this, and we would come to the House with an authentic statement like the one I am reading now.

THE SPEAKER: Have you completed? Hon. Macho, has he answered your question? 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister is not proceeding well; so he is right because he is answering a question that I have not asked the Government of Uganda to answer. I, therefore, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: What did you ask?

MR MACHO: On 1 August 2018, almost 30 cross-border women traders were arrested in Kenya and they paid almost Ushs 370,000, equivalent to Kshs 10,000. I am not talking about the women who were going to Nairobi because my business is not Nairobi; my business is Busia Municipality and the cross-border women traders. The minister is right to take his seat because he is not proceeding well. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is about the traders at the border. 

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, I would like to request my brother, the honourable Member of Parliament for Busia Municipality, to write to the ministry and give us the names of the people he claims were arrested in Kenya, so that we can investigate before coming back to this House with a report. 

THE SPEAKER: Please provide the names, honourable member, so that the minister can check whether they are in prison. If they were illegally fined, I think the Government of Kenya should refund the fines.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been observing how we are seated. I was once chairman of the rules committee, and I beg to be guided on this procedural matter. We have the new Leader of the Opposition (LOP) in her rightful position, like we have the Prime Minister the other side with his team in the front seat. 

Madam Speaker, there are some known shadow Cabinet members who have, without leave of this House, shifted their seats from the front to the back; for example, the Shadow Minister of Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General. This House should not be left in doubt about the intention of these honourable members. Are there some amendments to their sitting arrangement, so that we can proceed well? (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason we allot the front seats to the Cabinet and the shadow Cabinet is for you to consult quickly and respond. If you are at the back there, it becomes problematic. Please, come down to your positions. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, the statement has now been uploaded; let us now proceed with the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

(Continued_)
4.01
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me proceed from where we stopped. I was saying that the security situation during the three weeks of the campaigns in Arua Municipality, that is, from 23 July to 13th of August, was generally calm and peaceful, giving the opportunity to all the candidates to freely canvass for support. This peaceful atmosphere continued to prevail until yesterday, 13 August at around 6.30 p.m., when supporters of candidate Kassiano Wadri, with imported supporters led by Members of Parliament hon. Robert Kyagulanyi, hon. Francis Zaake, hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Gerald Karuhanga and former Member of Parliament, hon. Michael Mabikke, obstructed and violently pelted and attacked the presidential motorcade. This happened at Prisons Cell, Arua Municipality, and during that time one of the vehicles bearing the Presidential Coat of Arms had its hind screen smashed. At this point, security officers intervened to contain the situation and they indeed halted it from further escalating. 

I would like to note that as this happened, the presidential convoy had driven out of the municipality towards Ayivu County where the presidential chopper was parked. The situation was restored to normalcy by which time, someone who has now been identified as Mr Yasin Kawuma, a resident of Lusanja, Nangabo Subcounty in Wakiso District, was established to have succumbed to a gunshot. His body has been taken to Arua Hospital for post-mortem examination.

We continue to investigate to establish who was responsible for this sad occurrence. I would like to pass my condolences and sympathies to the family, relatives and friends of the deceased.

It should be noted that earlier in the day – (Interruption)

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. The honourable minister is reading his statement but we have failed to access it on our iPads. What he is reading is not there. What we have are just three paragraphs.

THE SPEAKER: Is it there or not?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, actually what the minister is reading is a press release that was prepared by the police spokesperson, Afande Kayima; we have already heard that one. That statement was circulated by Kayima, the police spokesperson. I think he should be honest. If you are not ready today, give us that statement another day because as a trained soldier, you know that what you are reading is not genuine.

THE SPEAKER: But he has not even finished. Why don’t you allow him to finish and then you debate it?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, we have already heard that from the police. He is an army general reading the press release of the police to Parliament.

MR SSEWANYANA: What the minister is explaining are the incidents that followed in Arua, but the main point was the whereabouts of hon. Kyagulanyi, hon. Zaake, hon. Karuhanga and hon. Mwiru. That is the matter that is very important as of now, but he is not answering it and by the look of things he was concluding. We want to know the whereabouts of the Members of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have not allowed him to finish presenting his statement. In addition, I think you should thank the minister for being proactive by coming here today, 24 hours after the incident.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, the truth is that the statement is not there. What was uploaded nine minutes ago is something else, and it is about Bukoto, not Arua. Let us be honest and fair. We decided to wait for this this statement to be uploaded on our iPads. Now that it is not uploaded, maybe it should be agreeable to all of us that he just highlights the most important parts. 

However, we would like to know the whereabouts of our Members of Parliament. If you took them to a military barracks, why did you do that? All Members of Parliament should be treated fairly. Even if we are not here in our House, wherever we move we should be accorded that honour. The way Members of Parliament are treated - I called the District Police Commander (DPC) of Gulu –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are debating before the minister has finished. Please, take your seats. Let him proceed. If it is not satisfactory, we shall tell him that it is not. Please, minister, proceed.

GEN. (RTD) ODONGO: It should be noted that earlier in the day at around 4.00 p.m., as the President was going to Booma Grounds for a rally, there was an incident where a grader, registration No. UAP 064R, wrapped in a red ribbon, obstructed his motorcade at a place called Transport Junction Road - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you allow the minister to complete the statement?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is not only a matter of procedure but also a matter of the privilege of Members. Madam Speaker, you are the custodian of the privilege of all Members of Parliament. When any matter touches any one of us, it should be the concern of not only Members of Parliament themselves but also yours, Madam Speaker.

The statement the minister is reading has not been furnished to us and yet it is our right, under our Rules of Procedure, to be furnished with this statement to enable us peruse through and appreciate it and subsequently, see how to debate.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, having shootings during every electoral period is becoming rampant. During almost every by-election we have had, people are being shot at. I do not know whether the country is going to the dogs. Therefore, it is important that the minister furnishes us with the statement in writing so that we look at this matter critically. 

If this trend continues, two years down the road I do not know what will happen because I do not understand where we are heading. It should be this House to take charge of and control the pace at which matters of insecurity are moving during the electoral period. Therefore, I would like to implore that the minister follows the rules and reads to us a statement that has been uploaded on our iPads so that all Members can follow and effectively participate in the debate. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that this should be treated not only as a matter of procedure but also as a matter of privilege to Members of Parliament. (Applause)
	
THE SPEAKER: I have asked the Clerk to ensure that the statement is uploaded. Let us do a few other things as we wait for that statement. 
 
Honourable members, in regard to item No.7, we had received the report of the Committee on Government Assurances on the status of implementation of Government assurances in sectors of health, works and transport in selected districts.  

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES AND IMPLEMENTATION ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES IN SECTORS OF HEALTH, WORKS AND TRANSPORT IN SELECTED DISTRICTS 

(Debate Continued_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had given you time during the weekend to study the report so that you can contribute. Are there any comments on the report? The report was presented last week and we gave ourselves time to read. Can I put the question?
 
4.12
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the report presented by the committee. However, I would like to state that Members of Parliament were informed to write to the leadership of the committee about the promises made in their various districts. When the committee presented the report, what we gave them was not reflected. We, therefore, need a response from the leadership of the committee as to how they will respond when we give them information about the promises that were made. Otherwise, not every Member will have the opportunity to raise the matters on the Floor of Parliament. 

Secondly, I agree with the committee report that many of these promises take too long to be responded to. Therefore, there is need to always update the House about the promises. It is also very necessary that as leaders, we are informed of the duration these promises have taken. This is because during the election period, questions which are supposed to be directed to the Government are asked to Members; for example, work on the road from Atiak to Afoji and even the unreliable power in Madi sub region was promised long time ago. Although it was worked on, it is still not stable. Actually, our road is not tarmacked and people believe that the leaders are not doing enough to ensure these promises are fulfilled.

In addition, the committee also reported that they were not able to cover the entire country. We also need to know the schedule of the committee because they only covered issues regarding health, education and roads, which were also limited to specific districts. Therefore, can the committee tell us their entire schedule regarding how they will cover the other parts of the country? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I also had a comment which I want the Minister of Health to address. I recollect that Bugaya Health Centre III in Budiope East Constituency is among those that the President promised to upgrade to a health centre IV. However, in the report, they talked about Irundu. I request the minister to examine that because the promise was made many years ago to upgrade Bugaya Health Centre III to a health centre IV to serve Bugaya and Kagulu, because Bugaya is about 100 miles away. Is there any other comment?

4.17
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I stand to thank the committee for the report presented.

Madam Speaker, the committee went to my district and I have read the report. However, there is one serious pledge that was made in my district as far as health is concerned, which I do not see in the report. I am giving this information so that it is included, so that when the ministries are responding I should be able to get a response. 

Madam Speaker, Kween District does not have a district hospital. In 2010, when we were conducting primary elections for the Ninth Parliament, I was present at a rally where the President said this, just near my health centre IV. The request from the people was: “Mr President, if you can elevate for us the health centre IV to a district hospital…” He responded, “Yes we are going to work on it.” It is almost more than eight years since then and nothing has been done. Officials from the Ministry of Health came to the district and gathered information but there is no development at all. 

My request is that the Ministry of Health gives us an update on what is being done to upgrade Kaproron Health Centre IV to a district hospital status. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.17
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation for once again documenting the un-kept promises. They used to be called “empty promises” and sometimes they are called “not walking the talk” but you can also call them “rhetoric”.

Madam Speaker, being here for the third time and having seen other  reports of  the  Committee on Government Assurances, I am beginning to wonder if Parliament could not do a better job by limiting what can be pledged by ministers and the President. We are no longer implementing the Public Investment Plan (PIP). We have Vision 2040, the National Development Plan (NDP) has been around for eight years but you will find an empty promise, which is nowhere in the Government policy or plan. 

It is not enough to just document empty promises. We have spent three years trying to implement town councils and yet the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development says there is no money for town councils. We have a law here; the Physical Planning Act, 2010 should be fast-tracked by putting in place some of these town councils. It really defeats the purpose to say that pledges are made yet there is no serious allocation of resources from Government.

Since we are a Parliament with the responsibility of appropriation - I want to believe we have not yet given it to the Executive because these days, we get orders from the Executive about how Parliament should run itself. It is not just fashionable for us to pledge here and there. Can we only get pledges that fall within Government policy and the NDP? Otherwise, he is taking the whole country for a ride and Parliament is looking on, just increasing the list of these pledges.

Madam Speaker, at the right time, I will be coming to you since we had requested, on the issue of regional imbalance. The Constitution talks about regional balance and equal opportunities. However, you find that resources are being directed to only one direction. If Buliisa, for example, got what Rukungiri had, we would be very happy, but –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, as I requested during the budget process when resources were not being equally distributed as directed by the Constitution, I am coming to you to allow a motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to operationalise regional tier governments so that resources are equitably distributed in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.21
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. However, it is unfortunate that they covered a few districts. I pray that next time the committee goes around the remaining districts.

If the committee had gone to Amudat District, they would have found out that the district has one health centre IV which is a private facility belonging to Church of Uganda. In that facility, there is cost sharing. Mothers these days even fear to go there because there is a fee that is charged. We tried to plead with the Bishop but he said unless we want the facility to close, they are going to continue charging.

I would also like to find out from Government, if a pledge is made, who is supposed to follow it up? In a bid to fight Female Genital Mutilation (FGM), His Excellency the President promised a secondary school to Amudat District and other FGM practising districts including Kween and Moroto. In the case of Amudat, a girls-only secondary school called Pokot S.S was promised.

I thank you, Madam Speaker, because when we came to you, you invited us for a meeting with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) Country Director then, Ms Janet Jackson. When we told you nothing had taken place and there was no construction going on, you promised to give us a push and indeed a few structures have been constructed for the school. There are two classroom blocks and a twin house for teachers with one pit latrine shared by the teachers and the learners. 

Although the school was initially meant for girls, the boys are also there because there is no other secondary school. There is no laboratory. There is no library. These are students we expect to compete with other children in Uganda. We are encouraging science subjects but there is no laboratory. Who is supposed to follow up to ensure that the school facilities or structures are completed? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nauwat. I hope when the Minister of Education and Sports comes, we shall discuss this issue of equity. The children wait for the headmaster and the teacher to come out of the toilet before they can go in.

4.24
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If you recall when you were in Buhweju, the district leadership brought to your attention the issue of the health centre IV being upgraded into a hospital. This has remained a problem in Buhweju District and subsequently, it even impacts on the ambulance which we took to Buhweju while you were there. It has to take patients from Buhweju up to Mbarara Referral Hospital because the health centre IV in Buhweju cannot do much.

Whereas we thank them for doing great work, I expect the committee to incorporate some of these pledges so that Nsiika Health Centre IV can be upgraded to a hospital and maybe the pressure on Members of Parliament and other leaders can reduce. Thank you.

4.25
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The report has major omissions. Masaka District is not included but there is a pledge by the President; every year when he campaigns, he talks about Bukakata Road. I do not know whether the people of Masaka should give up. I do not know whether we should continue reminding Government about this pledge every year.  

There was a loan approved by this Parliament to work on Bukakata Road. This is a major omission by the committee because Bukakata Road should have seen at least been mentioned. My prayer is that the committee includes Bukakata Road among other pledges in Masaka District.

4.26
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is exceedingly unfortunate that even when the President makes a pledge - I think in our own laws, anything pledged by the President goes under a schedule called a presidential directive or pledge. The relevant ministries or officers are duty bound constitutionally to execute the instructions. I think it is very important - and this Parliament should bring this to a close - that the moment the President makes a pledge, the relevant ministries run with the pledge and ensure its execution. 

While appreciating the chairperson and the committee, I will have to bring the point to their attention that the same committee should help us in clustering the unfulfilled pledges. Secondly, they should go further and conduct or undertake an in-depth analysis as to why those are pledges are not fulfilled up to now. I keep wondering; the President gave the directive that immature fish should be impounded - you were in Kasese, Madam Speaker – and literally, that brought the passion of the fish business to a halt. People are literally struggling to survive. I wonder why when the President makes a pledge like those highlighted in the report, execution cannot occur.

Thirdly, I would encourage the committee to see what this Parliament can do, first of all to stop or to clear those pledges that are unfulfilled, and also to make sure that further pledges are aligned with either our National Development Plan or at least the Sustainable Development Goals. Some of these pledges are kind of a duplication; one really not in tandem with the other. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate you for the opportunity. I would like to encourage colleagues that we can cluster the pledges made right now according to priorities - short term, medium term and long term - given the fact that we have a limited resource envelope. Much appreciated, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As I call up hon. Anthony Okello, I would like the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to help us. I have received many petitions from operators in the town councils about the President’s ban on collection of taxes in the taxi parks, which has apparently crippled operations in many municipalities and town councils. We shall want the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to respond because it is true that they are suffering. They are now on zero income.

4.30
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like my colleagues, allow me to appreciate the committee for the work they have done and their findings. 

I would like to comment on only the works sector. The findings of the committee show the pathetic condition of the road networks in certain areas, and Amolatar District is not an exception. Sometimes, I wonder what informs implementation of a pledge. In 2013, a pledge was made to have the famous Dokolo-Amolatar Road, one of the major roads that originates from Dokolo and goes to Amolatar, maintained under some contract until it gets tarmacked. We were able to get a contract for three years, which expired in 2016. As I speak now, the condition of this road is very pathetic. For the last two years, there has never been an intervention on this road by the Ministry of Works and Transport- (Interruption) 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the whole House that I am the Member of Parliament for Dokolo South County and my brother is the Member for Kioga County. Our people are now so incensed about that road. It has never been maintained for close to three years and now because the road is full of water they have now named it River Okot-Ogong. So, there is a river on the road. Therefore, I am informing you that the road has now been renamed River Okot-Ogong because of the state of the road. This is the information I would like to give Members. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Okot-Ogong for the information. Whenever it is rainy season, we get worried. I have been having trouble with members of my society wanting to plant banana suckers on this road. Some leaders in the district talk about heaping potatoes on a central Government road. Whenever it rains, it is me who gets abused. 

It is not only this road; we also have a 63-kilometre road which was acquired by the Central Government from Odiak going to Muntu, Alemere, Etam and eventually Namasale. However, from the time that road was relocated from local government to central Government, it has never been maintained apart from where they patch up some extremely bad areas.

Madam Speaker, our concern is that whenever there is a pledge- (Member timed out.)

4.34
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is about the borderline between South Sudan and Uganda - Moyo District and Kajo Keji County in Sudan. This issue has been very contentious since the Sixth Parliament. We have always been talking about it and nothing has come to fruition. 

Madam Speaker, promises have always been made. We have been told by Government that there is now money from the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union, the East African Community and the World Bank. Very soon, the borderline will be demarcated and we should be patient. Up to now, since the Sixth Parliament, there is nothing. 

Madam Speaker, economic activities along the border have stagnated. People are always on the run. Moyo Local Government would always want to construct access roads to help transport the produce of the people to the market but they cannot because the roadworks have been stopped. Drilling of boreholes has been stopped. Installing the electricity line, which was supposed to pass through a certain primary school, was stopped because the people from South Sudan claim that is their area. It is not only that, even the Operation Wealth Creation has not succeeded there because women and men are always on the run. Whenever they want to go to their fields, they are chased by their counterparts from South Sudan. 

This situation has brought about general insecurity - fights, quarrels, displacement of people and so on. This has been captured, as I said before, since the Sixth Parliament but up to now, nothing has been done. My appeal, therefore, is that the Government really comes to the rescue of my people of West Moyo County. I rest my case. Thank you very much.

4.36
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the work done. 

The committee did some work but my concern, as my colleagues have said, is this issue of regional imbalance. I am also worried about these pledges because they are really impacting on us as Members of Parliament. When the President comes to an area, he says “I have given you this. This Member of Parliament must follow it up. If he does not, then automatically vote him out”. So, it is something that is serious.   

I also would like keen attention to be given by the National Planning Authority of this country. Are we really looking at all corners of the country or just bending towards somewhere else? Madam Speaker, if you come to the islands, and I talked to the minister about this - The President one time came and said, “You have only one health centre III, which is going to be elevated to a health centre IV”. Namayingo District has no district hospital, where do we refer our people to now? We even do not have ambulances on the water. What can we do? We are using wooden boats. 

The other time, as I was going to the island with hon. Ofwono and other MPs, he gave his will to his wife because he thought he was going to die in the water. He asked his wife to take care of all his activities because we were travelling in a wooden boat. We are now referring our patients using wooden boats to Kenya. When we go there, they charge us. 

When I talked to the minister, he told me to wait until around 2020 because that is when they can try to elevate Sigulu Health Centre III to a health centre IV. So, we will keep waiting while people continue dying up to that time.

Madam Speaker, look at the situation in the primary schools on the islands. There are only 93 teachers in all these schools. Students are now at home. They are not studying at all because there are no teachers. What we should do is have the quality assurance teams move deep into the villages and access the marginalised groups and areas like the islands. That is when we can plan better for this country. 

We were promised a ferry and I am glad it is coming. However, I am also hearing about other things, Madam Speaker. While the ferry is going to serve the islands, some other people are saying it should now be moved from where they planned to put it to another place so as to help the people of the mainland, not the islanders. Therefore, I appeal to the National Planning Authority and the President that what has been pledged must come to pass so that we, Members of Parliament, can be accorded respect as Members of Parliament. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.40
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation for the work done. Although it was not done very well, at least they have tried their level best and we have the record now. 

Madam Speaker, I note that for Busia District and Busia Municipality in particular, the pledge that was made by the President in 2001 to construct a vocational institute has not been reported or mentioned at all in the report. Moreover, -

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember when the committee was giving its report they said there are very many assurances but this time they had only focused on two areas - health, works and the roads sector. They also said that Members should bring issues which were not captured in those sectors. They said that they were preparing reports for other sectors, which were not captured. However, we seem to be proceeding as if we have widened the debate. Are we proceeding well?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the beginning we informed you that this report was on selected districts. Concentrate on what was in the report. We know that we all have issues but let us concentrate on what was in the report. 

MR MACHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was going to quote Indira Gandhi who said that any foundation of a country lies in its education. However many good roads we have, without a good education we cannot have good citizens.

Madam Speaker, leaders gave a report in 2001 requesting the President that Busia Health Centre IV becomes a hospital-

THE SPEAKER: Was Busia indicated in this report?

MR MACHO: Yes, I see it here. We request the chairperson and the committee to include Busia Health Centre IV becoming a community hospital. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether there is a problem with the Members of the Opposition in this country. The chairperson of this committee is hon. Fungaroo and the vice-chairperson is also from the Opposition. How can we discuss this important report when they are all out of the House? Leader of the Opposition, are your people boycotting your new leadership? The Opposition’s seats are empty. Thank you.

4.43
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

My contribution is in relation to the roads in Katakwi District. We are happy that a very good classy road is being worked on from Katakwi to Moroto, but the state of other roads, especially those linking the swamps, is very bad, I appeal to the Government to work on the road linking Soroti, Gweri, Katakwi and Magoro. 

Related to that, the President made a pledge regarding the settlement of people in Angisa in Magoro Subcounty. The people of Magoro brought a petition here and Government gave them 1,700 iron sheets. However, recently, Uganda Wildlife Authority evicted all the people from the 10 villages in Angisa. The boundary of this area should be demarcated very well. 

Lastly, the issue of the border between Karamoja and Teso-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what you are saying has nothing to do with this report. The report was on health, works and transport, not on everything.

MR KOLUO: Thank you for your guidance.

4.46
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the President for fulfilling his pledge of the Mpigi–Kanoni-Maddu-Sembabule-Villa Maria Road. However, the only problem was the start of the implementation of the pledge. The designs are outdated and they do not match the development that has continued; in Kabulasoke, for example, at a junction where you have four roads meeting, we need a roundabout. At the time when the designs were done in 2006, it had not been thought about. When they delayed to implement the pledge, it caused such problems but we have discussed with Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and we hope to get a solution. 

We were promised a district hospital, which is supposed to be in Kanoni, but we do not have it yet. Right now, Kanoni has a health centre III. Our people have to go to Gombe Hospital, which is quite far and very expensive; if someone is very ill and is coming from Maddu, it can be fatal. I pray that Kanoni district hospital is constructed.

We were promised a bus for Kabulasoke PTC and it is yet to be fulfilled. It serves a number of districts; we pray that it is considered. Thank you.

4.48
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Government Assurances for reaching my district, Kitgum, and going up to Tumangu Health Centre II, which was built for children suffering from nodding disease. Unfortunately, much as the fulfilment of the pledge for a health centre II was done, there are only two nurses. People kept on wondering why Government could not employ more health workers. When we went to the district, they told us about the staff ceiling which dictates that they were not supposed to be recruit more health workers than the number that was established by the districts.

On the same note, Kitgum Hospital was promised a facelift but when the money was provided, to our dismay every year the project is conducted in piecemeal - the Government gives only Shs 300 million – and this does not show good progress. As they are working on one side, the other side is collapsing.

Kitgum High School was one of the first secondary schools in Uganda. However, ever since it was built by the British in the 1960s up to date, no renovation has been done by the Government much as it was pledged.

However, I would like to thank the Government of Uganda and His Excellency the President for having fulfilled the pledge of tarmacking Olwiyo –(Member timed out.)

5.51
MS ROSE KABAGYENYI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee. 

On the issue of roads, Kisoro District has had a long standing pledge from the President for Nyabwishenya-Kanungu-Buhoma Road. This road partly goes through the Bwindi National Park. We believe that if it is opened, it will ease trade and movement of people from Kisoro and Kanungu. It will also ease the transportation of other commodities.
 
We also have a presidential pledge for Kisoro-Mgahinga-Bwindi National Park Road, which connects the two national parks. This has been on. We have a problem because when it rains, it is we who are abused. Uganda National Roads Authority has continuously engaged a fake contractor called Civicon, which has done nothing. These roads earn a lot of income for this country because we collect a lot of revenue from these national parks. I would like to bring it to your notice that these roads are also a security threat because Kisoro borders Rwanda and Congo. Often when there is a problem of insecurity on either side, the security personnel find it a problem to rescue our people.

On the issue of hospitals, we have Kisoro Referral Hospital, which hosts over 1,000 refugees, minus the local people. Besides the refugees that are hosted on a daily basis, this hospital also receives patients from Congo and Rwanda. We find it hard to get medical supplies in this hospital. Our people end up suffering. We would like Government to help us. 

Also, the medical personnel are not enough because Kisoro is one of the hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay areas. Even when the doctors come, they stay for a month and they disappear. Therefore, we would like Government to help us and at least make sure that the medical supplies are there. Madam Speaker, last week you heard of the accident we had. We did not have the capacity to attend to these patients. Some of them died because they could not be rescued. 

Also, allow me to thank the Japanese Ambassador – (Member was timed out.)

4.54
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to again register my appreciation to the committee for this report. 

I would like to reiterate what they have reported in regard to Mubende Hospital. I would like to thank Government for constructing a referral hospital within my jurisdiction. However, since the Ninth Parliament, we have been promised staff quarters. Up to now, the Government has totally failed to fulfil that promise. The staff quarters in Mubende Referral Hospital are absolutely dilapidated. Some of the structures are roofed with asbestos contrary to international standards. As a result, most of our doctors who are referred to Mubende Referral Hospital are not happy to reside in such infrastructure.

Secondly, Mubende Referral Hospital is a catchment area for five districts - Mityana, Mubende, Kiboga and Kyankwanzi. Due to the geo-demand, you find that we are able to accommodate patients from Kakumiro, Kibaale, Kagadi and Sembabule districts as well as Kyegegwa and Kyenjojo. The referral centres where they are meant to go are quite distant. The challenge we are facing is that we have an old ambulance. It is good that one of the ministers is around. Because of the nature of the demand, the ambulance is overworked and experiences mechanical problems all the time. I would request that since the honourable minister is around, that issue be fully implemented.

We were promised a blood bank since the Ninth Parliament. The nearest area for the blood bank is either Fort Portal or Nakasero – (Member was timed out.)

4.57
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. The findings of the committee on the health sector, works and transport are not limited to the districts that were visited but they cut across all the districts. 

Colleagues have talked of pledges or promises made during campaigns. What are most disturbing are the assurances that are made through policies. I will give an example. There is a policy that at every subcounty there will be a fully functional health centre III, at county level a fully functional health centre IV and all the districts would also have a district hospital. It is very difficult to explain to the people and make them understand why these policies are not implemented. It is even more difficult for districts that are very old, like Pader District that is almost 20 years old. There is no district hospital; there is only a health centre IV despite the fact that we have two counties, which are also ill-facilitated. It is difficult to explain to the people when policies are clearly spelt out but are not implemented. 

Therefore, much as we are talking about pledges and promises made during campaigns, we would appeal and urge the Government to properly plan for some of these assurances that come as policies.

Madam Speaker, I would like to support the recommendations of the committee. I see that some of them have already been overtaken by events. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should avail – (Member was timed out.)

5.00
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the Committee on Government Assurances for the report. There are quite a number of pledges and assurances by Government that have been made to the people of Uganda over time. Today, we are looking at health, roads and transport. We have not looked at education and the other sectors. 

My concern goes to the Leader of Government Business and the ministers. I believe that the President is not supposed to pick money from his pocket to implement some of these pledges that have been made. They are supposed to be transmitted to various ministries so that they take them up and as they draw up their budgets and their priority programmes, they would take the first call on their budgets, so that they are implemented. Madam Speaker, these also include the manifesto of the Government in power. However, you will find that our budgeting and priorities are different from what the ruling Government has got in its manifesto.

Madam Speaker, I now think that this is where Parliament needs to put Government to task. Can we have all these assurances and pledges sent to the various ministries, so that when we begin to deal with the budget, they make sure that these pledges take the first call on the budget during implementation? 

I think this is the only way through which we can deal with these challenges as Parliament. We will then stop complaining and blaming Government because the way we are moving is not coordinated. We continue to take new priorities from ministries, agencies and departments yet the old assurances made to the nation are being ignored or even forgotten. Madam Speaker, look at the old roads, which you have even talked about, - the Rwenkunye-Apac-Masindi Port Road – the rehabilitation of the old hospitals that were built during Obote’s time like Apac Hospital; they are all pending.

I think that is how we should move, Madam Speaker. If we do not do that, we will then be moving back and forward. This is where I think that the Leader of Government Business, the Government Chief Whip and the Leader of the Opposition should sit together and see to it that Government deals with these pledges in this way. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can we reduce the time for our contributions to two minutes? This is because I would like us to deal with the issue of internal affairs. Let us use two minutes each.

5.02
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro South County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this is one of the most important committees that we should be giving a lot of time to report, so that we discuss and make very serious recommendations therefrom. It goes deep into what brings us here, into what we should be delivering back home. 

How do we get these assurances? These are got through ministerial pledges, presidential pledges and pledges from other Government leaders. At the end of the day, I strongly expect that a leader of a political party, and especially the secretariat of the party in Government, to be capturing these pronouncements and pledges. The ministries concerned should also be capturing these pronouncements and pledges. At the end of the day, if the President comes to Isingiro and pledges a hospital, I expect the minister to at least carry out studies, bring the proposal back to Parliament if the funds are available, and if they are not available, go through the usual borrowing process so that the pledge is fulfilled. 

Look at the case of Isingiro; before I came to this Parliament, they were talking about water for water-stressed districts like Isingiro, Mayuge, Kiruhura, Kotido, Moroto, among others. These are water-stressed districts. I also came here pledging, “let me go there and you will see; I will move the mountain”, but I could not even move a pebble or roll a stone in the Ninth Parliament and worst of all, even in the Tenth Parliament. It was that bad. Even when I was the Chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources, I could not even move a pebble. This is how difficult it can be. Honourable colleagues, I think we need to come out strongly and say enough is enough – (Member timed out.) 

5.05
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation for the very good report and also for selecting Koboko and looking at the hospital and roads.

I am happy with the President because he has fulfilled some of his promises, like the highway from Arua to Oraba. It is one of the best roads we have and we are very grateful. However, when it comes to the hospital, we have been given a general hospital only in name. The doctors are only two, the midwives only three, and the nurses are very few. Every time you go there, people are not there. If one doctor is sick and the other has gone on safari, we are told to go to Arua for operations. Therefore, Koboko Hospital is just in name. Ever since it was established, no additional building has been put up. When one is given a promise, it must be given fully. We need it to be equipped as a hospital, so that we do not go to Arua or to Gulu all the time. 

As regards the road, we have one road now, from Koboko, Yumbe to Moyo, and it is very bad. Recently, I travelled to the Nile and up to now my back is paining because of the bumps. In the past, the road – (Member was timed out.)

5.07
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and the Government for what they have done. Specifically, I would like to thank Government because they are now working on the road from Tirinyi to Pallisa and they have started working on the part from Pallisa going to Kumi. I am very happy. I also would like to thank Government for the water project from Agu up to Kumi. The work is ongoing, which is actually very good. 

However, I have a few things that I would like to raise here. One, the tarmacking of the road from Kumi up to Ngora and Agwara has not been done. I would like clarification on that. Two, the seed secondary school that was promised for Ngora Subcounty has not been actualised and that is where the big problem is. The other challenge is the renovation of St Aloysius Core PTC, which is now overdue. 

The other very critical thing is Agule-Alelesi-Ngora Bridge, which you are aware of. The minister deceived us one time here about this bridge; it is in our records. The minister said that it had been worked on and yet nothing had been done. You know what is going on now.

Finally, my concern is on our dams. There is still no single dam. There was a promise by the President that they were going to de-silt all the dams in Teso, but up to now, nothing has been done as we talk. 

My appeal is that we prioritise the implementation of some of these key pledges. This is how we are going to help and support our people, for the common development of our country. I thank you.

5.09
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is now almost a quarter of a century since the President promised to upgrade Mparangasi Health Centre III to a health centre IV. Madam Speaker, I represent Bugahya County and as I speak now, it will be hosting the second biggest international airport. However, the biggest health facility we have in that constituency is a health centre III. Imagine this county will be hosting many people from abroad, but the only health centre we have is a health centre III. I beg Government to please consider upgrading the health centre in Bugahya County to at least a health centre IV.

I would like to thank the Government; in Bunyoro, in terms of roads, we need to give credit where it is due. Bunyoro region is doing well in terms of roads. Many roads are being tarmacked. It is only one road, that is, the Biso-Masindi Road, which has not been worked on. I would like to beg Government to consider this section so that all roads in Bunyoro are in a good condition. I thank you so much. 

5.11
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for the good work that they have done, especially in enabling us to at least have a starting point. 

As far as the pledges are concerned, I think we are still behind in Busia. For over a period of time now, my constituency particularly, is operating without a reasonable hospital. I have eight subcounties without even a health centre IV. It is quite interesting but true. The President has pledged a number of times that this would be worked on but up to today, Samia Bugwe North does not even have a health centre IV. 

Madam Speaker, the President’s pledge has stood for a number of years for Masafu General Hospital in Busia District to be upgraded to a referral hospital. The committee hinted on it and we hope it will be worked on. However, the hospital still lacks an ambulance. We have one old ambulance but it does not work. We need to note that this hospital serves the entire district but it is at the far end of the district, very far away – (Member timed out.) 

5.13
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation for the report that they presented in this House. 

I would like to also thank Government for fulfilling the pledge that the President made to my district for a bridge where over 300 people were massacred in Barlonyo - the Kaguta Bridge has now been completed. I would like to thank Government for that, even though it has not yet been commissioned. 

Madam Speaker, there are several pledges that the Government has made. Hon. Tonny Ayoo has just mentioned the road from Rwenkunye to Kitugum. Anybody that has tried to move on that road will tell you that the people along that road are suffering because the dust is too much. When the President went to Lango sub region, he asked the population to choose between giving back their cattle or the roads. This is very unfortunate because the people pay taxes and they have the right to decent roads but what they are being rewarded for is not acceptable. 

In this House, we approve loans. Therefore, I would like to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as well as the Minister of Works and Transport to consider that road for a loan, which we were assured we would get. Let us see equity; if you go to Lango sub region, the kilometres of tarmac road are minimal compared to other districts. You hear Bunyoro – (Member timed out.)

5.15
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Once upon a time in this country, there was a programme by Government to build roads where there were economic returns. That was a policy of Government. The mere expectation was that we were going to get economic returns where these roads are going to be built. 

Madam Speaker, when you look around the country, we know where we are getting what. This country is an agricultural country but I keep wondering about this. We produce a lot of maize and Government is not able to buy it. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should buy that maize and keep it for the people of Uganda tomorrow when there is hunger. However, Government goes on making promises every time there is an election coming. 

Mr Minister, the President promised the people of Budadiri, Sironko District, that he was going to build a road from Nalugugu to Mutufu, Budadiri and Namagumba because that is the food basket of this country. We have also got Mount Elgon. Tourists used to go up to Mount Elgon but today it is a gone case because the roads are impassable. While in Mbale, many colleagues know the President stays on Bungokho Road, Masaba Gardens or Mount Elgon Hotel but the roads are impassable. 

There is also a group from Mbale in this House who went to meet the President – (Member timed out.)        

5.17
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are some pledges that never make it to ministerial policy statements and there are those which do but after one year or two, they disappear from the ministerial policy statements. I do not know how serious we are at times. I will give an example of the tourist roads. When you read some ministerial statements from the past, in the first and second year they would state that the roads are being designed and then in the third year, they would disappear from the ministerial policy statement. Imagine you would have caused a lot of excitement in society with a policy of Government and then it disappears from the ministerial policy statement. Is this fair? 

Madam Speaker, I am sure the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation never looked at those pledges and they are very many, particularly concerning roads. At least, let us make sure that if what is in a ministerial policy statement is not done this year, let it be done next year or the other year but let it not disappear from the ministerial policy statement. I have many examples of roads that have disappeared from the ministerial policy statements and they are no longer talked about. They were the first pledges that appeared and they have disappeared. That is not fair, Madam Speaker. 

5.19
MS CATHERINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the work done. However, I have not heard any comment from Kabale, which means that they did not appear. 

Every time a high profile Government officer is in Kabale, they talk about the provision of a ferry on Lake Bunyonyi, including you and other ministers. However, people have kept perishing due to the poor means of transport across the lake. I do not know why the ferry has delayed and who needs to implement that pledge. The Speaker of the whole Parliament or the President himself cannot cause that to happen. The district has kept waiting for the pledges of the President and the Speaker to be fulfilled.

Madam Speaker, in 2015, the President commissioned a wine factory in Maziba, which has never worked because of electricity. In addition - (Member timed out.)

5.21
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. 

However, the committee does not mention the challenges faced by islanders like those in Kome who were promised ambulance boats. I am sure you are all aware that we do not have any good health facilities on the islands. Those people have been using canoes but 80 per cent of them have been destroyed by the military operations on the lake. Right now, we are in a total mess. At least if the boats that were promised as ambulances were bought, there would be a great change at the islands, more so Kome, Buvuma and other areas. 

On the mainland, at least there are private clinics where they can go. In addition, there are health centres III and IV in some areas. However, there is completely nothing on the islands. Our cry is that we get ambulances in form of boats as we were promised in 2010. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 30 Members have contributed; the other Members will contribute on other reports. I just have one issue from page 24 of this report. I would like to confirm that the Musita-Lumino-Namayingo-Nankoma Road has been done and construction has reached beyond Namayingo. Therefore, we need to correct this because it has been done. I wanted to confirm this because I have used the road.

The second one is also from page 24, which is about the construction of the Jinja-Kamuli-Mbulamuti Road. The Mbulamuti Road is near my house and it has never been done. What has been done is the Jinja-Kamuli Road. We are still waiting for the Mbulamuti one and if it is not done, you will see. (Laughter) 

I invite the Leader of the Opposition and then the Government Chief Whip.

5.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for appreciating the report of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation. I clearly followed the debate but it is as if we mix up things sometimes. These are mainly pledges by either the President or ministers that must be brought on the Floor of Parliament. I know that we have many districts; in case you realise that your pledges have not been handled, it is important for you to go to those committees even when you do not belong there, to push for your issues. 

I was not happy with Government at all, especially on Kapchorwa. The road from Kween to Bukwo was promised way back in 1986 - 31 years ago. This means that as Members of Parliament, we should pressurize Government to handle pledges within five years; 31 years is very unfortunate. Many pledges have been running for between seven to eight years.

To note further, Members of Parliament decided to bring up issues like lack of hospitals in their districts or health centres IV in their constituencies, even when those promises were not made or not brought here. The President and ministers cannot visit all the districts. Some districts are more loved by the President than others that he keeps visiting them and forgets others. Therefore, some districts may not receive pledges. 

We need the National Planning Authority to take up some of these issues because we are here for the country and not a portion of the country. We must love our country and everybody in the country so that we see services reach especially to the rural areas. This is what I have observed. I would like to thank you, on behalf of my chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation, who is in Arua.

5.27
THE GOVERNMENT CHIF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the colleagues who have contributed to this debate and the Committee on Government Assurances for their report.

Madam Speaker, there are Government programmes which we sometimes mistake to be pledges by the head of state. On infrastructure, for example, if I can begin with electricity, it is a Government programme to take electricity to all subcounty headquarters and beyond and to institutions like health centres. It is a Government programme to have a Universal Secondary Education (USE) school in very subcounty, a Universal Primary Education (UPE) school in every parish, and a district hospital whenever a new district is established. The question, therefore, is: How do we implement those programmes in the manifesto of the ruling party within the budget we have in the five years?

Secondly, I heard the Woman Member of Parliament from Amudat ask about who is supposed to follow up on these programmes. I agree with the Leader of the Opposition when she talked about us, the people’s representatives, pushing for the implementation, but also the ministers who are supposed to implement these programmes because every programme has a ministry under which it falls. The ministers are supposed to give Members of Parliament updates so that Members of Parliament do not become beggars, begging for a Government programme to be implemented in their constituencies. 

The issue is that we must avail you with information so that you update your constituents and instil hope in them by giving them examples of programmes, which have been implemented after a certain period. However, to sit here and think that whatever we have put in the manifesto or whatever the President has pronounced himself on is supposed to be done with the budget we have, is deceiving ourselves.

Madam Speaker, I heard somebody talk about a road which was promised in 1986. We know very well what has been happening since 1986. We had to handle cattle rustling, and I participated in this. During that time, you could not even take electricity to certain areas. People were making bangles and bracelets out of the electric wires. Therefore, we had to establish peace first so that we can take roads, and we are on the right track.

I would like to humbly ask my colleagues to say that enough is not yet enough; do not give up. We have seen roads being constructed; for example, from Kampala to any border point in this country, you move on tarmac. I know that we will have time to discuss the State of the Nation Address and some of the issues that are in the President’s address are issues that Members have been raising. Therefore, I would like to pledge that when that time comes, we shall clarify, as Government.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that as we push, we also –(Interruption)

MS CHEKAMONDO: Madam Speaker, I am surprised to hear that to every border today, there is a tarmac road when a few minutes ago, one of the Members said that the Kapchorwa-Suam Road has featured as a pledge on the budget for 31 years and it goes to the border of Kenya. Is the honourable minister in order to say that all roads leading to border points in the country have tarmac yet the Kapchorwa-Suam Road is still in a very bad state that we have to pass via Kenya to enter Suam and Bukwo? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the Kapchorwa-Suam Road is not a good example because it is a national scandal. From 1986, Kapchorwa-Suam Road cannot be done! You can talk about Yumbe and the other areas but Kapchorwa-Suam Road is a national scandal and it should not be talked about casually.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I spoke very fast but I said major border points. It may not be every point. I visited hon. Rukiya Chekamondo’s place and it is tarmacked. We are now moving with the tarmac and we will make sure that this road that was promised is tarmacked. However, to say that this road was promised for 31 years since 1986 is not correct. This is because at that time, we were dealing with cattle rustling and Joseph Kony. There is no way we would have promised to tarmac that road before handling the issue of security. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for allowing me to seek this procedural guidance, if hon. Godfrey Kiwanda and hon. Adolf Mwesige could indulge me.

In the Ninth Parliament, this very committee, chaired by hon. Odonga Otto, came up with a report and made proposals, among others to have both a policy and law. This has not happened since the Ninth Parliament. The reason I rose to seek your procedural guidance is on how we can be of assistance to Government in ensuring that pledges are handled with equity; and secondly, that we are systematic and there is a level of seriousness. 

One of the proposals in the Government Assurances Bill was to deal with lazy Government officers that frustrate Government pledges and therefore, fail them. I wonder whether it is not procedurally correct for us to push Government to come with a policy and law. You have heard many colleagues contributing here but there are some places where you do not even have pledges and people have those problems. 

I am not saying that we who do not have those pledges are begrudging those with unfulfilled pledges, because we are basically on the same page. Is it not procedurally correct that we be advised by the Government on the steps that can be taken by the Government itself to ensure a systematic way of making as well as handling pledges? It baffles me that you simply handle this - We are so haphazard in the way we run Government. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Office of the Prime Minister would be moving the Government Assurances Bill if they were inclined to do so. I do not think it can be a backbench motion. Where is it? Is it one of those we saved? 

5.36
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): To the best of my knowledge, Madam Speaker, the Committee on Government Assurances in the Ninth Parliament came up with a Bill because committees, just like private Members, can also initiate Bills. I remember that Bill was tabled here, it was discussed with Government but somehow it did not progress. The person who led the efforts was hon. Odonga Otto and he is still in this House. Therefore, it is a Bill that can be traced. We can trace it and perhaps have it revived. As far as I am concerned, it was a good effort.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Clerk is requested to dust that Bill, wherever it is, and bring it for discussion so that we can move on that issue. Honourable members, I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Has the report of the Minister of Internal Affairs been uploaded? Members, do you have it? Minister, please conclude your statement.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

(Continued_)

5.38
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Thank you once again, Madam Speaker. I would like to continue from where I had stopped. I would like to inform Members that the grader which I mentioned plus another Tundra vehicle, Reg. No. UAJ 416K in which Yasin Kawuma’s dead body was found, have since been impounded and are now with the police at Arua Central Police Station.

Suspects, following the incident I alluded to earlier, have been arrested and include: candidate Kassiano Wadri; Members of Parliament hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Gerald Karuhanga, hon. Robert Kyagulanyi; and former Member of Parliament for Makindye, hon. Michael Mabikke. As I speak, they are with the police making statements. 

I would like to take this opportunity to caution the general public that it is criminal to obstruct or attack the presidential motorcade as it contravenes the Traffic and Road Safety Act as well as the provisions of the Penal Code Act. To that effect, it is incumbent on all members of the public to be cautious and desist from attempting to engage in acts of criminality that often result into regrettable incidents as I have already mentioned.

I would like to take this opportunity to inform Members of Parliament and the country at large that we are ready to secure the election tomorrow. We encourage all voters in Arua Municipality to come out and exercise their constitutional and democratic rights to freely cast their votes for their preferred candidate. The general public is also urged to continue with their business without fear.

In conclusion, I would like to state that-

Impunity of whatever kind or amount shall not be tolerated. It shall be dealt with sternly and decisively. 
The National Resistance Movement (NRM) fought to bring freedom of choice and thought to our political space. Any attempt by anybody to deny Ugandans this freedom is unacceptable and will be resisted.
What value do processions add to the political process other than creating a false impression or biasing others about the political support or strength one has? It is not worthy that processions have resulted in clashes and violence. It is, therefore, our considered opinion and advice that these processions should be discouraged.

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you can contribute; do not ask for clarification.

5.42
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the honourable minister, Gen. Odongo, for this statement regarding this unfortunate incident that happened in Arua Municipality. This is a municipality where I was raised and where I currently reside. I would like to say the following in respect to the minister’s statement:

The driver who died in cold blood yesterday was not shot on the road. That driver was shot while the vehicle was parked at Hotel Pacific. This is a completely different direction from where His Excellency the President had his rally and from where he was travelling to Pokea Primary, probably to board his helicopter. This man died in cold blood. 

I strongly believe this is one of the reasons this Government went to the bush – to fight state-inspired violence and insecurity. This is a trend I have observed happening with this administration especially when they anticipate electoral failure; they resort to violence. It makes me believe that when they went to the bush in 1980, truly they were defeated in the election. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, up to now, we do not know the whereabouts of our honourable Members of Parliament who were arrested. However, reliable information has it that they were transported to Gulu military base or Gulu Police Station. What are the reasons for relocating a legitimate candidate from his electoral area to a place like Gulu if it is not meant to subvert the will of the people of Arua Municipality? Can we truly say that democracy is one of the core values of the NRM Government when we see intimidation, unnecessary deployment and unnecessary use of force – (Member timed out.)

5.46
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I rise to make three comments in regard to the statement made by the minister.

One, I would like to state the fact that for some of us who have tasted the political history in terms of turmoil either directly or indirectly from the time Uganda gained independence to date, it is very difficult for us to attempt to touch the “something” of a leopard. (Laughter)

Secondly, I would like to say that generally, it is important that the history of Uganda be properly taught, especially to the young generation. From the time Uganda gained independence, through the pigeon-hole Constitution, to the 1980 elections, to the time where this country could not be led by one person under Legal Notice No. 5 of 1980 and we had to appoint three people to superintend over this nation, we do not want to get back to such situations.

Thirdly, I would like to remind the people of Uganda that we chose representatives who came and promulgated a new constitutional order for this country. Under that legal regime - the Penal Code Act, the laws of Uganda - section 24 is on penalty for acts intended to alarm, annoy or ridicule the President, and I would like to read it: 
“Any person who, with intent to alarm or annoy or ridicule the President —
(a) 	wilfully throws any matter or substance at or upon the person of the President;
(b) 	wilfully strikes the person of the President; or
(c) 	assaults or wrongfully restrains the person of the President, commits an offence and is liable to imprisonment for life.”

I beg to submit. Thank you.

5.48
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for the statement that you have presented to us. 

In the statement, it is mentioned that one of the presidential vehicles was smashed by an item. This is a lie. That is propaganda, according to us who know how the President should move. If Parliament budgeted for money for an armoured car for the President - a car through which bullets cannot penetrate - I do not think a stone can penetrate it. 

Madam Speaker, I think there is a planned move to hoodwink Ugandans about the very cause of the death of this young man, Yasin Kawuma. The minister, in his own statement, is trying to lie and hoodwink the Parliament of Uganda and the public so as to create sympathy for the person of the President because I do not think – (Interruption)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MS Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I have heard hon. Ssewanyana use un-parliamentary language, saying that the minister, who is a General in the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, is lying to Ugandans. I do not think lying is parliamentary. Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the word “lie” is not allowed by our rules. You can say he has misdirected us but “lie” is out of order.

MR SSEWANYANA: I concede. The minister has misdirected, misguided, misinformed us and misstated the facts in the Parliament of Uganda. If an armoured car can easily be penetrated by a stone, Madam Speaker, we are equally worried about your security because that is why Parliament spent a lot of money – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is not whether stones could penetrate but it is the act of throwing the stone, which is an offence under the Penal Code.

MR SSEWANYANA: That can only be determined by the investigations, Madam Speaker. However, I do not think there is anyone who has a right to kill a civilian, especially in the situation which the minister mentioned – an electoral campaign. People were just excited. Do you kill people because they are excited in support of their candidate? Is that right? Is that the freedom that he mentioned that the NRM Government brought to this country?

Madam Speaker, we need a better statement. This is not a formidable statement which Ugandans can accept at this moment. I thank you.

5.52
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. With a sense of deep regret, this Parliament is here to receive a shallow statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

Madam Speaker, how come after this long – 33 years in power – the Fountain of Honour is associated with the brutal killing of innocent citizens in an electoral area? In 1980, at Kiryandongo, a similar incident happened when the bodyguard of the then candidate, who is now President Museveni, shot at a person in the confusion at a political rally. Why, after the President took charge of this country, does this keep happening? Why doesn’t the Fountain of Honour restrain himself? 

I have heard the Member read the Penal Code here but. However, even if imprisonment for life is to take place, someone must go through the due process of the law; not having those handling the security of this country going on rampage and shooting people away from the scene of crime. If indeed the police were serious, we would like to know those present at the scene of crime. It would be terrible for the President to be named among those found at the scene of crime.  

Honourable members, it is unfortunate that it is the eve of elections in Arua Municipality where the former Member of Parliament died under very similar circumstances. We are in the process of healing from that death and we are causing more and more deaths. This is unacceptable. 

We are calling for restrain on the part of Government. The President should know that he is there to heal wounds but not to cause more wounds. We demand that the minister, at an appropriate time, comes to this House with a fully detailed statement – (Interruption)

MR NSAMBA OSHABE: Thank you very much, colleague. The information I would like to give you is that last year, the police shot at young men who were expressing their views in Rukungiri. In Bugiri, the same police shot at young men who were exercising their constitutional rights. In Rukungiri, there was no convoy of the President. In Bugiri, there was no convoy of the President. 

This is now the order of the police. We should be handling this matter of the police shooting at Ugandans other than the matter of the President because yesterday it was in Arua but it has happened elsewhere. That is the information I wanted to give you, hon. Ssekikubo.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much for the information. We would like to call on those involved in the election tomorrow to allow the people to make their choice because this is what people died for - to have democracy. The President should be the last person to be seen trying to subvert the will of the people not through persuasion but through terror and killing. This is unacceptable – (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Ssekikubo really in order to insinuate that the President of this country is the one who has been going around instigating terror in the people without substantiating? The President is the chairman of the ruling party. He was invited by the secretary-general of the party to Arua and that is what he did. Is hon. Ssekikubo in order to insinuate that the President is the cause of the problem?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, can you substantiate the role of the President in the shooting?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I based my statement on those around at the scene of crime. The vehicle talked about is the vehicle that carries the President and he was in that vehicle. Certainly, if you want to know what caused this, the most prominent thing at the scene of crime was H.E the President’s motorcade in which he was travelling. 

To that extent, it can only be through a police investigation that we can get to know those who ordered the shooting of persons. However, as far as I am concerned, the incident was sparked off by the alleged attack on the presidential convoy according to the minister’s statement.

5.59
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As an advocate of national dialogue, I would like to plead with the Tenth Parliament that if we are going to be relevant to our children and grandchildren, this Parliament must be seen to support the civilian authority to take charge of this country as we struggle from our history of militarised politics.

Yesterday, I watched the head of state and other political leaders and all candidates during the climax of the campaigns, and our police and Electoral Commission were overstretched. I do not know why these leaders, if they love the country, cannot go two or three days before the end of the election. You cannot carry out in one city all these campaigns and expect the police and the Electoral Commission to help you. We did not provide leadership on either side. As a result of that, I would not like to – 

For those who may have forgotten, unlike Rwanda and others that have documented the human lives they lost in their power struggle, Uganda has forgotten. We do not even know who died in Luweero, in the North, Teso, Kasese, among others. That is how someone dies and the children are left without a parent.  

Madam Speaker, the country is very polarised. Let us not hide our heads in the sand. We need, with immediate effect, Government to bring business related to the process of national dialogue - whether it means a national conference or a process - and where we can start a constitutional review commission. Otherwise, people are now very desperate. What you saw in Bugiri is what you are seeing in Arua. As Parliament, our role is to dialogue, not a monologue where the majority is against the minority. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to plead with you and the Leader of Government Business that we should start the process of establishing national consensus building. It seems the consensus we had before, expecting elections to solve our problems, is not enough. We need to go beyond the political parties so that we can dialogue for the good of the country. Anyone trying to deny us this chance of having a national dialogue is not patriotic because we need it for the good of this country. It is should not be about the majority against the minority or the ruling Government against the Opposition but for the good of this country. Arua was - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a few weeks ago, the Inter-Religious Council of Uganda and the council of elders were going around marketing the idea of a dialogue. If you are interested, meet them so that we can discuss with them and develop it.

6.03
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For once, I cannot thank the minister for the statement. I think he has done a disservice to this country and I speak with a bleeding heart that even at his age, he has no sympathy.

First of all, he desisted from telling us the fact that this young man was killed from a hotel where he had parked the car. The information we received from there was that he was first asked where hon. Kyagulanyi was and then he was killed.

Secondly, while he considers that an attempt to attack the President is criminal, and I agree with him. However, while he considers that criminal enough to arrest a candidate with 80 of his campaigners and taskforce members, the minister does not find it important to arrest the person who shot and killed someone away from what they consider to be the scene of crime.

Madam Speaker, I know what the situation would be like if there was an attack on the President, who as a matter of fact was not in the convoy. I know what the situation would be like and it is something I do not want to imagine. I also know that the Chairman of the NRM is the President of the Republic of Uganda and he must do things the presidential way. First, he has enough intelligence to tell him that that route has a crowd. Therefore, as a statesman, he would either order to have them stopped somewhere or use another route or wait. Who said the President cannot wait during a campaign? This is an electoral process. Must people be –(Member timed out.)

6.06
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I expected the minister to apologise to the nation. I expected him to say that the role of the police is to protect property and lives but they were unable to protect people yesterday and as a result someone died, rather than just reading to us a press statement that was released by the police at Interpol. It is an embarrassment!

I also expected the minister to tell us where the Members of Parliament are or at which police station they are being held.  The minister should have also told us where the other 34 people who were arrested are. Otherwise, the minister is just speculating.

Irrespective of what happened yesterday, nothing warrants the death of a Ugandan. The minister spoke as if he was justifying the death of that Ugandan. Honourable minister, we expected you to have done better than that.

Madam Speaker, I am a victim of police brutality; I have bullet wounds in my thighs, so I know what the police is capable of doing. It is, therefore, regrettable that someone died yesterday, and all of us must express regret; we must condemn what happened yesterday. We must also realise that our police has degenerated to such a level that we would not like to call them the “Uganda Police Force.”

Finally, the journalists who were covering the events of yesterday were arrested and taken to Gulu. They were released two hours ago in Gulu and charged with inciting violence because of reporting - (Member timed out.)

6.08
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When Gen. Jeje Odongo was the army commander, I remember very well when he was transferred from that office because there was a big war between him and those who took over. One of the statements Gen. Jeje Odongo made was that they were fighting as if they were grasshoppers in a tin eating each other.

Madam Speaker, I accord a lot of respect to Gen. Jeje Odongo. I am on record as having warned Gen. Kale Kayihura of such incidences and now I am warning you, Gen. Jeje Odongo, because I move with God. Gen. Jeje Odongo, you carried out campaigns - (Interjections) – He stood as a candidate - Where haven’t you seen processions? Honourable members, haven’t you had processions during your campaigns? We have had them.

Gen. Jeje Odongo, do you really believe that hon. Kassiano Wadri, hon. Mwiru or hon. Mabikke attacked the President and were shooting at him? Gen. Jeje Odongo, do you believe that Kassiano Wadri threw stones at the presidential convoy? Do you believe that? 

Madam Speaker, are we going back to a one-party state? We need to know that. If we are going back to a one-party state, which will allow only the NRM to contest everywhere, we must know that. President Obote did that – (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. I lived in Russia, which was a one-party state. I also know about North Korea and I was in China. I do not know whether this country wants a one-party state. If they want it, the Opposition can give it to them so that they can rule as a one-party state. However, I must tell you that what is happening in North Korea, China and Russia is regrettable and we are going to regret if we go by a one-party state. That is the information I want to give you.

MR SSEWUNGU: The minister cannot convince me that the intention was not to kill a Member of Parliament; the intention was to kill hon. Kyagulanyi and we cannot allow that. As hon. Ssewungu, I have no debt with anyone and so, how do you expect me to die by a bullet when I have not stolen from anyone? It would be the state to kill me.

Madam Speaker, we once met His Excellency the President of the Republic Uganda as the Public Accounts Committee. He told us that before he began forming his Government, he called the former President of Tanzania, His Excellency Julius Nyerere, so that he could give him ideas and methods on how to run government. His Excellency Julius Nyerere was good at asking for apologies and forgiveness if a mistake was made. This was the type of government Nyerere run. If our President was indoctrinated into running the Government using Nyerere’s ideas, this is not what is happening in this country.

Gen. Jeje Odongo, as a trained senior soldier and a former teacher, do you believe that hon. Kassiano Wadri threw stones at the presidential convoy? – (Interruption)

MR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, the honourable member is addressing hon. Odongo, the minister, directly. The practice is that we all speak through the Speaker but I see this situation happening all the time. I wish that the House is reminded that always any discourse must be through the Speaker and not directly to Members of Parliament. Is the Member, therefore, in order to be doing what he is doing now?

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order.

6.12
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. It is very regrettable that yet another life of a Ugandan was lost in a very reckless way yesterday. May his soul rest in peace.

Madam Speaker, the direction our politics is taking is very dangerous and very unprecedented. It is as if politics has become a do-or-die game, which is very unfortunate. As leaders, I think we also need to be mindful of the way we control these crowds as we speak and canvass for votes. Sometimes, we become reckless with the language we speak and the young population that this country has is a time bomb; they can take any message, especially if you have a strong following.

This country is for all of us, Ugandans, and we need to enjoy its benefits. We can practice clean politics. We can do that without losing lives. When we make this a do-or-die game, then we go wrong. As politicians, we should be preaching a message of unity and co-existence, so that at the end of the day, we congratulate the winner from either side. I beg to submit. Thank you.

6.14
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a concern about one journalist, Herbert Zziwa, from NTV, who was arrested, beaten and also charged. I have seen his bond paper reading that he was inciting violence and caused malicious damage. I wish to know from the minister what role that journalist, who has just been released, played in that fracas of having the presidential motorcade stoned.

Secondly, what was the justification of having armed personnel in military uniform going from hotel room to hotel room, picking up people as if the hotel rooms were part of the scene of crime?

Thirdly, how many stones pelted the President’s vehicle to warrant an arrest of a candidate and his entire taskforce? As you go to pick up suspects, you need to know and first of all analyse the extent of the damage. In my opinion, the suspects should have been around the area where that vehicle was purportedly stoned. Thank you.

6.15  
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We regret the death of our young men. This has become a trend. I am a product of a by-election. I know what it is like when people from all over the country descend on a small town like Bugiri, Jinja, Rukungiri; all the devils in Government and the Opposition spit fire and yet they are not voters. They go on inciting people along ethnic lines and religious differences. I know you know some English but I am speaking things you understand – (Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am at pains. Unless I missed my brother’s submission, but there was some connotation to a devil. I have no idea who among the 35 million Ugandans qualifies to be called a devil. Is my honourable colleague in order to make reference to a human being as a devil? Would that really apply in this House, Madam Speaker? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have talked about un-parliamentary language. Who is the devil in this situation?

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, I can use another word - all the bad mannered people from all spheres of life descend on one constituency. What I am saying is normal and these people know about it. I have gone through by-elections – (Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Much as I appreciate what the honourable Member of Parliament is saying, we know that when there are by-elections, people go to support the candidates of their political party. In yesterday’s case, the President himself went to support the NRM candidate The Member is referring to all those people as bad mannered. 

Can I be made to believe that even His Excellency the President is bad mannered because he went there? Is he a devil as he stated? Is he in order to name the honourable Members of Parliament and even His Excellency the President who went there as being bad mannered?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, can you substantiate who the bad people are?

MR KASULE: Honourable members, let me withdraw those strong words. What I am saying is that we should sympathise with these local people and avoid using strong words and inciting them. After all, they are the only voters. During a by-election, about 9,000 people would be voters but about one million people go to these people and incite them. They bring out all the ethnic and religious differences. 

In Rukungiri, Bugiri and even in Kyadondo South, we had similar situations and in all these places, people died. Why don’t we sympathise with the people and like he said, embrace clean politics. After all, the Government is already in place. We have a President. We have a side which has the minority – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, this House is like a holy altar where anybody should not just come and create dirt and dust. The issues that we are discussing are very important and very touchy. There are so many responsible citizens of this country and they are stakeholders in whatever happens in the nation, and that includes me. If you find me in Arua, I have a stake because it is within the borders of Uganda. If you find me in Bugiri, I am not the devil. If you find me in Buliisa, I have interest; our oil is there. 

Is it in order for the  Member to continue pushing such a position, which is dark for this House, and declare such people to be devils and yet we have a stake in the entire country? 

THE SPEAKER: I think he has withdrawn the words “devil” and “bad persons”. 

MR AOGON: He continues to think that people should not go to those constituencies. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think he has withdrawn the strong words.

MR AOGON: He is using strong words. Is he in order?

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, I withdraw the word “devil”. I withdraw that word. However, my caution is –(Interjections)– hon. Ssekikubo, please be patient. I said, please sympathise with the local communities like the people of Arua. 
I watched the campaigns to the end on television. What happened at the end of the campaigns is that people started running from one end of the city towards the centre. The other people also started running from the other side of the city to the centre. The police and the army were overwhelmed. I know people who left my constituency in Nansana and Kamwokya here to go to Arua. They have fought in all these districts. They have –(Member timed out.)

6.23
MS AGNES WEJULI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate we are losing lives during elections. It is unfortunate we lost Yasin Kawuma yesterday. It is also unfortunate we lost Ramanthan Walyendo in Bugiri and many others. 

Madam Speaker, I think the police needs to come up and take on the political pressure in the country right now. There are so many vigilant people. Also as leaders, there are messages we send to those yearning for power – the youth - that they should fight, and this causes problems.

Madam Speaker, we had general elections in 2011 but most of the time, teargas was used. If the crowd is just too much, why don’t we use teargas other than live bullets? It is unfortunate. Every life matters. 

I appeal to my colleagues, more so those in the Opposition, that as you go to canvass for votes, please, let us tell our youth to be calm. Inciting the youth to be violent as they participate in democracy is very dangerous. Inciting people against those who have guns - Sometimes, they also get overstretched and shoot anyhow and lives are lost. We were in Bugiri and I saw the youth attacking us when we did not even have guns. That was very unfortunate. 

As we work to capture power, let us all restrain from being violent. This goes both to the police and those canvassing for votes. I beg to submit.

6.26
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take the same opportunity to convey condolences to the bereaved families, those who have lost their dear ones in the violence that is taking place in our country. It is quite regrettable and very unfortunate. 

Madam Speaker, politics should not be mixed with violence and taking things personally. It is because we are taking things personally, making it do-or-die, that innocent people are dying. I do not know how the mother of the late Yasin Kawuma feels, and also his father, relatives and the children, if he had any. All of us should put ourselves in those shoes so that we really do not condone such acts.

I do not support violence. However, I do not want to believe that Members of Parliament attacked the President. I really do not want to believe it. It is quite unfortunate that it can be believed that a Member of Parliament stoned the President because I cannot. I do not even have to dream about getting a stone and throwing it at the President. However, Members were arrested for attacking the President and in the statement –(Member timed out.)

6.28
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, we stand to speak about this statement by the Minister of Internal Affairs with our hearts bleeding. This is because we had just lost our colleague and before we even come out of that shock, during the campaigns to replace him, someone was shot again under very unclear circumstances. This is really regrettable and unacceptable in the country.

When you read the statement given by the Minister of Internal Affairs, it falls short of responsibility. It falls short of the type of Government office we require in this country. In this type of situation, someone should resign. It is not a matter of giving us a statement. It is also not a matter which you try to explain in a statement that is full of falsehoods. You cannot say that the President was attacked by honourable Members of Parliament violently and then someone died. Really, that is nonsense as far as I am concerned. You cannot stand in this House and start -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the word “nonsense” is also not allowed here. 

DR LYOMOKI: Okay, I withdraw it, Madam Speaker. I withdraw that statement. However, it is very unacceptable for the minister to come and explain and claim that the President’s motorcade was stoned and yet this matter was not recorded anywhere. We have forgeries of vehicles being stoned - (Member timed out.)

6.30
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, I attach a lot of significance to the statement of the minister. If this statement is true, then I can only say it was quite unfortunate that the presidential motorcade was blocked and one of the vehicles’ windows was shattered. I think by all standards, this was suicidal. 

Madam Speaker, I have lived in this country and in the world. Ever since independence, I stand to be corrected but I think President Museveni is the eighth President of this country and it is the first time in history that I am getting to understand that a group of people can attack a presidential motorcade. For clear information, and as a stakeholder in this country, I would like to know the instruments of violence that were applied in attacking the President. Were they stones, guns, pangas or bricks?

The grader - UAP 064R – that was wrapped in red ribbons and blocked the presidential motorcade was a clear indication of defiance and – (Member timed out.)

6.32
MR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): I too regret the death of the person we are talking about. I would wish that the country does observe that this nation is in trouble. The extent to which lawlessness and hooliganism is encroaching on our daily lives is mind boggling. The other day, we did see the despicable act of some MPs jumping on the Table in this House. This is something that had not been done before and many honourable members were delighting in the kind of discomfort we saw that day.

Today, Parliament is suffering tremendous injury arising from our conduct as Members of Parliament. It is no longer the case that we have –(Interruption)-

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am a Member of Parliament in this House and there is decorum required, where strangers need to stay in the gallery or outside. As the Speaker of Parliament, you yourself wrote and queried the strangers who entered the Parliament of Uganda and I was a victim. Anybody would defend themselves. Was it the fault of the Members of Parliament that strangers entered the House and attacked them? Is he in order to say that Members of Parliament fought when strangers entered the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I would not want to go back to that situation. You know that for four days we could not work. Let us stop there.

MR BUTURO: Madam Speaker, the truth is that our integrity as leaders in this country has suffered immensely. We now have a new situation of leaders taking delight in lawlessness and encouraging our youth to be lawless. The other day, you saw a Police officer being beaten up and now it is the president’s motorcade being attacked. Something unique is taking place in the country and the custodians of what should qualify this nation to be a nation that is secure, stable, prosperous are themselves compromised every day. When it is not in Parliament, it is in the political arena, like we saw the other day in Arua. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that one day you give us time to deliberate on this matter that is at the heart of the stability of this nation - the integrity of leaders, the morality that is now giving way to immorality, and the fact that many of us do not see that we are part of this decline in the nation. 

I regret the death that occurred yesterday. However, I welcome the minister’s statement and promise that we have got to be tough when it comes to defending the nation’s integrity to defending this nation’s security –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, hon. Ssewungu is an example of what I am talking about right now.  

6.36
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that our youth are losing their lives during by-elections. I would like to add my voice in condoling with the families of those who have lost their dear ones during by-elections. During the presidential and general parliamentary elections of 2016, these cases were rare. Parties should caution their youth against violence during by-elections.

Secondly, why don’t the party chairpersons canvass for votes for their candidates four days before the elections, and then go away and leave the locals to handle their politics. When I was campaigning in Nakasongola, there was nobody, just like it was for the other Members, but we still came to the House. Why don’t we let the locals handle their issues and the big weights leave the field? Thank you.

6.38
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to extend my condolences to the family of the deceased. At the end of all this, the public is looking to Parliament for solutions. However, from what I see here, we may not come up with a unanimous position and yet we have to forge a way forward.

I concur with hon. Mukitale that we need to sit down and observe what has gone wrong. If such scenarios continue, then I am afraid that in the next election in 2021, we are headed for trouble. I also propose that we find ways of minimising elections when a term is running; we probably need to change our laws to say that if we create new constituencies, all elections should be conducted in the next general elections. We can only entertain inevitable elections like maybe when a Member is pushed out by court or when death occurs.

I do not condone any kind of criminality or hooliganism and I do not tolerate any form of loss of life. Honourable members, this is not the time to exchange. I have witnessed all the big shots, apart from my President, addressing individuals and not exactly the issues that are going to be handled by candidates. They attack each other and that builds dissent within the supporters and they end up fighting because they –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, in the past when a new constituency was created, we had to wait for the general elections. I also do not understand how this changed. The district operations would start but we would go into elections after five years. Even here with my budget, I do not know how many Members I am going to have; I am just there.

6.40
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the biggest achievements of the NRM is security and this makes me doubt the report by the minister. We all know the security detail of the President, the intelligence and what happens before the President moves to a place. That a crowd could succeed in pelting the vehicles of the President with stones and there is a statement that even one of the vehicles with the coat of arms was pelted and the hind windshield smashed by stones - I thought the vehicles were bulletproof. If they are, how come a stone could be used to smash the hind windscreen of the vehicle? 

This is a report that has been cooked here in Kampala. I belong to the NRM, but what is happening in Arua will happen to you tomorrow. We should stand as Parliament and call a spade a spade and put our country on the right track. Politics is not a matter of death and life. Thank you.
 
6.42
MR KEEFA KIWANKUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I convey my condolences to the family of the bereaved on behalf of the people of Kiboga District. 

There are three things I would like to bring out. First of all, the violent attack. I would like to believe the statement of the minister, but that violent attack on the presidential motorcade is an example of how the violence in elections is growing. That is worrying. I shudder to think of what would have happened if the President was in that convoy. 

Most importantly, however, from the minister’s statement, he says that they will continue to investigate to establish who was responsible for this sad occurrence. That is great but it falls short of stating what the Government position on this is. Are you condemning this shooting or are you tolerating it? 

I get so scared because we are seeing growing violence. Any of us could have been involved in this scuffle – a minister or even a Member of Parliament. If you do not condemn it, then it is like you are sanctioning it. I would like to say that these men, who were probably trigger-happy in this case, can go on killing other people. Honourable minister, you need to make clear what your position is on that.

Finally, we need to think about what we need to do –(Member was timed out.)

6.44
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues who have already condemned this unwarranted killing of this innocent person, the late Yasin. I say this because I doubt the report that the minister has laid before this House. I am now a fairly grown woman and I call myself an old woman. I have been around seeing the presidential convoy moving across this country. I have never heard or seen an attack of that level. 

For some reason, Madam Speaker, I had even started to doubt the efficacy of section 24 of the Penal Code Act because it has never been tried and tested in any case. There may be very few perhaps, if they are there, which are not related to stoning of the presidential convoy. I thought it is those sections that needed to be changed. 

Nevertheless, I think that even if that section is right now being tested – and I think that it should not be left without being tested - it has to be subjected to the due process of the law, which starts with a thorough investigation of the crime committed. According to the report the minister laid before this House, I do not think that an investigation has been thoroughly done. If it has been done, why is the minister shying away from telling the House the person who shot? The defence of the President is a noble cause. If a person does that, it is a noble cause. Therefore, why didn’t you lay that before the House, saying Sergeant so and so has done this noble – (Member was timed out.)

6.46
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start my statement by asking, what is happening to Ugandans? My first suspect is the police. The police and the security of today are not faithful to Ugandans. Why do I say so? When His Excellency, the President is coming to Parliament – he came here two weeks ago - all of us were stopped from taking the same route that His Excellency was going to pass through. What then happened in Arua that you allowed the route the President was taking to be open so that anybody could access it with stones or whatever else? My question to you, dear minister, is: Are we really safe, even if they are saying we should have sharp shooters? Are we safe?

My second issue is about this grader which was wrapped with red ribbons. Where were the security personnel, or did they do it to stage the situation? I will go to my fellow politicians because we say politics is a dirty game. We are now using the poor – (Member was timed out.)

6.48
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If this is the trend elections in this country will take, then I am afraid this country is destined for doom. 

It might never be clear as to what circumstances led to loss of the life of Mr Yasin Kawuma. I thank the minister for his statement. We represent people on the Floor of this Parliament. Yesterday, after that very unfortunate incident, the President sent out a tweet, which is circulating on social media. He stated that he was in Arua Municipality campaigning for our candidate and his convoy was attacked. Police took action for which he thanked them.
 
However, many people out there are expressing dismay that even if it was Mr Yasin Kawuma who was killed for attacking the convoy of the President, the President as a father of the nation should have said, “Sorry for the death of Mr Yasin Kawuma”. The message that is circulating – (Member was timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Use half a minute to conclude.

MS OKETAYOT: Madam Speaker, many people are disappointed. In the message that the President tweeted, he never said he is sorry for the death of Mr Yasin Kawuma. He never condemned the killing. I would like to put this on record that we are very sorry for the death of Mr Yasin Kawuma.

6.51
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement, which is very necessary. Since the death of the late hon. Ibrahim Abiriga, the people of Arua are not at peace within themselves. The situation is very volatile. The people are angry and not happy. Under normal circumstances, because of that pain, we would have just selected somebody to replace him so that we do not have elections. However, due to the municipality being cosmopolitan, there was no way we could do that. 

As a result of this, anything can happen. People are angry and they are canvassing for votes. Therefore, anybody could have hurled stones at the President’s convoy. Hence, the most important thing would be to identify that particular person so that we arrest him or her for their wrongdoing, instead of arresting everybody.

These other people have been arrested because they are suspects. They think that hon. Wadri’s people are the ones who might have had the stone and that a suspicion. I think time will prove and investigations will show who did it. On that note, I would like justice to be served quickly. They should not be held there for over 48 hours – (Member timed out.) 

6.53
MR TONNY AYO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I express my sympathy and condolences to the family of the late Yasin Kawuma, who lost his life in a rather unfortunate situation. I think we will need to call upon the state as well as Members of this Parliament who are willing to help the widow and the children, where necessary. (Applause)

Elections in this country are becoming so violent and I think as Parliament we need to sit, discuss and come out with a position on how to deal with election violence in the country. 
Whenever there are elections, the leaders and politicians mobilise all kinds of courageous people that can do anything and can attack any time, day or night. These people are prepared for action and that is why we are getting this problem. In most of these places, they are called “kanyamas”. Therefore, I think we need to have a law to guide us on election violence. 

Madam Speaker, I think we are only lucky that the President was not in the presidential motorcade. Otherwise, we were going to have a very serious disaster in Arua yesterday. As politicians, we must begin to rein in our supporters to avoid using violence as the only means of winning elections. The people must also realise that when you put your life on the line, you will die like Yasin did but the leader will remain there and move on with his life. Therefore, Ugandans should also wake up to this – (Member timed out.) 

6.55
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for this important statement. My heart goes out to the parents, relatives and friends of the late Yasin Kawuma and those who died in Bugiri and many other places. 

People are dying every day; some from hunger, poverty and disease. Unfortunately, now in Uganda, we are also beginning to die during unnecessary and small elections. It is very unfortunate. Any life lost means all of us lose; nobody wins in a war because we are all losers. As long as there is bloodshed, nobody should celebrate. I am not going to celebrate.

I was a first year university student at Makerere University in 1980 and I know what happened. We were being instigated into doing these acts of violence and I was one of them. It is not that these boys are bad but we were pushed into doing these things by the political elite. I remember Matovu, a friend of mine, and I in Katwe throwing stones at these big guns and tanks and I was a student. This could possibly have happened. 

I think as you correctly said, Madam Speaker, it is high time we thought very seriously about these by-elections. Why is it that during by-elections, we experience the highest level of violence and hooliganism? I think it is high time that we thought about this seriously so that in the next amendment, we change this law. We could say that after two years, we should not have any by-elections. 

We need to change this. It is the law that justifies the level of democracy and justice. We must be able to change this law. In 1980, I saw this; West Nile was condoned off so there were no elections then. We do not want a repeat of that anywhere –(Member timed out.)

6.57
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity to raise very important points. 

First of all, I would like to condemn, in the strongest terms possible, the killing of the people in Arua. I do not condone this neither do I support it. The people of Ngora do not support any killing. They are not happy or comfortable at all. 

I would like to also send my condolences to the families that have lost their dear ones. By the way, when we were sworn in here, we either used the Quran or the Bible. Genesis 1:26 in the Bible states, “God said, ‘let us make man in our own image’…” This means that we resemble God. If we are seeing the people that resemble God being killed, this means that we no longer value human beings, and that bit is very bad. I do not mind who has done what but what is important is that the people who have done this must be brought to book. We should not negotiate on this matter because people have lost their good lives. The Bible also says, “Thou shall not kill.”  If you shoot somebody with a gun, you will also be shot by the gun, according to the Bible in the book of Exodus.   

Madam Speaker, the Inspector General of Police recently released a report saying crime has increased by 3.3 per cent –(Member time out.) 

6.59
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me join colleagues in expressing my heartfelt condolences to the departed. The circumstances surrounding this unfortunate shooting and killing of our colleague’s driver in cold blood are reminiscent of the dark days of state-inspired violence in Uganda. 

The one million dollar question that should go to the minister, after stating that they are not sure of the culprits of this killing and murderous act, is about the cordoning off of the scene of crime by the police. Those of us who were watching what happened, and even from the videos which were circulating on social media, saw the police cordoning off the area and even stopping access by an ambulance to ferry away this young man and yet he was bleeding profusely. Eventually, he died, and I must say that this was out of the callous actions of the police. This was an act of savage beasts.

Madam Speaker, the assaulting of journalists, which we saw on the videos circulating - I even received a call from a friend in the USA who watched this unfortunate terror unleashed on innocent journalists –(Member timed out.)

7.01
MR LAWRENCE MANGUSHO (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for making a statement to this House. 

Yesterday, the whole country was shocked by what happened in Arua. I received calls from my constituency and I could not believe that an ordinary person can attack a presidential motorcade and secondly, that we could lose a person in cold blood like that.

Honourable members, we should come out clearly and condemn the act of provocation and the act of security personnel not acting with restraint. As we have always seen, our Special Forces Command (SFC) act with a lot of restraint. We have never had incidents where the SFC has hurt somebody; they always use commandos and arrest the culprits. However, in such a situation like the one in Arua, where the public is charged, I think it was very difficult for anybody to act with restraint. 

As leaders, we should not mobilise our people to be so charged in as far as elections are concerned, if we have to avoid such circumstances in the future. It is very bad because most of these locals are mobilised by us, the leaders. The way you mobilise your electorate is the way they respond towards campaigns and the way they demonstrate. I really call –(Member timed out.)

7.03
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My condolences go to the bereaved families. We are only talking about one person but I have been seeing on social media that there are three people who died yesterday. There was a man who was going to hospital to check on a patient with food on his bicycle and he was shot dead. We need to find out more, honourable minister, about the number of people that died.

I have a question to ask: Is our President safe? How could they have bought for him a car that is not bulletproof or even stoneproof at that? At least if they had lied to him that it is bulletproof and then they make it stoneproof. How can a President’s car not be bulletproof and yet all Ugandans know that the President is very safe and is moving in a car that is bulletproof with the coat of arms. We need to question the procurement department that bought his vehicle. It is not bulletproof but just any kwarakwara vehicle.

Also, the security around the President must have seen the people who shot at the man who was in hon. Kyagulanyi’s car. With all the security around the President, I am still wondering whether the President is safe. How could they not see the person who threw a stone at the car? How can they fail to get - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR BARYAYANGA: Lastly, Madam Speaker, are our Members of Parliament who are in custody safe? We need to find out about their safety and know where they are. Let the security tell us so that people talk to them. We need to know how they are being looked after; otherwise, we may end up losing more Members of Parliament. This is because we have heard that some of them are being beaten seriously, like hon. Kyagulanyi. That is what is circulating on social media. Therefore, we need to find out so that we know about the safety of our Members of Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.06
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to start by sending my condolences, on behalf of the people of Kumi Municipality, to the families that have lost their loved ones. 

Madam Speaker, an attack on journalists denies us the chance to see what happened. Usually, when we leave Parliament, we rush home to catch up the 9.00 p.m. news. However, the people who have been attacked now and denied the chance to do what they are supposed to do are the people who bring the news to us. What are we going to do as a country if we are going to reach that level? I condemn that act of arresting journalists. 

We cannot audit the situation in Arua because the people who should have brought the information to us are the ones who are denied to work and that is not good for any of us. Whenever we want to become popular, we look for the media and want them to be by our side. Now when they are working, we go and arrest them. Are we orderly? I think that is not okay and it is unethical.

Madam Speaker, the police is supposed to keep law and order. Indeed, as one of my sisters said, when we usually have something happening around Serena Hotel or Imperial Royale Hotel, the police block the roads here, denying even the Members of Parliament access to Parliament where we sit. One day, I got out of my car and went to ask what they were doing. I told them that we pass their budgets but they block us from going to work. I think we need some order. Not all the police are bad but there are some who have gone irate and do not know what they are doing.

Madam Speaker, we need a select committee of this House to go to Arua to find out what happened, but not just anybody. This is a very touchy matter; we need to go as a team of Members of Parliament.

Finally –(Member timed out.) 

7.08
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to be crystal clear; I would like to condemn the statement from the minister. We are talking about the loss of a citizen, and I subscribe to a value system that says every life matters.

Before President Museveni became president, he was the age of Mr Yasin Kawuma. We cannot tell what our citizen and brother, Yasin Kawuma, was going to be to this country. I want to condemn your statement, honourable minister, and if it pleases Members, I ask that we ask the minister to withdraw it because it is insensitive.

Madam Speaker, I am struggling to figure out how the minister was able to identify the people that threw stones at the presidential motorcade and yet the same minister was not in a position to identify the person who shot our brother. It is a complete contradiction. You are in a position to know who hurled the stone but not in a position to identify with - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Take half a minute to complete. 

MR KATUSABE: I would like to draw your attention, Madam Speaker, to December 1969. An assassination attempt was made on the President of this country, President Milton Obote. Check your records; no life was lost. For ease of reference, the venue was Lugogo Indoor Stadium at 10.00 p.m. and no life was lost.

On 14 December 2008, a journalist in Iraq hurled a pair of shoes at the former US President, George W. Bush. The President ducked and the second shoe hit the US flag; no life was lost.

This is something that this country should tame. A stray bullet has no direction or target. It is possible that if we continue tolerating a situation where a security officer plays with a gun, this very gun or stray bullet could end up in the chest, God forbid, of our President himself. This is another opportunity for this House to pronounce that never again should a security officer release a bullet because that bullet would certainly find its direction to your head, Mr Minister, God forbid. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.12
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have only two or three issues to raise. I think the matter at hand touches our core business as Members of Parliament because we are involved in rallies, campaigns and processions. That is our core business.

Madam Speaker, venues are agreed to prior to rallies by the police and the Electoral Commission. I know this because I have been a campaign manager and candidate at so many campaigns. You have a meeting and agree on the venues where each one of you will hold his or her rally. You even agree on the routes that processions will take. 

Secondly, when a President is supposed to move from one area to another, that road is supposed to be secured by the security forces. How on earth do they want to tell us that there was a grave failure on the part of the Special Forces Command? Normally, the SFC reports to an area a week or so before the President travels there. They carry out thorough intelligence of the security situation in the country and they advise the President accordingly. 

We would have expected that this meant that SFC and the police failed in its core duty to protect the President. Even when the President is supposed to travel, there is a lead police car that passes through the route more than five minutes before the other convoy comes. It is supposed to foresee danger and secure the President. However, we are getting a report and the minister is telling us that a tractor – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. They even want us to buy into the story that a tractor blocked the road where the President was supposed to pass, and that story has to be believed. They said it was draped in coloured ribbons and it was seen as posing a real danger. 

There are also two other situations that are unfolding. In Bugiri District, a day before campaigns, we were at a hotel with hon. Robert Kyagulanyi. In the morning, the police surrounded the entire hotel and searched it. It was a mob that rescued us from the police. When the mob came, they said they wanted their leaders to go and enjoy their rallies.

I fear that more death is going to occur, because you create a situation of artificial eyes. When you see the heavy deployments that descend on these areas, you get scared. This has actually been counterproductive for the NRM; the women and elderly people have feared to turn up and vote because of this artificial eye that has been created by the security operators.

Madam Speaker, can you rescue us in the following critical areas: You have a candidate, Kassiano Wadri, under custody and elections are tomorrow. His core team is also in custody. You will see chaos the day after elections if these fundamental issues are not addressed. You have a candidate – (Interruption)-

MS AMODING: Honourable member, I just wanted to give you information that as we talk, there is a message circulating on social media platforms right now that hon. Kassiano Wadri has already been disqualified from participating. I do not know if it is true, but that kind of state of affairs can happen. Maybe this can help you make your point, Sir.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, the minister needs to assure the country. Even if it were you - we are all politicians - and you are supposed to oversee your election tomorrow, there is the remedy of a police bond. Hon. Wadri is not an ordinary citizen; he has been a Member of Parliament three times and his integrity can be relied on. If we cannot defend somebody we know, how can we defend those we do not know? 

Therefore, my humble prayer to the minister is: Can you issue a police bond for hon. Kassiano Wadri to freely oversee his election tomorrow? Can you release the core team under the condition that they will report to the police the day after elections? They are not going to run away. These are pertinent situations on the ground and they need immediate answers.

7.18
MS MARY BABIRYE (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My condolences go to the family of the deceased.

The Government and the people of Uganda should appreciate that this country is a multi-party state. I have noted that whenever there is a strong Opposition showing in a by-election, that is where such shootings happen. Is there a strategy to weaken the Opposition? 

As Members of Parliament from the Opposition, we have a great role to play in this country. We help the Government to implement policies; we ensure that services reach the people down there, among others. My request is that since we allowed the country to be a multi-party state, we must be accorded the same privileges like the others in Government during campaigns. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that you issue an order for the release of our Members of Parliament who are detained where we do not know. I thank you.

7.19
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Constitution of Uganda is very clear about elections. It gives the right to the Electoral Commission to organise elections. 

I came to Parliament by winning a by-election in Mbale District. The army, police and everybody else converged in Mbale. I was even lucky to have won that election with a landslide. What happened in Bugiri, Rukungiri and what has happened in Arua District, is it really called for? The Constitution says we can have a peaceful election; why the killings? Surely, why do we have to go through all this? 

Madam Speaker, I agree with the colleagues who suggested that in case something happened, let us do away with the by-elections and wait for the main election. This is because where we have had by-elections, everybody has converged and there has been trouble, people are killed. 

The minister’s statement really leaves a lot of unanswered questions. Somebody is killed and there is nobody who has been arrested for that; instead, our colleagues are arrested. Madam Speaker, you helped hon. Dede when he was incarcerated in Jinja. You intervened and he was released. Our colleagues are being kept somewhere that we do not know. I am, therefore, requesting you, Madam Speaker to intervene so that our colleagues are released. We do not know if they are being mistreated or beaten – (Member timed out.)

7.21
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I offer our condolences from Gulu Municipality to those who lost their loved ones in Arua and many others before that. 

I must say, honourable minister, your statement is still patchwork; you need to do a lot. What you have stated here is not what is on the ground in Arua. It is very sad, because the National Resistance Movement Government came to power as a result of challenges during elections. If we were to learn from that, this should be the government that should ensure that any election that is organised should be extremely free and fair, without any fear. This is because of the lessons we learnt when we were children and our parents had to leave this country because elections were rigged. 

What we are receiving from Arua are indicators that are not good for the national governance of this country. For those who understand the challenges and legacies of violence that West Nile went through, the issue of conflict sensitivity in managing any affair in that part of the country is very important. You could learn from what happened to this gentleman who said he was very rich, Brian White. He went and organised a function to give money to the people of West Nile. Only one statement caused a total desertion of the entire event. He said, “I have come to you because you are poor”, and that was enough –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Use a minute to conclude.

MR KOMAKECH: My prayers, Madam Speaker are as follows: One, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, through your office, should review the situation of the security of Members of Parliament. Two, the Government of Uganda needs to have a status review of freedom of assembly and association in this country because that is where all the problems are coming from.

7.24
MR TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I came here after a young man of about 21 years had been killed just before our election results were declared. In Rukungiri, during the recent campaigns, people were in tears because of the loss of the life of a one Kakuru. In Bugiri, the story is the same. Now, we have Arua. My question is: How many people are yet to die during the next elections and who are they?

Yesterday, when the news came through, the first statement that came from police was that Yasin was killed by a stray bullet. My question was: If there was a rowdy gathering, who was the target of the stray bullet that was missed before it found Yasin? (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Use half a minute to conclude.

MR MUHINDO: We need to identify where the bullet came from. We have been speaking about the life of Yasin; I would like you to remember that Yasin has left 11 orphans. These are Ugandans that need the care and support of this Government. 

Shortly after the death of hon. Abiriga, there was a message that was going around indicating that there is likely to be another death and that the next target is hon. Kyagulanyi. Here, we see hon. Kyagulanyi’s driver dying, trying to indicate that there is probably a syndicate. Government needs to come out and give its position on its investigative capacity so that we are sure that we are safe as Members of Parliament. Thank you.

7.27
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A lot has been said about this incident. The bigger question here is: Are the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Security in charge of the affairs of their dockets? (Interruptions.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, order! [Mr Ssekikubo: “The minister is walking out.”] I also saw you get out earlier to do something. (Laughter) Therefore, allow the minister to also do something. (Laughter)

MS BIGIRWA: The question I was posing is: Are the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Security in charge of the affairs of their dockets? Why am I asking this? The safety and security of Ugandans, and above all the Fountain of Honour, is paramount. We are talking of the President of this country being attacked. That means there is a failure on the part of our security forces. It is high time the security forces went back to the drawing board to put their house in order. 

A lot of lives have been lost in this country. At this point in time, Madam Speaker, we would see the concerned ministers even resigning from their offices. We are blaming other people but how about the responsible ministers who are supposed to take charge of the security of this nation and above all, the Fountain of Honour? It is saddening when we see the head of state being attacked in that form. What then happens to the ordinary Ugandan? This is a very serious matter. 

Ugandans need to have a free atmosphere to exercise their constitutional rights. We have seen many times in our constituencies a lot of influence peddling. People are not given the opportunity to exercise their freewill in electing the people they want. Colleagues, we are politicians, isn’t it possible for us to change the laws of this country to allow every Ugandan to be free to elect and choose a leader without being influenced in any way? That is when we are going to experience peace and harmony in this land. 

Uganda was here before us and is bigger than all of us. Can we behave in a way that is going to leave a legacy for our young ones? Our motto says, “For God and my Country”; we need Uganda and we need people alive. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.30
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who have spoken, as I express my condolences to the families of those who have lost their loved ones. 

Disappointment has been expressed by most of the colleagues that have spoken and I would have expected the minister to say something about crime prevention. I think it is the cardinal role of the police, among others, to detect that there is going to be a problem somewhere. We are told, and this can be verified, that there was a diversion of the convoy of the President. Maybe the processions that were being held by those who had finished their rallies did not respect the instructions of the police in order to give room for the convoy of the President that was passing. If that was true, then we also have ourselves to blame – (Interjection) - I said “if it is true”. 

In addition, Madam Speaker, all of us watched what was happening and also listened to the words spoken at these rallies. I think as politicians, we are the ones who lead our people into some of these situations. It happened on both sides. The words of the people who had the opportunity to speak were very inciting on either side. I would like to tell all of us politicians that we can all become victims of this tomorrow. We have elections coming ahead of us where we have to address our people; let us be responsible so that we do not make our opponents enemies – (Member timed out.)

7.32
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to express sincere condolences upon the death of Yasin and to state that elections should never result into death. I would, however, also like to condemn the attack on the presidential convoy. 

There is increasing violence during elections and many acts like the ferrying of supporters and inciting of supporters to carry out such violence are responsible for this state of affairs. We have laws such as the Penal Code that condemn various acts that surround this; for example, acts of unlawfully causing or attempting to cause the death of the President, acts intended to alarm, annoy or ridicule the President are contained within the Penal Code. 

We, leaders, are the ones who should change our ways and stop that violence with impunity. As a House, I propose that we discuss violence during elections and legislate against it. I also suggest that the security committee sits and comes up with measures regarding violence during elections. I beg to submit.

7.33
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest in conveying my condolences to those who lost their dear ones. 

I listened carefully and my opinion is that all the acts were bad - the shooting, stoning, blocking the convoy, and the high level of incitement. If I look at the intent of all the acts and I am asked to choose one, I would not be able to identify the one to go with. Therefore, I condemn all the acts that happened in Arua. 

Madam Speaker, as we are still grieving the death of hon. Abiriga, we expect peace in our sub-region. When big shots are fighting, it is the grass that suffers; Yasin is now gone. I do not think Yasin took the lead but he became the grass.

Madam Speaker, as leaders and citizens in this country, we have roles and responsibilities to play. We are experiencing a lot of things happening in the neighbourhood. I come from an area that borders South Sudan and I would not love to become a refugee –(Member timed out.)

7.35
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to talk on behalf of all the peace-loving people of West Nile in general, the peace-loving people of Arua, and the peace-loving people of Arua Municipality in particular. 

I was born in 1962 and I have seen it all. From 1980 to 1990, our people were driven into exile in Sudan, the then Zaire and some went to Kenya. We never had good education and we did not have good health facilities. We suffered for a decade. Therefore, it would be very sad if our people were again destabilised and they went back into exile to Sudan, Kenya and Congo. That is my cry as an elder from that sub region. We do not want civil strife, disorder, lawlessness and other issues that will destabilise us and we get disorganised.

Dear colleagues, our role is very simple; when we go to campaign for our colleagues, let us just say, “Oyee” or “Aza Oyee” and we stop at that, like we did here when these Members came to campaign for the East African Legislative Assembly seats. We were very peaceful and singing, “Oooooh Mama…” and so on, and the whole thing ended. That should be our role. When I go to Karamoja, that is what I should do. When I go to Kasese, that is also what I should do. I should not encourage the wanainchi to throw stones at the vehicle – (Member timed out.)

7.37
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Madam Speaker, I extend my sincere condolences to the bereaved family. 

I have been listening and I have been here for some time. Whenever we go for elections, we have reported cases of election violence and there are reports which are written but we have never discussed them to look at the genesis of some of this election violence. I would like to believe that at one time we need to look at these reports, discuss them at length and find out the genesis of election violence.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, at times after the death of a Member of Parliament, people are moody and traumatised and need time to heal. For the Electoral Commission to organise elections very soon after – I know it is within the law but I think at times we do not read the mood and study the situation. At an appropriate time, we shall need to amend the Act so that we create that healing time for the community to be able to accept what has happened. 

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, since we decided to adopt multiparty politics, we have not done any audit on the performance of political parties. If we can, let us agree here that we need to carry out an audit of how we are performing. If we are meeting the standards, then that is good but if at all we fail to meet – I vividly remember during the Constitution amendment – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MS BINTU: During the amendment of the Constitution in 2005, we reserved the Movement political system where everyone would be able to stand and compete. You did not have these colours and slogans but you just presented yourself.

Madam Speaker, I think that as we move on, during the Constitution amendment which may be coming on board, let us think of doing an audit of the performance of political parties and if we find that we are below the requirement, we need to do what saves Ugandans’ lives. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Kaluya comes, I think you are aware that there is an African Union (AU) charter on democracy, election and governance. The states of the African Union were supposed to ratify it before it comes to effect. Up to today, less than 20 states have ratified it and that is why it is not even in force. We are just there swimming.

7.40
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand here to convey my condolences to the family of the late Yasin, who passed away in a rather gruesome manner. I would like to condemn the acts of both parties.

When we come here to speak, most of us base our speeches on what is reported on social media. You find that hon. Kyagulanyi has posted something on his Facebook page and you may take it as gospel truth. There is another fellow called Don Wanyama who will also post something on his page and we take it as gospel truth. What I know for sure is that there is a big possibility that hon. Kyagulanyi’s side acted with a bit of extremism but also, there is the side of those who shot hon. Kyagulanyi’s driver, who acted with zero patience. I believe that there was a way this situation could have been averted. However, for someone to respond to a stone with a bullet and think everything is well, we shall not accept.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Internal Affairs should caution the police, especially the police spokesperson. When I went out to do something, I drove around in my car and I listened to the news. The spokesperson of the police said, “We are investigating this case and there is a very big possibility that the gun that shot that boy could have been a gun owned by one of the Members of Parliament that we have arrested.” This was in the news and I listened to it. This is a very high level of un-seriousness. How can you insinuate that I can shoot a boy who is on my side as a Member of Parliament? All those scapegoats– (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: The information I am giving is very useful because it will help the Minister of Internal Affairs. Actually, what happened was that when SFC followed this young man to the parking lot, they asked him to get out of the vehicle but he refused and one of the SFC people is alleged to have shot him on spot and took the vehicle.

MR KALUYA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for that information.

Madam Speaker, the point I would like to make is that before the so called spokesperson of the police comes to make a statement on national radio, he should not think we are fools and say that one of the Members that were arrested had a gun. I think that was a bit absurd, honourable minister. In fact, the people who would have given us the right information are the media. If hon. Kyagulanyi and the police are not agreeing on what happened, we are going to rely on the media, although the media has also been gagged; they have not given us any information. We are just seeing photos of Herbert Zziwa, one of the journalists who was roughed up. If it now comes to roughing up journalists, where are we going to get the truth from? 

I agree with hon. Aogon’s suggestion that Parliament should send a committee to investigate what is going on, especially the Committee on Human Rights. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 44 Members have contributed to the debate. I had to allow it because of the environment. Honourable minister, I want to know whether it is true that Mr Kassiano Wadri has been disqualified. Did he participate in any election offence? What we want to know is whether hon. Wadri Kassiano is free to contest in the election.

THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, we have been here in this House the whole of this afternoon and we just heard the report from the honourable member, claiming that hon. Wadri has been disqualified. We cannot say “no” or “yes”. I think it is only the Electoral Commission that can disqualify a candidate on good grounds. Therefore, it would not be fair at this moment to conclude with a report that is alleged to have been put on social media regarding the disqualification of hon. Wadri; it sounds strange, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, in such circumstances where the country is being tested, it is not enough for the honourable minister to also continue speculating by saying, “We cannot say ‘yes’ or ‘no’”. What is usually done is that the ministers withdraw from the Chamber, since they are two or three here, make a call and then come back to inform the House, so that we can deliberate with facts, from an informed point of view. 

This issue is critical because the voting is tomorrow. Therefore, as Parliament, we need to take a position on this very critical matter. The minister can excuse himself for two minutes and then give us a clear position about the status of hon. Wadri.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, you asked a very pertinent question to the minister. As guided by hon. Ssekikubo, it is important that that question should be answered.

Madam Speaker, there are more questions that arose in the debate. The fact that hon. Wadri and his entire team are under detention yet the election is tomorrow, I think a statement of this nature is supposed to answer questions but not create more questions. There is no way we can be here as Parliament and yet democracy is at stake because an election is going to take place and certain things are being done, even against the ideals of the current Government – (Interruption) - The main reason as to why the NRA went to the bush and why some of us joined it was because of stealing elections and also the security issues that have been raised. 

We still have three years before I take over in the 2021 elections (Laughter). We cannot have this kind of situation for the next three years, where anyone can be killed by stray bullets and candidates are arrested. We still have three years and many more elections to conduct. Even the 2021 elections will have issues. If a mere parliamentary election can have this type of violence, what about the election in which I will remove the current President? Shall I be safe?

Madam Speaker, these are very serious issue that affect all of us and therefore, the minister should answer those questions. Parliament is supposed to sit from 2.00 p.m. to 11.59 p.m. Therefore, we are ready to wait for the minister, so that he can answer these questions. He can just make a phone call to the Electoral Commission and the DPC of Arua and then he tells us whether our colleagues are safe. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, kindly give the closing remarks and the answer to that issue.

7.51
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Madam Speaker, let me take this opportunity, once again, to thank Members for the inquiries they have made in the course of the debate this afternoon. I will make seven brief statements to summarise what we have discussed this afternoon.

First of all, I would like to state that doubts have been expressed about my statement that the rear windshield of the President’s car was broken. For me to continue to discuss that would be to force me to say more than I should say. Therefore, let us be careful about talking of things we do not know much about. 

Secondly, in the course of the discussion this afternoon, a matter was raised about the unfortunate incident of the death of Yasin Kawuma. Let me state that no one has a right to take the life of another person unless that right is granted by law. Therefore, the matter of the death of Yasin is one that we will continue to investigate. We will establish who caused his death and the person responsible shall be punished.

Thirdly, innuendos have been voiced in the course of this debate that the fracas happened while the President was around. I have stated that the President’s car was pelted. The President proceeded to Ayivu County, where his chopper was parked. The issue of the police trying to contain the confusion happened when the President was no longer in Arua Municipality. 

Fourthly, an issue has also been raised as to where the colleagues I mentioned, who have been arrested, are. I would like to state that those colleagues are with the police and are making statements.

Fifthly – (Interjections) – Can I complete, please?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to conclude. We need to go. We have been here since 2 o’clock. Please conclude.

GEN. (RTD) ODONGO: Fifthly, hon. Ssewungu emphatically asked if I believe. I would like to say that I am happy that my friend, hon. Ssewungu, has followed my life for quite some time now. What I believe does not matter; what I can prove matters. We, the leaders, have a responsibility for our actions. It is not sufficient for us to run away from our responsibility. 

Sixthly, I was asked what the justification is for arresting these colleagues. You all know that the police can arrest on reasonable suspicion and once they have been arrested, it is incumbent upon them to proceed to prove. Therefore, if there is reasonable suspicion, you can be arrested. 

Seventhly, I would like to say that what we have discussed reminds me of a report which is in the records of this House. It is a report by a committee chaired by the then Member of this House, hon. Augustine Nshimye, when he talked about political violence. It reminds me, in particular, about our role as the political elite in fomenting violence. This is not acceptable. We must take our responsibility, guide our people and advise them accordingly.

Finally, Madam Speaker, you asked a question about hon. Wadri’s case - as to whether he is disqualified. I will not be able to confirm or deny, but if you give me a little bit of time, I can confirm or deny whether he has been disqualified. However, all I know is that there is a process to disqualification, including an investigation and a report from the Electoral Commission. I can confirm what the situation is, if given time.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you very much for the work done.

(The House rose at 7.57 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 15 August 2018 at 2.00 p.m.)