

Wednesday, 15 August 2018

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. We have started a bit late because we had many engagements in the morning. However, I hope that we shall be able to catch up with our programme.
		
In the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of St Theresa Primary School in Kakumiro. They are here. (Applause) They are represented by hon. Nabbanja Robinah and hon. Kasirivu Atwooki. You are welcome. 

We also have pupils and teachers from Sunlight Learning Centre in Buikwe. They are represented by hon. Judith Babirye and hon. Paul Musoke Sebulime. You are welcome. (Applause) 

We also have pupils and teachers of St Michael Primary School, Kagadi. They are represented by hon. Janepher Mbabazi and hon. Eric Musana. (Applause) 

We have pupils and teachers of Maanyi Community Primary School in Busujju, Mityana District. They are represented by hon. David Lukyamuzi Kalwanga and hon. Judith Nabakooba. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, there are a few issues of national concern. Use only two minutes, honourable members.

3.00
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. University students are resuming studies and my concern is the issue I raised last year pertaining to Bunyoro University. There are six districts that make up Bunyoro. If you are in Kiryandongo, Masindi or Buliisa and you would like to attend university, you have to cross through Kafu and Luweero to come to Kampala. When you are the other side in Hoima, Kibaale and Kakumiro, you still have to cross through Kafu, Kiboga to come to Kampala for university education.

When I raised this issue, Madam Speaker, you directed the Ministry of Education and Sports to come with feedback. However, to date, the people of Bunyoro are still demanding for a university. They do not know the status of the university or when it will be operational. It is my humble prayer that a statement is given on the Floor of this House so that the people of Bunyoro know why their university is not operational. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I would like to back hon. Kasumba on this because in 2015, this House passed a resolution to establish Bunyoro University, together with Kabale, Soroti and Lira universities. Namasagali and Bunyoro universities were to become operational in the financial year 2016/2017; we would like to know what happened. The Minister of Education and Sports is not here. Prime Minister, there was a resolution of this House in 2015; we want answers.

3.02
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I shall follow up the matter and report back. Thank you.

3.03
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu County North, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance concerning the number of children suffering from nodding syndrome who are being defiled in Aruu North County. 

When we visited Atanga and Awere subcounties, one of the medical personnel told us, Members of Parliament, that there is a particular medicine that is given to these children to avoid them from getting frequent attacks or falling into water or fire. However, this medicine increases the libido levels of these children and they actually end up looking for men who defile them.

My prayer is that if possible, Government should recommend alternative medicine so that we can reduce on the number of defilement victims in Pader District. Right now, Caritas puts the number of children who have been defiled in the district at 44 – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, we discussed the issue of children with nodding syndrome who are suffering multiple problems. In Kitgum, as well as Lamwo District, these children are still tied with ropes because the other family members have to go out to look for a livelihood, especially the mothers.

Last time, as Parliament, we agreed that there is need to have nodding disease centres operationalised. They were closed down after a Good Samaritan, Dr Suzanne Gazda, from the United States of America (USA), left. As Parliament, we have not been able to locate money to reopen these centres where these children are kept safe and monitored. I would like to think that it is high time, following the submission of my colleague and the information on the ground, that this Parliament approves funds to have the original and new centres opened in the districts which are affected by nodding syndrome. 

As I speak now, there is more information to the effect that we even have doctors from Australia who have been waiting to come on board. However, we need the Minister of Health to cooperate and allow a helping hand in this area. As long as these centres are not operational, these children will constantly be defiled, even if they do not go out to look for men. This is because they are isolated; the parents are not there. Thank you for giving way.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we shall direct the Minister of Health to come and tell us the plans for the rehabilitation of those children. However, we also need to know whether it is true that the drug contains an aphrodisiac, because that is a serious matter. The minister should come and explain to us those two issues.

3.07
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a very important matter concerning the renewal of the tenure of the Board of Directors of the Financial Intelligence Authority. 

As you know, the term of office for this board expired on June 30th this year. This board was put in place specifically to help us fight against money laundering in Uganda. However, from June to date, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not appointed or reappointed its members. As you said yesterday, you have not received any letter or any communication from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Madam Speaker, there are some members of that board who had challenges. At this stage, I would like to ask the minister when he is going to appoint the new board so that we know specifically what is happening. There are even intelligence reports saying that the old board still holds meetings. I do not know under which law that is happening, if it is true. For us in Teso, we say that somebody can deny you anything – food, water, etcetera - but nobody can deny you information. Madam Speaker, here is a letter that was written by the minister -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I told you yesterday that I have actually not yet received that letter although people have been talking about it. 

MR AOGON: Thank you so much. The information I would like to give my brother is that at the time Rt Hon. Oulanyah was presiding, I raised a point of procedure. I asked the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and confirm or deny having reappointed specific members of that board, especially Madam Bagyenda. The minister promised to come here and give information. However, up to now, that information has not been brought to the Floor for Parliament. We are in darkness; we do not know whether she has been reappointed or not. The minister needs to confirm or deny this before we get to know where to start from. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is directed to come and inform this House when he is renewing the tenure of the board of the Financial Intelligence Authority and of course, the composition.

MAJ (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, I am called Guma from Ibanda District. You and I, and a few others in the House, have been here for a while. For the last two years, I have observed that there is a procedural problem in the Tenth Parliament. 

Our rules say that when Cabinet is absent, this House cannot meaningfully transact any serious business. Madam Speaker, Members have raised issues of national importance but the majority of the Cabinet ministers are absent. As we speak, there are no more than ten out of about seventy ministers. You will excuse me, but it is really disturbing. We are adult Ugandans elected to come here to discuss national issues. Members have raised various issues but there are no ministers to respond. 

Madam Speaker, this has been disturbing me for a while. I would want to know whether it is procedurally correct for our colleagues, the ministers, to continue defying the proceedings of the House. The President appoints a minimum of two ministers for every portfolio. Presumably, it is only security which has one minister. Really, if Minister X has a commitment, why can’t Minister Y appear here? It is as if we are - Madam Speaker, I would want to request you to direct the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to whip his ministers. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I think the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business is aware about that directive because it has been given on a number of occasions. However, certainly, there are issues of finance that have been raised and the Minister of Finance, Planning Economic Development is not here. I also think the Minister of Works and Transport is not here. You see, I do not know whether I should stop Members from saying what they want to say. I would like them to raise their issues. I do know whether I should stop them until the ministers have come. I do not think that is fair to the Members.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, what hon. Guma is saying is very serious. When we were debating the budget and the tax laws here, I was on record as having asked the Speaker then, Rt Hon. Oulanyah, why the Attorney-General was not present while the House debated taxation on mobile money and Over-The-Top (OTT) services. See what is happening now - we have had problems with those legislations. I do not know whether the Attorney-General is a minister or he was appointed to just have an office without appearing here. 

There were issues raised here; for example, when we talked about nodding disease, I was one of the five Members you selected, led by the honourable Dr Bitekyerezo, to go to northern Uganda where we spent three days, taking up all the responsibility to do some work in regard to nodding disease. We do not have any status report on these children. The report we are getting is that they are being defiled. 

The Constitution grants us 22 ministers but because we have clawback in the Constitution, we have 80 of them moving out. Recently, when we were in Kalungu celebrating World AIDS Day, none of the health ministers was present. This is about handling AIDS but the Minister for the Presidency was there defending the ministers. It is not fair; we cannot proceed like this. Now, we are going to enact some laws but the Attorney-General is not around. 

Whenever we bring up matters of national importance, we are aware, Madam Speaker, that you call and inform the ministers. Why don’t they come on time? Nowadays, these ministers even have sirens for their vehicles yet they do not have right of way. All their vehicles keep making funny noises along the roads. Sirens for vehicles procured at Shs 600 million. Haven’t you seen this, Members of Parliament? We give them way because we want them to arrive here on time to attend House. 

Gen. Moses Ali is here waiting to say, “I can answer; give me some time.” We shall praise you, Gen. Moses Ali, for being a General but your ministers are doing us a disservice. The Prime Minister himself is very irregular here. He only comes only for the Prime Minister’s Question Time and then disappears. 

3.16
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have also always been on record that it will be difficult to ask me to say where the ministers are. It will not be possible for me to answer that question because I do not know where these people are now. (Laughter)

Secondly, Madam Speaker, these ministers are not actually ours alone; they are yours too. When the President appointed them, it is you who vetted them. Nobody can be a minister without going through your hands. So, do not blame us alone; you are also responsible. (Laughter) Find a way of handling these ministers because I cannot do anything. If they were not vetted, they would not be sitting in front here. Therefore, find a way because this is a common problem now. (Laughter) Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are aware of the constitutional provisions in Article 118 for sanctioning ministers; take them up. 

3.18
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. I arise on an issue of urgent national importance, which pertains to the payment of salaries of civil servants in districts including my district, Kaliro.

Today is 15th of August. The civil servants should have received their salaries by 25th of July but as I speak, they have not received their July salaries. This particular month is unique because university students are reporting to their institutions of learning. To receive an admission letter, you must have paid a portion of the tuition fees. I have received complaints from parents whose children have failed to get admissions because their salaries have not been paid. 

At this time, they should be working on the salaries of August but July is not paid yet. I request that you direct the Minister of Public Service to come here tomorrow and give an explanation to the nation as to why these civil servants have not received their salaries. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, tomorrow is too late; let the minister come here today because this House passed a resolution that a civil servant must be paid by the 28th. He should come here because he is in breach of our resolution. 

3.20
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance regarding taxes in Uganda. 

I had a very big challenge in Gulu last week when the business community wanted to close all their shops because of the approach that Uganda Revenue Authority is using especially on tax arrears. There are challenges of corruption; you have to pay some money so that you are given a preferential amount to clear. 

Madam Speaker, this is why I wanted the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with Uganda Revenue Authority to proceed to Gulu to find out what is on the ground. There are arrears that have accrued from long before the war. Many people are closing businesses because of loans that they have to clear every month. I pray that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development takes this matter very seriously, otherwise they are threatening to close shops in Gulu until Uganda Revenue Authority clears what is supposed to be done. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be able to respond to this issue when he comes to answer on the matter about salaries.

3.22
MR EMMANUEL KIGOZI (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the newly commissioned Entebbe Express Highway. 

There is a problem with part of the project around the Munyonyo spur, which comes from Kajjansi to Munyonyo. The main Entebbe Express Highway was designed in such a way that when it meets the local feeder roads, it either goes above or below. At this point, however, it goes across the road yet the road was designed for express travel. At those junctions, especially those that go to Serena Hotel, Busaabala Road junction and others, vehicles often collide. In order to correct the problem, they installed traffic lights which have not been working for two months now and motorists do not know what to do. People and vehicles keep crossing from Kajjansi, Entebbe, and from the city as they rush to the airport at breakneck speed. 

We request Government to redesign those sections of the road so that we reduce traffic, or at least make sure that they have other measures that are better than the installed traffic lights. This is because speed is killing people.

THE SPEAKER: The minister of works should come and address the House on that issue next week. 

3.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I rise on an issue of national importance. 

Yesterday, we deliberated on the issue of our colleagues who went missing. Up to now, apart from the rumours we are receiving - Philly Lutaaya sang a song entitled, “Today it’s me; tomorrow someone else.” You and I must stand up and fight this. His struggle was about HIV/AIDS, but ours is political. Five of our colleagues are missing. Yesterday, we demanded to know their whereabouts, but it was not very clear.

They have not been presented to court and they cannot be given police bond because we are not very sure where they are - in police or military detention - yet we are sitting here, legislating, as if nothing is happening. I am speaking with a lot of pain. As Members of Parliament who care about our colleagues, we are not going to simply sit here; we are going to hunt for them. Even if it means dividing ourselves into three groups, we will do it in order to find them.

Rumours reaching us indicate that people like hon. Kyagulanyi are badly off. They say he is detained in a military barracks. Are we supposed to go to all the military barracks to find him? Are we supposed to travel throughout the North looking for the rest of them? If you do not see us in the House - I do not see the Minister for Security, the Minister of Internal Affairs or the Minister of Defence. We can no longer take this. It was not properly clarified yesterday; so, we have to leave in order to find our colleagues. These are honourable Members of Parliament; they cannot be treated like chicken thieves –(Interruption)
	
MR JULIUS OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I rise on the Floor of Parliament to give information to the Leader of the Opposition. This afternoon, we received images of our colleague, hon. Zaake, lying in an unknown place like a dead man. It took us by surprise this afternoon. There is no way an institution of Government, like this Parliament, can proceed to discuss business as usual in this House when the Government institutions that are concerned are not in position to assure the country about the legislators that went missing.
 
Madam Speaker, we cannot proceed with business here. Under the current situation, only you can prevail over them and mount pressure on them so that Government comes to the Floor of Parliament to tell this country about what has happened to the Members. We cannot continue like this.

The information I am giving is that all the arrested Members of Parliament have been tortured to a level you would never expect of a Member of Parliament in a country that observes good governance and the rule of law. That is why we as the Opposition, under the leadership of our Leader of the Opposition (LOP), are not going to sit here until all the Members of Parliament who are in unknown detention are brought to light for the people of this country to see them. That is the information I am giving.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable Leader of the Opposition for allowing me to give further information.

The situation in which our colleagues are is so alarming. We were informed that hon. Zaake was tortured and if you see his pictures, his eyes are swollen, blood is flowing from his hands. As for our colleagues who were transferred to Gulu Police Station, the police officers are not allowing anybody to see them, not even their lawyers. 

The way our colleagues are being mistreated is serious. We need the Government to take serious action. I have just come from Arua. We witnessed what took place and if we continue in this direction, we shall ruin our country and kill our generation. Uganda shall not be called a state in the near future. Thank you.

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Security or the Minister of Defence. The First Deputy Prime Minister is here, maybe he can tell us clearly what to expect. Otherwise, I am asking those of us in the Opposition – but it is not only for Opposition Members of Parliament; those of us who care should just move out, divide ourselves and we go to look for our colleagues. (Applause)

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, tell us very clearly, and it must be clear and not vague as the honourable minister of security was yesterday. Thank you.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we had a fully-fledged debate on this matter. However, what did not come out is where the Members are being detained. Therefore, can we demand this from Government; before we close the sitting today, we would like to know where our colleagues are and when are they going to court. (Applause)

MR YAGUMA: Madam Speaker, the issue is serious. Yesterday’s report was not sufficient. I would suggest that the Prime Minister gives an account of what is happening now because the pictures are on social media. It is a very serious issue.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Prime Minister can answer those questions. I would like the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Security to respond.

3.33
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I have been sitting here and I do not have information about the whereabouts of our colleagues. I have to look for the information, but I will have to find out before I can say anything –(Interjections)

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, in the event that even the Prime Minister does not have information, we are left with nothing but to move a motion that this House be suspended and we all go and look for our colleagues who are not in the House. I submit. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to give the Prime Minister, together with his ministers, an hour to bring the information to us before we take a decision. Can we allow ourselves an hour to receive the information?

MR YAGUMA: Madam Speaker, I suggest we suspend the House. We must stand by our colleagues. Today, it is them; tomorrow, it will be us. I beg to move.

MS AOL: Seconded –(Applause) 

MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The situation might look as if it is simple to us this side but we are not sure whether we shall be treated well tomorrow. We need to be careful with the situation of our colleagues, the Members of Parliament. They deserve better treatment as Members of Parliament. 

It is true they might have misbehaved, but they are not the first to do so. Whenever people misbehave, they are taken to police stations that are known and they are always accessible. At the moment, the whole nation does not know where they are. It is better for you to tell us if they are dead, so that we start mourning. If they are alive, then we know what is taking place, whether investigations are going on or not. Therefore, I do support the idea that we suspend the House until we get information about our colleagues. Thank you. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with the proposal that you suspend the House for an hour, so that I can go and look for information and bring you whatever information I will get instead of suspending until tomorrow or the day after; it makes no difference.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, the House is suspended until 4.45 p.m.

(House was suspended at 3.37 p.m.)

(On resumption at 5.02 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suspended the House so that the Prime Minister could go and establish the location and situation of our colleagues. I do not know where he is. Minister for Presidency, do you have any idea? 

5.03
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Ms Esther Mbayo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You suspended the House on the premise that the Prime Minister would go and tell the Minister of Security to come here. We are equally waiting for him to come. 

5.04
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank you for your humility and the heart you have for our colleagues and indeed for this entire Parliament. 

The matter that led to the suspension of the House is a very serious one and it has caused a lot of anxiety. Even when you suspended the House, I received over 20 calls requesting me to update them on what exactly Parliament is doing about this issue. Now the Prime Minister, the Minister of Security and the Minister of Defence and even the Government Chief Whip are not here. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that in your wisdom, you find it right to adjourn this House so that we all converge here tomorrow, even if it means coming here by 10.00 a.m., for Government to update this country about the whereabouts of our colleagues and the state in which they are. It would even be good if they are produced before us, alive or dead. Hon. Francis Zaake’s state is worrying and we are being told that hon. Robert Kyagulanyi is in a worse state because he was vomiting blood. 

Therefore, I request that you adjourn the House and let Government put their house in order and gather all the information as we also gather information on our side. They should deliver these colleagues, dead or alive, before this Parliament tomorrow. I thank you. 

5.05
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I know that torture is outlawed in this Parliament. I also second what hon. Benard Atiku has said. This is for all of us, Members of Parliament. It is very sad; I thought the immunity and privileges we have also extend to when we are out there and we should not be treated like that.

In the Eighth Parliament, I used to caution the then Prime Minister, hon. Amama Mbabazi. I told him that as he tried to set traps, some of those traps would also get him. I think some of them caught up with him. Therefore, this is for all of us. 

Madam Speaker, this is not the first time that Members of Parliament have suffered. Even if somebody has committed an offence, it is not wrong to detain them at the police and then produce them before court within the 24-hour timeframe. If Members of Parliament can be treated like that and even tortured to a point of death - We are not very sure; we may even receive another body here if we do not open our eyes and tell these Government agencies, which are mistreating us, to stop –(Interruption) 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, honourable Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. 

Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give this House is that one of the Members of Parliament, hon. Robert Kyagulanyi, was airlifted from Arua and in the plane, he was tortured. By the time he reached Bombo, he had collapsed. We are being told - Government needs to explain this - that he was executed and Government is stranded with his body and that is why we cannot have the explanation. 

This is very serious because we do not want to debate in this House today and have his body here tomorrow yet we have not had the opportunity to understand the situation. If Government is saying, “No”, we have ministers here, can they come and refute this allegation and produce him. Thank you.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I warned this Parliament to look at the problems facing this country with one heart. The issue about the Member of Parliament for Kyadondo County East is a very serious matter. I confirm that this Member was airlifted from Arua to Bombo. By yesterday, the state had invited two doctors to save his life. 

Let Government come to the Floor of Parliament to tell the people of Uganda what happened in Bombo, if they think they are in the right position. Let Government stand on the Floor of Parliament to tell the people of Uganda what happened to Bobi Wine at Bombo. 

Madam Speaker, for your sake, do not have this problem on your hands. My prayer is that Government should give the statement here and these people should be produced here whether on a stretcher or not. Let Government do it because it is a serious matter. 

MS AOL: Thank you, Members, for the information you have given. We have all confirmed that there was a lot of torture; so, what do we do as Members of Parliament? Don’t we need some kind of resolution in this Parliament so that Members of Parliament move securely? We do not have to be secured by sharp shooters but we have to move freely to our people. 

Even when we commit offences, the treatment that we deserve should not be that kind of treatment. These are the people we budget for in this Parliament; these are people who should respect us. However, they treat us that way because we do not have guns and we do not need to carry them. The minister then comes here with a false statement filled with a lot of lies. They are not supposed to be liars. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I also would like to support hon. Benard Atiku’s proposal that we should adjourn to tomorrow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we were waiting for the Prime Minister and he is back; let us hear from him.

5.12
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I have come back with the message the House was expecting. You asked me to come back and inform the House. I was asked the following four questions, which have been answered:

    i) Where are the detained Members of Parliament? 
    ii) In what state are they?
    iii) When will they be released?
    iv) When will they be taken to court in case they are not released? 

These are the four questions I am going to answer. I would like you to take this in a calm way as it a Government statement. The Members of Parliament arrested included the following: Hon. Paul Mwiru; hon. Kassiano Wadri, former Member of Parliament; hon. Gerald Karuhanga; hon. Mike Mabikke, former Member of Parliament; and hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu –(Interjections)- Zaake, okay.

Hon. Kyagulanyi Ssentamu Robert was flown to Gulu Military Hospital for medical care but he is now okay. He was found with a gun and therefore, he will have to appear before the General Court Martial tomorrow. 

The other four will appear in the Chief Magistrate’s Court tomorrow in Gulu. The files are being processed by the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions in Gulu. 

The total number of those arrested as suspects is 33, together with the Members of Parliament. They are all at Gulu Central Police Station. 

The allegations of torture are not true –(Interjections)- This is a Government statement, Madam Speaker; let them listen carefully. They have said what they wanted to, but now we are also saying what we know; so, they should be careful. (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Members, take your seats.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: There is no torture happening at the Central Police Station (CPS) cells. The Regional Police Commander has taken charge of their safety. They are accessible through their relatives and lawyers. Finally, we condemn any form of election violence and disruption of peace and stability. Thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We demand that the Prime Minister be very clear. He stated clearly that the hon. Kyagulanyi was found with a gun; tell us very clearly what type of gun he was found with. Was it an AK47 or a small pistol? What type of gun and what is the serial number of that particular gun?

Madam Speaker, he dismissed the allegations that our colleagues were tortured. We have evidence and photos of our colleagues lying in hospital, almost lifeless. We have seen photos of hon. Zaake, for example. If you look at the photos, blood is oozing from his hands, his eyes are swollen and ears totally shuttered. Madam Speaker, I do not know if hon. Zaake tortured himself since the Prime Minister is trying to rubbish the allegations.

Finally, when I was in Arua yesterday, a police officer at the station told me that they are going to teach hon. Kyagulanyi and hon. Zaake a lesson they will never forget. 

MR SSEWANYANA: Madam Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has just mentioned that hon. Kyagulanyi was taken to a military hospital in Gulu and yet he said that they did not torture anyone and that they are safe and in good health. I wonder what takes someone to a military hospital yet they were healthy on Monday, attending a campaign rally and moving on their own. Now the Prime Minister comes here and tells us that they have not tortured any of our colleagues. What a lie, Mr Prime Minister! Is this the country that you want us to live in? Is this the freedom, peace and harmony that you wish us to have, with all this propaganda on the Floor of Parliament? 

Madam Speaker, Uganda is our country. The minister must be truthful to this country. He should tell us what our colleagues did that warrants them to be taken to a military hospital and yet we have civilian hospitals in Gulu.

MR KALUYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek further clarification from the Prime Minister concerning the information that he is giving us now. 

When you suspended the House for one hour, Madam Speaker, we thought that the Prime Minister was going to come with a clear picture of what is going on with our colleagues. Apparently, he has just circulated the reports that he has come up with. According to these reports, one of our colleagues, hon. Zaake, is missing on the list. We do not know if he is not a Member of Parliament or he is not even there.

Secondly, he has said that these people were not tortured. Most of us in this House and the country at large are depending largely on WhatsApp for information. When we were here and they were telling us how the President’s car was stoned, everyone was relying on information from a photo of the President’s car which was on WhatsApp. No one has seen that car. Until now, they are looking for the stone that could break a bulletproof car. 

Madam Speaker, let the minister, if need be, go back and come with clear information. We know our colleagues were tortured and are not even in the hospital or barracks, and he is not sure where these people are. Probably, when he delayed to come, he was just typing this from somewhere in the secretariat. Thank you very much.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give some information which will help us appreciate the state in which our colleagues are in. I can confirm that hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Gerald Karuhanga and hon. Michael Mabikke are at Gulu Central Police Station. Yesterday, I was with them the whole morning. However, I must say that the other – because in total they are 33 plus a baby -(Interjections)- Yes, 33 suspects and a child. 

There is a woman who was grabbed in the scuffle and she was taken with her baby. I pleaded with the District Police Commander (DPC) to release the women but the DPC refused. He said he was waiting for a team to come from Arua to release these people. I struggled and got food for these 33 people. They needed somewhere to sleep and I got for them two mattresses and that was rejected. When I got for them blankets, that is when the DPC said I could maybe take these ones.

Madam Speaker, I would like to tell you that the Members are not okay. There is a young girl called Abola and she was crying throughout. I think they kicked her badly. I pleaded with the DPC to give them a referral because the health unit at Gulu Central Police Station said they can no longer handle the situation, especially of three cases. They refused and said they would bring medical officers to the police station to treat them. By the time I left Gulu at about 3.00 p.m., none of that had happened. 

Therefore, if we are talking of no torture, please let us not deceive. I saw with my two eyes. This will not only end with these people that has been mentioned but it will come back to any of us seated here. Today, it is them but tomorrow it will be somebody else. Madam Speaker, what hurts me so much is that little child who is suffering innocently.

THE SPEAKER: Members, just make your contributions; no clarifications. We need to end this debate.

5.26
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Madam Speaker, what has been circulated is an official document from Government, according to the First Deputy Prime Minister. Government has given us accountability but this accountability we have got officially does not include hon. Francis Zaake. Who accounts for where hon. Zaake is? From what we have been told about the circumstances surrounding the honourable Members of Parliament, these are lies. 

Madam Speaker, through the concerns that have come up from the Members of Parliament, may we get full accountability of all Members of Parliament as they were arrested. We cannot depend on this statement if it has gaps. My humble appeal to you is that we suspend the House until tomorrow so that we get full accountability of all the Members of Parliament. I beg to move.

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, our roles require that the documents that are laid before the House are identifiable and traceable to the persons laying them, especially if the documents are coming from the Government. Apart from the Prime Minister being the one to present this paper before us, which is a very critical document at this point in time, I am raising a procedural matter because as you see, Members are discounting what has been put in this paper.

This document before us does not show anything that can be attributed to the Government and it is being presented by the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda. Is it procedurally right for us to even continue debating this document, which is not authenticated, before this august House?

Madam Speaker, there are many falsehoods in this paper. One of them is that the Members who were tortured can be accessible through their relatives and lawyers. Yesterday, the wife to hon. Robert Kyagulanyi circulated a WhatsApp message and together with the family, they were saying they had no information whatsoever about where their loved one was. 

By now, it cannot be confirmed in the House that they are sure, and even as Members we are still discussing back and forth and we are not sure where these Members are. I beg to move that we throw this document out with the highest contempt that it deserves. (Applause) 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure. Parliament wants to know what is happening on the ground. There are teams on the ground from Government and also our colleagues have people they are consulting on the ground. You and the rest of us are not on the ground but we are requesting you to guide and take a decision. When the First Deputy Prime Minister stepped out as Parliament directed, we had a meeting with the Prime Minister and we were talking to the people on the ground. What he has reported is what has come from the ground.

The point I am raising is that we need a team agreed upon by this House to go on the ground. Documents will be thrown out every time because a certain group is not satisfied. You send us to go and we rely on the informers on the ground. You call the Inspector General of Police, the DPC, the Minister of Internal Affairs on the ground to ask for information. When you bring the information here, which does not satisfy a certain group of people, what should the presiding officer do? Unless, you send a team – (Ms Betty Aol rose_) - I rose on a point of procedure, Madam Leader of the Opposition. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, despite the circumstances, we need to be courteous to one another. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I am sincerely looking for a way forward, where we shall receive information which will satisfy everybody. The Prime Minister stepped out for 30 minutes to get in touch with the people on the ground. I was in that meeting and what he has presented is what he was given. 

Can we find a way of getting a group probably to go on the ground and find out what exactly is happening in Gulu? Otherwise, it is one word against the other. This is the point of procedure that I wanted to raise.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course this statement cannot answer all our questions. The Government says one of the Members will appear before the court martial in Gulu tomorrow and others will be in the Chief Magistrate’s Court in Gulu. 

What we could do is to send some people to attend court and tell us whether they have really been charged or not. Let us propose four Members to go to Gulu and see whether they have been charged and then they come back and report to us. Hon. Ssewanyana, have you volunteered yourself? (Laughter)

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, while we are going to nominate four people to go and represent us in Gulu, I still would like to thank the Prime Minister for the information he has provided. He alleged that these people were not tortured. Our concern, therefore, is why hon. Kyagulanyi was taken to the military hospital if he was not tortured.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are going back into the debate; let us move forward. Let us agree to send four people to Gulu to attend the General Court Martial and also the Chief Magistrate’s Court. 

MS BETTY AOL: From our side, I would like to nominate hon. Allan Ssewanyana and hon. Gilbert Olanya. From the Government side – (Interjections)- Yes, we should have two people from this side and two from that side because we are all the same, even if some people like the Government Chief Whip are saying that we are not the same. All of us are Members of Parliament. We can nominate all the four from this side if the Government Chief Whip is shaking her head and taking it as a joke.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: The point I am raising is whether the Leader of the Opposition is in order to attack the whole Government Chief Whip who has not said anything. I did not say anything while she was submitting. She has continued to attack me and it is on record. She is claiming that I am not agreeing that we are the same, that I shook my head and said that we are not the same. Of course, I cannot be the same with hon. Ssewanyana; I cannot. The two of us are quite different. However, I had not said anything.

Remember that I am the one who moved the proposal, which is forging a way forward. Is she in order to intimidate the Government Chief Whip when she has just assumed the position?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let us be courteous to one another despite the apparent difficult environment we are in. Can we nominate the Members? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, on the ground we have the Minister of State for Internal Affairs and I would like to request that we choose some members of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs because they will be following up these issues. We are not setting up a special committee. We just want to get people who will help us. Therefore, the chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, plus two other people that they can choose, can help us go to the ground.

THE SPEAKER: Can we nominate the honourable chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights together with the chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs? - Who is not around? She was here yesterday.  

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In situations like this that can turn out to be contentious, I would like to propose that we have five people – an odd number – so that we can have the Opposition take two slots and we have an independent Member. In this way, we can get a comprehensive picture. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aja Baryayanga, can you nominate an independent Member.

MR AJA BARYAYANGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to go there myself and see. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have the hon. Jovah Kamateeka. Who is the new chair for defence? Okay, we also have hon. Amule and hon. Aja Baryayanga. You gave us one name; you did not give us a second one. 

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, we have hon. Allan Ssewanyana. We would like to also nominate hon. Sseggona. We want the learned friends who have some legal background. Let us have these two, but we also request that they should be allowed to access those prisoners. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: That is why we are asking them to go to Gulu. The head of delegation is hon. Amule -(Interjections)- That cannot stop her from going to Gulu. 
 
MS AMULE: Madam Speaker, I believe I can speak for myself. I know I have a baby. If I think it is impossible for me, it is between me, my Chief Whip and you and I will inform your office. However, I know that I can handle. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amule is the head of the delegation. The members are hon. Jovah Kamateeka, hon. Sseggona, hon. Ssewanyana and hon. Baryayanga.
 
MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, out of those indicated as arrested, - I know that we are representing all shades and opinions in this House - apart from hon. Paul Mwiru who is from the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) party, hon. Gerald Karuhanga is an Independent, hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu is an Independent and hon. Zaake, who is missing on the list, is an Independent. How about if this other side connived against the Independents? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aja Baryayanga is there.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the point I am making is that we would need an additional Independent MP. This is a political process, which is near legal. We do not want any side to feel overpowered by this matter. Therefore, I just move that you permit an additional Independent MP and Parliament facilitates them to go, and it does not have to be me. I decline, although I would be a good candidate. (Laughter)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, in the Eighth Parliament and the Ninth Parliament, matters concerning colleagues’ welfare were matters of the Commissioners of Parliament. I am not comfortable that we are beginning to approach such a matter in a partisan manner.

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence; if the Parliamentary Commission is still responsible for Members’ welfare – which I think is still the mandate in our rules – the commission should have moved yesterday and it should be the commission reporting. As we are getting wrong stories through WhatsApp, the commissioners of Parliament should by now be giving us the right version using ICT. 

Madam Speaker, I request that we do not take a partisan path. We still have Commissioners of Parliament, unless they would like us to move a vote of no confidence in them and we start electing them because when we had elected commissioners, there was no such fracas. It was the commissioners who informed us about what was happening to our colleagues. I seek your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you insist on the commissioners, it may not be tomorrow because they are not here. In addition, these committee chairpersons are appointed by us. They are representatives of this House. We approved them recently here. The commissioners are not here.

MR CENTENARY: Madam Speaker, I would also like to seek your indulgence on Parliament sending a team to go and witness our very own Member of Parliament, who we very well know has never been recruited into the army, going to appear before a court martial whose jurisdiction is very clear. 

As lawmakers, we should not be part of a scheme by the army to topple the rights of ordinary citizens. Tomorrow, somebody is going to drop a gun into your car, frame you and they will take you to the court martial. It is going to be a very bad precedent that we are setting now. Is it procedurally right, Madam Speaker, for Parliament to approve of the illegality of bringing somebody before a court of law, which does not have jurisdiction –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Centenary, are you suggesting that we leave Kyagulanyi’s issue and only concentrate on the Chief Magistrate’s Court? 

MR CENTENARY: What I am saying is that unless they give us hon. Kyagulanyi Ssentamu’s army number, he should also be produced before the Chief Magistrate’s Court. It should be the one which will determine the level of criminality that hon. Kyagulanyi committed. Therefore, Parliament should not be part of the machinery that will go and sit comfortably to witness our very own civilian being tried before a court martial.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, we ought to move extremely carefully as Parliament. I have just come here running from a meeting with a group that has been to Gulu and has been able to see the detainees. They have sent me pictures and those pictures do not have hon. Kyagulanyi and hon. Zaake. The pictures were taken because the son of Kassiano Wadri was permitted to go and see the detainees in Gulu. 

Secondly, hon. Kyagulanyi was captured in a hotel and while he was being captured, not a single gun was recovered from him, and we can bring evidence to that effect. The information we have is that hon. Kassiano Wadri had a pistol and it had been long given to him. For a statement to come before Parliament from the Prime Minister and we allow an ordinary citizen of this country to be court-martialled and you are busy sending a committee of Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: What do we do? Do we leave them?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Parliament cannot witness a breach of our Constitution. We would rather not be there so that they do their stuff and we do not legitimise it by the presence of an institution like Parliament. We would be making a horrible mistake. 

Our duty, as we swear in, is to protect and defend this Constitution to the letter. We would be the last people to allow a civilian to be court-martialled and Parliament is there as a witness.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Kabaziguruka was before the General Court Martial and he is a Member of this House. What did you do about that?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I have listened very carefully to the proposal that Parliament cannot be part of an illegality by going to witness a civilian being tried before a military court. However, I think that the way we were proceeding was right. 

The First Deputy Prime Minister has given a position to this House and this House wants to have another opportunity to verify. Therefore, it was proposed that we have five open-minded and impartial people to go and see and come back here and inform Parliament so that a decision can be taken by the House. I propose that we proceed that way and conclude this matter. (Applause)

However, now that I have the Floor, Madam Speaker, I think the time is now for the House to start a debate on electoral violence. We have had a death arising out of an electoral process in Bugiri. Immediately thereafter, we have had another death. In the past elections, many of us were forced to react to threats of violence in our constituencies. Madam Speaker, the problem of electoral violence is moving from bad to worse and therefore, the House needs to find a solution. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as requested, most of those Members are independent Members of Parliament, so let us add hon. Oboth to the team. 

Honourable members, the team of six Members should go to Gulu tonight so that tomorrow morning, some of them will be at the General Court Martial and others at the Gulu Chief Magistrate’s Court. We expect them to report back to the House. House adjourned to Tuesday.
 
(The House rose at 5.53 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 21 August 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 
