Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Wednesday, 28 August 2019

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I have two rulings to make, but I do not see the people who are supposed to be directly benefitting from these rulings in the House. 

One is on externalisation of labour - the question raised by hon. Medard Sseggona on whether we should not constitute a select committee. I will be dealing with this when the people concerned are in the House. 

The other ruling that I have to make today is on the objections raised by the Deputy Attorney-General on the motion by hon. Wilfred Niwagaba seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019.” The learned Deputy Attorney-General raised some issues on a procedural matter and I am required to give guidance on those before we proceed or we do not proceed with the debate on the motion for leave by hon. Niwagaba. 

I do not see the honourable members here; so I will pause this and deal with them when they are here, so that they can receive these rulings directly. 

There are Members who wanted to raise some issues; hon. Hillary Lokwang, you wanted to raise some matters. 

2.09
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter regarding the rampant killings and deteriorating security situation in Kaabong District. 

Mr Speaker, on Sunday, at around 3.00 p.m., one of the Ik boys was caught, interrogated and afterwards shot dead and his eyes were plucked out. The criminals were confirmed to be Turkana warriors from Kenya. On the same night, two villages were looted, just next to my home. One person was also killed in the neighbouring sub-county of Lodiko in Dodoth East County. 

Last month, one man was also killed in my constituency. Another boy from Lotinyam Village in my constituency was also killed when he was riding back from Kenya. Last year, on the 25th of December, my student, while travelling on a motorbike, was also killed. On 3 December 2018, a soldier and a boda boda rider were both gunned down just a few metres behind me. In the same month, one person was killed in Kalapata in a village called Kurao in my neighbourhood.  

Mr Speaker, unreported silent serial killings and rampant cattle theft in Kaabong District continue happening each and every day, night and day. The borders are porous and there are many illegal guns roaming around Karamoja’s borders, covering around 350 kilometres.

Security is thin on the ground, with no patrols. I have written to the Minister of Information Communication Technology (ICT) and National Guidance and also MTN and Airtel to provide network in vain. 

There is also no water to permit deployment of the security personnel. Lack of security roads is also one of the major problems, Mr Speaker. 

My prayers for intervention are: 

1. 	More deployment should be stepped up by the security personnel. 
2. 	Government should provide guns for home guards for the Ik people because – (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR LOKWANG: We do not keep cattle but we are purely farmers. Abim and Karenga districts were given home guards who are even inside their homes. Nevertheless, the people along the borders, like the Ik people, are vulnerable. Hence, we need to be given home guards because these people are well versed with the terrain of the place. If you do not use the Ik people, it will be very difficult even for the security personnel to track these criminals. 

3. 	Mr Speaker, Government should provide telecommunication networks along the borders. 
4. 	There should be water for security roads and then cross-border roads to enhance trade and interaction. 

I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Lokwang. Honourable minister, the Member has raised some substantial issues happening in Ik in Kaabong District: 

    i. There is cattle rustling by people believed to be from Kenya - the Turkana. 
    ii. They are killing people and taking livestock and other things. 
    iii. People are in distress. 
    iv. They have sought intervention from the ICT and national guidance ministry that there should be network in the area to help communication but there is nothing. 
    v. There is no water so the soldiers cannot be deployed far since they have no supply of water and several other matters that the Member raises concerning his people. 

2.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are very sorry for coming in late but we will follow up the issues with the relevant sectors to ensure that they are addressed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is also the issue of cross-border proliferation of arms that has started again, which will be a threat to some of the programmes in this country. Therefore, you might have to raise this matter more strongly with your people so that they can deal with it. Thank you. 

2.14
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance on the state of the regional referral hospital in Kabale District. 

In Kabale District, a mother, Sarah Niwandida, 29 years old and resident of Kitunduguru Village in Buhara Subcounty, delivered triplets at Kabale Regional Referral Hospital. These triplets were left with some days to mature. However, due to shortage of incubators, the referral hospital referred this mother to Rugarama Hospital, which is a private medical facility that was started by a missionary. 

During my visit there, I found very many referrals from Kabale Hospital, much as the facility had over 20 incubators. On following up the matter, I found out that Kabale Regional Referral Hospital had only two incubators, which could not handle the three premature babies and others beyond that. 

This state of affairs is very disturbing, given that a regional referral hospital is referring patients to private facilities. I would like to know from the Minister of Health what the preparedness of our referral hospitals is in handling emergencies such as premature babies and whether these hospitals have such facilities in place. 

My prayer is that the Government, through the Ministry of Health, should ensure that all medical facilities that handle deliveries are equipped with adequate facilities such as incubators to save the lives of premature babies. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Yes, honourable minister.

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I would like to request that the Minister of Health comes during the course of this sitting to respond to this question. Otherwise, the issue raised by hon. Ndamira is important because we need to strengthen our referral hospitals. As Government, we are looking for resources to upgrade the 14 referral hospitals including the one in Kabale District. 

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank the honourable ministers for availing themselves this afternoon. 

Before we passed this year’s budget, this House received a motion, which was approved unanimously, from hon. Spellanza Baguma urging Government to improve on the health budget. At least, you are here and you are the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development. What we require of you is to tell us the steps you have taken, knowing that this is your mother district. 

The people of Kabale would like to hear their son, the minister in charge of finance, say something about what he is really doing to show that he has understands their plight, pain and agony. For each parent that loses a child, it is not as ordinary as anything else. 

Therefore, as Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you were here when the entire House unanimously approved and stated clearly, “we urge Government to increase the health budget”. It was not limited to the purchase of incubators and equipment but also to boosting the wages and salaries of health workers. Can you please enlighten the House and the country on the steps you have taken as the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in order to enhance the health budget.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the NRM Government has been putting in place systems and raising resources to better our health system; for example, we have completed the women’s specialised hospital at Mulago, which is now a state-of-the-art facility to help our mothers deliver in a better environment.

Secondly, we are refurbishing Mulago National Referral Hospital, which will be ready in the next two to three months.

Thirdly, we are also raising resources, through borrowing, to upgrade and equip the 14 referral hospitals. In the next two months, probably this facility will be here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.20
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, mudslides occurred in my constituency in Bulago and Nabiwutulu subcounties. As a result, a lot of damage was caused. Crops were destroyed, livestock lost and the wananchi are displaced. They are now camping at nearby churches and schools. 

The estimated number of affected people is about 9,000. The particular place I am talking about is my home area; it is where I was born. Fortunately, I had moved to another area, where I am currently staying.

My prayers are:

    1. Government should intervene and assist the affected families with food and non-food items;
    2. The Ministry of Works and Transport, through Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) are requested to open up two roads - Buyaga-Bulogaya and Bulago-Bulegeni and Sipi-Buginyanya - which are totally blocked; and
    3. Government should consider the affected community to be among those to be resettled in Bunambutye Settlement Camp. I beg to submit.

2.22
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (MS Mary Karooro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable member, I am very sorry about what happened to your people. However, like we have been saying, we no longer talk about climate change but climate emergency and crisis. As we put these measures in place, we have to think about how to protect the environment.

Since this is an emergency, you can talk to the Chief Administrative Office (CAO) to immediately write and avail the letter to the Office of the Prime Minister and it will be handled. I know that there are some items that are not available right now, but we shall make sure that whatever is there is taken to your people. We need that letter as soon as possible. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have two schools - Homing Dove International Primary School and Ushindi Primary School both from Arua District. They are represented by hon. Kassiano Wadri and hon. Mourine Osoru. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming these two schools. You are very welcome. (Applause)

Minister of Health, while you were not yet here, matters were raised about Kabale Hospital where a mother gave birth to premature triplets but there were no incubators to look after them. They were referred to a private facility to save their lives. What are you doing about Kabale Referral Hospital? 

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (MS Sarah Opendi): Mr Speaker, my apologies. I got delayed outside here. I am surprised that Kabale Regional Referral Hospital does not have incubators. Maybe, they are just not enough –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Inadequate.

MS OPENDI: I expect a regional referral hospital to have incubators –(Interjections)– Yes, they have but they are not adequate. We have another method, in the absence of incubators, which we have also been encouraging - the Kangaroo method – and it is very effective. Mothers are encouraged to put their new born babies on their chest for some time. Of course –(Interruption) 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, honourable minister in charge of health, for giving way. The question that we would like to put before you is from a policy level, just like we discussed it before the budget was passed. The entire House unanimously agreed that we urge Government to increase funding in the health sector. 

From a policy level, you told us that every referral hospital should have at least a few incubators. The issue before you now is: What is that minimum number, at policy level, that you as a minister thinks should be at every referral hospital or at a healthcare centre, before we even talk about those other methods? Yes, in case of that absence, there is this improvisation by science, but what is that that every single person would expect? 

The honourable member clearly said there were only two incubators. In that case, assuming there is one person who walks into a referral hospital in Jinja, how many should he expect to find? What is the minimum number of incubators for a referral hospital in Uganda? Let us know that from you.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving me way. I am seeking clarification. With the option of using the Kangaroo method in a regional referral hospital, in the case that mother has triplets, how best can she use the Kangaroo method? If she puts one at the back, one at the breast, where does the other go?

MS RWAKOOJO: Is it in order for honourable Mbwatekamwa to make fun of us women? He has never given birth and he has no breasts. If you have three children, you can do it one at a time. He is just ridiculing us. If one is deep down in the village, they would do it one at a time. You cannot ask such questions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member just wanted to understand. It is effective if you have one child; you can hold it. However, if you have three, how do you do it? That is what he was asking. 

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that the Kangaroo method has been recommended by the World Health Organisation (WHO) and it is very effective. 

In situations where mothers give birth to more than one baby – we had a mother give birth to twins and another give birth to triplets - first of all, we expect that there is a wife and a husband. We expect the man to be there to support his wife during such situations for the Kangaroo method. You do not have to put the child on your breast for a long time; it is just for hours and then you put the child aside. We have had situations where an auntie or any other volunteer can come in and provide help for this Kangaroo method. It is allowed and it has been happening. 

Mr Speaker, to be more definite, allow me in a few minutes to get clarifications and I get back to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Mbwa, now you know that even if you have five, it can be managed. Honourable Mbwa, your name is such that you should come in a calm way –(Laughter)– so when you approach the minister in such a way, they think you might do the mbwa thing. (Laughter) That is why I stopped you from proceeding the way you were proceeding. 

I have two rulings to make. I do not see the people who should receive these rulings - the learned Deputy Attorney-General, hon. Sseggona, and hon. Niwagaba. They are not here. I do not know whether I should deliver my rulings in their absence because if I do not do it, it is going to affect the proceedings of this House. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE NEED FOR GOVERNMENT TO SUPPORT THE FAMILIES AFFECTED BY THE FATAL ROAD ACCIDENT AT KYAMBURA TRADING CENTRE IN RUBIRIZI DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My understanding is that the President offered Shs 5,000,000 per family. Is that what you are coming to tell the House? If that is what you are coming to tell us, then we should go to the next item. 

2.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Mr Speaker, the responsibility to handle disaster – because this is a disaster issue – lies with the ministry responsible for disaster preparedness in the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Allow me to tell the House exactly what happened, then I will conclude with the matter of the support and also – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue was very specific: What are you going to do to support the families? We do not need a background to that. 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are having discussions with the Office of the Prime Minister and specifically, the minister in charge of disaster preparedness.  We want to see what can be done because this is categorised as a disaster matter. 

However, like you said, Mr Speaker, the President came in very fast through our senior colleague, hon. Mary Karooro Okurut, and the families that were affected were given Shs 5 million each. We are in talks to see what can be done. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We all witnessed, through the media, what happened to the people of Kyambura. I would like to get clarification from the honourable minister as to whether the President’s pledge of Shs 5,000,000 per family for those that lost loved ones and Shs 1,000,000 to the others has already been delivered.

Secondly, what have you done so far, as Government, in terms of immediate rescue as we wait for the long term support that might come?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, you are supposed to be the one processing this clarification, not the Speaker. You are supposed to accept them or not accept them, not me. 

MR OTHIENO: Thank you. I have heard the minister saying that he is holding discussions with the Office of the Prime Minister but this goes to the minister in charge of transport. All these vehicles normally have third party insurance and I thought this would be the time when that insurance would be operationalised to assist the innocent victims of that accident. 

The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is: How effective is the ministry in operationalising the usage of third party insurance?

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I seek clarification from the minister. Even yesterday, along Masaka Road, a Global Bus had an accident and about five people perished. I was in Arusha with some Members. In Tanzania, police has curbed fast running vehicles. At one time, these buses had speed governors but they are now continuously driving very fast. 

I would like to seek clarification from the minister: What intervention are you making in your ministry to control speed and put back speed governors in those buses and lorries? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS KAROORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of compensation –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was there a reshuffle recently that I missed? I see a new Prime Minister. (Laughter)

MS KAROORO: Mr Speaker, the Shs 5 million that the President talked about is for the families of those who lost their loved ones and it is being processed. The Office of the Prime Minister had already organised Shs 500,000 per family and it is already at the district –(Interjections) - Why are you laughing, hon. Ssewungu? This a tragedy and it does not call for comedy on our part –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I am at pains to raise a point of order against my mother because I married from Bushenyi. The honourable member asked about what has been done for the people who were involved in the accident and that is what the minister was supposed to come here and answer. When the sitting Prime Minister tells us that the money that was first raised is at the district yet people who were involved in the accident are in their homes, is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think it is about systems. How do you reach those people? Do you fly by a chopper and start distributing the money?

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, she is from Bushenyi. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but the point is that the money was delivered to the district so that the district can handle the actual distribution.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, why should it come after a number of days?

MS KAROORO: Mr Speaker, I know my honourable colleague does not mean bad and so we shall leave it at that. Anyhow, the money was taken several days back and it is the district administration that is organising and giving out the money. 

Mr Speaker, it is like you, honourable, as a big man in your home, you cannot start dishing out food. Even though I am from a different district, the fact of the matter is that I represent Government. So, that money has been taken. Apart from that, the Office of the Prime Minister organised relief items – rice, tarpaulins, basins, plates and so on. Those items were delivered one and a half days after the tragedy. In addition to that, people who were hospitalised are going to get Shs 1 million. 

Therefore, the Shs 5 million and Shs 1 million are being processed. I cannot answer for things to do with the Ministry of Works and Transport –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Mr Speaker, the minister has clearly said that those who are hospitalised will be getting Shs 1 million. I have my worries. There was one province in Zambia, I think it was Kabwe, where there was an accident - I am not saying this will happen in Uganda – and when the President went there, he made an offer of $3,000 to the families of those who had died. What happened is that when the families of those who were in hospital heard about that, they made sure that they killed those who were in hospital in order to get the money. 

I am trying to tell you the reality. When they heard that for the dead you would get more, accident survivors that were in critical condition had their necks twisted. It was because of poverty.  That happened during President Kaunda’s time. 

Therefore, I am only urging you not to make promises that families who lose people will get more money than families of those ones who are bedridden. If some families realise that the person in the intensive care unit may not be capable of recovering, they may complete the job in order earn the money quickly. 

Probably, the clarification I would like to seek from you is whether it would not be prudent that instead of offering the Shs 1 million, you instead take care of the full hospital bills of those who are in critical condition, even if they are to be given further treatment outside the country. Give them assurance that Government will take care of their treatment until such a time that they are able to live a decent life. 

Mr Speaker, I plead with the minister that the best promise would be that Government will take care of the hospital bills of those who are in hospitals and maybe give them a contribution when they get better. Thank you.

MR ALERO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister. Is the Government now trying to set a precedent that each time there is an accident, people have to be compensated? Recently, we had accidents involving Gaaga Coach in Nakasongola and we also had an accident in Moyo District, where 23 people died, but they have not been compensated. Why do you it selectively? We have also had accidents involving Y.Y Coaches. 

Honourable minister, if this is the beginning, then it must be spread everywhere for everybody and it must be a policy to compensate everybody. Thank you very much.

MR ABBAS AGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, when the President visited the accident scene, in his condolence message to the people he mentioned that the oil company that owned the truck would compensate the victims. I heard him say that and I read it. So, I would like to have clarity from you on that. 

After the efforts being made by Government - of course, it is natural in our culture that when people have problems, you can send them some help - how is the Government helping the process to ensure that these families are compensated? That is important to know. This is because if we take long without having a clear roadmap, the families may have to run to lawyers to seek help to follow up the truck owners to compensate them. Thank you.

MR KAROORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank colleagues for raising those issues. Hon. Nsereko said that there is a danger that some of the relatives might kill their patients and make money. Really, we have to find out where the “rain started beating us” because if we can go to that extent - I do not buy the excuse of poverty. When you are a man and poor, do you practise prostitution with your mother? It cannot happen. Actually, Mr Speaker, there has been a rumour that                                                          on some of our highways, there are iron bar hitmen waiting by the roadside and when an accident takes place, they come out and finish off the victims. On that matter, we have to go back to the drawing board.

Some colleagues raised the issue of accidents and asked whether we are setting a precedent. I remember the President saying something like this, which I will find out: the issue of fire is different; for instance when there was a tragedy involving fire along the Northern Bypass, the compensation was different. For anything to do with fire there is a precedent, but for these other accidents, I am not an authority. I am only quoting what I heard the President say –(Interjections)- They cannot be okay; we have all lost people in those accidents. We are talking about human lives; I am only repeating what I was told.

The Member of Parliament from Rubirizi, who was there all that time and he almost died trying to rescue people, wanted to add something to the debate. Thank you.

MR TWESIGYE: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving me an opportunity to give more information. 

Mr Speaker, that accident happened right in my constituency. I was there from the first day and throughout the week with the honourable minister until the President came on Sunday. 

The Shs 5,000,000 was specifically for the people that lost their loved ones and the Shs 1,000,000 was a starting point for basic support for those in the hospitals. The President differentiated the money for compensation and the money given to families as a starting point. He advised that there should be a committee coordinated by the Minister for General Duties in the Prime Minister’s Office, hon. Karooro, and the Resident District Commissioner (RDC).

They started work on Monday. He asked them to critically assess the situation and guide Government on how they can come in and help. Meanwhile they are going to establish the owners of the company to see how the compensation arrangements could be handled. 

Additionally, a question was raised on whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs had done its work, because it was evident that when he called the Regional Police Commander (RPC) to explain, he could not explain whether the truck was comprehensively insured or it had third party insurance. That is why the President went ahead and said that there was need to dig deeper into the problem. 

That is the additional information I wanted to give. In my opinion, the minister is not contradicting herself. That was what the President said; he did not say that they were not going to help those people as a starting point. He said that there must be a comprehensive report about the accident. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think we will pause it here.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have consulted. Kabale Regional Referral Hospital has three functional incubators and not two as earlier stated. 

To answer hon. Nsereko, the regional referral hospitals should ideally have 10 incubators. Aware of this challenge, now that we are having many premature babies being delivered, they have prioritised the procurement of the incubators this quarter. However, they have been using the Kangaroo method in addition to the three incubators that they have, which has been effective. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of St Mark Nyarilo Primary School from Koboko District. They are represented by hon. Anite Evelyn and hon. Baba Diri Margaret. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

RESPONSE TO AN ISSUE RAISED BY HON. FRANCA AKELLO ON THE ALLEGED IRREGULAR AND FRAUDULENT DEDUCTIONS FROM EMOLUMENTS OF CIVIL SERVANTS IN AGAGO DISTRICT BY SOME MICRO-FINANCE INSTITUTIONS

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the statement has been uploaded on the intranet in response to the issues raised by hon. Judith Franca Akello on fraudulent loan disbursements and recoveries from civil servants in Agago District.

In March 20l9, we instructed the Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority (UMRA) to investigate the above concerns. I am pleased to report that the authority has concluded its investigations and the key findings are as follows:

i.) 	Bayport Financial Services and Platinum Credit (U) Ltd are money lending businesses with operations countrywide. They are categorised as “payroll lenders” and their activities have been licensed by the supervisor - UMRA.

In its investigations, UMRA confirmed cases of continued deductions even after the loan completion dates countrywide. This was attributed to:

a) 	Late remittance or non-remittance of monthly deductions by employers/local governments. In most cases, the affected civil servants dropped off the payroll for some months. As a result, their repayment instalments to the money lenders, as per the loan agreements, went into arrears.

b) 	Inadequate information sharing across key stakeholders and poor record-keeping resulting into variances in the agreed monthly instalment payments and actual deductions effected on the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System for some borrowers.

As a result of the above, the loan repayment periods for individual civil servants is affected and sometimes results into penalty interest charges. Unfortunately, these penalty charges are sometimes not disclosed to the borrowers in the loan agreements. 

On the issue of the payroll lenders fraudulently disbursing loans to civil servants who did not apply for the credit, UMRA confirmed that the complainants had indeed received the money on their respective accounts. The authority also obtained copies of the loan agreements that the money lenders allege were entered into with the complainants prior to loan disbursements and shall forward the cases to the Uganda Police to establish whether the complainants’ signatures were forged.

Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority also found that in some cases, the loan agreements prepared by the moneylenders did not clearly specify the interest rates payable and penalties for delayed repayment.
	
In view of the findings from UMRA's investigations, Government shall prioritise the following measures to address the challenges related to loan disbursements to and recoveries from civil servants by payroll lenders - we are taking the following actions:

1. 	We are going to conduct mass sensitisation of the public on the new Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions and Money Lenders Act, including the services of the Authority to address client complaints against money lenders; 

2. 	We would like to foster collaboration and coordination across all key stakeholders like the Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Local Government, Uganda Micro Finance Regulatory Authority (UMRA), Uganda Police Force and the private sector associations; 

3. 	UMRA is developing regulations and guidelines for the unique operations/activities of payroll lenders; 

4. 	UMRA has forwarded the cases involving allegations of forgery to the Uganda Police Force for further investigations and action; and 

5. 	UMRA has warned licensed money lenders that the authority shall take action against institutions that continue with unfair lending practices such as non-disclosure of vital information to the borrowers in loan agreements.

In conclusion, the issues raised by the honourable member were found to be true and we have reported them to police to investigate and take action. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Is there any supplementary question from Agago? There being none, let us go to the next item.

MS RWAKOOJO: Mr Speaker, on Thursday, 22nd August, the Rt Hon. Speaker gave the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries one hour to report here in order to answer the question, which appears as number two because it was three weeks from the time I raised this question on Foot and Mouth Disease. 

Ssembabule District neighbours Gomba West Constituency and we receive cattle every other week in Kyaayi Market. On the other alternate days, the cows are taken to Kifampa and Maddu markets. We are at high risk of contracting the said Foot and Mouth Disease and having our markets closed again, having earlier suffered for three years with the ban. We only recently had the ban lifted.

The question of vaccines and acaricides still lacks an answer. I am praying for your guidance on this matter because we are now going into the fourth week. Children are on holiday and their parents have to get them fees. If the markets in Gomba West are closed, we are going to suffer yet we still have no vaccines and acaricides.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the challenge you raise is the challenge I also face. There is no Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. There is no Minister of Internal Affairs. There is no Minister in charge of the Presidency. That is why I have gone to the next item.
 
RESPONSE TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. ESTHER ANYAKUN ON BLOCKAGE OF SIRONKO-MUYEMBE-NAKAPIRIPIRIT ROAD DUE TO FLOODS 

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This statement is presented in response to a matter raised in the 21st Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament by hon. Esther Anyakun concerning floods that devastated the Sironko-Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road.
The Ministry of Works and Transport, through Uganda National Roads Authority, acknowledges that there was over flooding along the Sironko-Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road on 16 August. After receiving reports about the floods, the Uganda National Roads Authority team, under Mbale station, assessed the situation and undertook appropriate action.

The blockage was fixed on 17 August 2019 by installing Armco culverts. Therefore, the road is safe and open to traffic. It should also be noted that Sironko-Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road, that is 93 kilometres of that section, is part of the current road development programme with financing from the Islamic Development Bank. 

Once the revised loan agreement is approved by Parliament and signed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, implementation will commence immediately, in this financial year. The works contract was also already procured and is awaiting no objection from the financier.
Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The honourable member for Nakapiripirit is not here to ask a supplementary question. Let us get on to the next item.

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. JUDITH FRANCA AKELLO ON THE POOR ROAD NETWORK IN SOME PARTS OF AGAGO DISTRICT, PARTICULARLY KILAK CORNER-MOROTO VIA ABIM; LUKEE BRIDGE-PATONGO-KALONGO-BULUGI SECTION BETWEEN LUKEE TO KALONGO AND ADILANG-LIRAKATO-LAPONO-PAIMOL-OMIYA-PACWA TO NAMUKORA
 
3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This statement is presented in response to a matter raised in the 23rd Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament by hon. Judith Franca, Akello concerning the poor road network in some parts of Agago District, particularly Kilak Corner-Moroto via Abim, Lukee Bridge-Patongo-Kalongo-Bulugi section between Lukee to Kalongo and Adilang-Lirakato-Lapono-Paimol-Omiya-Pacwa to Namukora.

The Ministry of Works and Transport has a clear record of the state of these roads. The roads in reference were under term maintenance by UNRA, which ended in the Financial Year 2017/2018 and were planned for framework contracts phase II, which has delayed in procurement. The ministry is also faced with inadequate funds, following the reduction of the national road maintenance funds this financial year, despite the increasing maintenance backlog.

Despite that, these are the interventions that are planned for each road section;

    1. Kilak Corner via Abim is planned to receive grading, drainage improvement works and spot gravelling using UNRA force account under Kitgum Station in quarter II;

    2. Lukee Bridge-Patongo-Kalongo-Bulugi section is currently receiving grading, drainage improvement works and swamp filling using UNRA force account under Kitgum Station in quarter I; and

    3. Adilang-Lirakato-Lapono-Paimul-Pacwa-Namukora is planned to receive grading, drainage improvement works and spot gravelling using UNRA force account under Kitgum Station in quarter II.

The Ministry of Works and Transport, under its mandate, is committed to ensuring that all roads are well maintained to motorable condition.
Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The honourable member will not be able to be here to ask supplementary questions. Let us go to the next item. Thank you, honourable minister.

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ELIJAH OKUPA ON THE STATUS OF THE BKK FERRY AND ATTEMPTS TO SHIFT THE DOCK FROM OKILE IN KOBULULU SUB COUNTY TO AKAMPALA IN OCHERO SUB COUNTY

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This statement is presented in response to a matter raised by hon. Elijah Okupa concerning the status of the BKK Ferry and attempts to shift the dock from Okile in Kobululu Subcounty to Akampala in Ochero Subcounty.

The Uganda National Roads Authority is handling the project for the Bukungu-Kagwala-Kaberamaido ferry project, known as the BKK Project. The project has two components; a ferry and landing sites.

Ferry/landing sites

A contract for design and build for landing sites for BKK civil works was signed on 27 March 2019 and it is at implementation stage. The scope of work includes design of the landing sites and facilities in Kaberamaido District, at Kagwala and in Buyende District, at Bukungu.
The project is now at design stage and it is estimated that the construction will begin in March 2020 and will be completed in May 2021. 

Ferry Procurement 

The procurement for the ferry commenced in November 2017 and so far, the procurement has been tendered twice with no responsive or compliance bids. The main reason for this has been the relatively shallow water levels of Lake Kyoga. UNRA plans to retender after review of the tenancy specifications. Currently, the tender specifications are under review before UNRA to restart the procurement tentatively by the end of August 2019.

It is estimated that the ferry procurement will be completed and the ferry contract signed by May 2020 and the ferry construction completed before October 2021. 

Throughout the procurement and the current implementation process, UNRA has been engaging the stakeholders of the BKK Project area and updating them on the ferry project area and the status of the project, the most recent being in April 2019 where UNRA engaged stakeholders at Bukungu, Kagwara and Kaberamaido.

The sensitive issues that were handled include:

Location of the Landing Sites

There was a report of the Ministry of Works and Transport, which had recommended four landing sites; one at Bukungu in Buyende District, the second one in Serere District, the third one at Muntu and the fourth one at Okile in Kaberamaido District. 

UNRA reviewed the options and found another landing site on Kaberamaido side - at Akampala, just next to Muntu Landing Site, which if used, will reduce the arrival time of Kaberamaido-bound traffic by two to three hours. Although this new location has various stakeholders for and against it, it specifically benefits Kaberamaido District as a whole. 

Nevertheless, we plan to build a landing site at Okile as well so that when the ferry starts, it visits both Akampala and Okile as per schedule that will be agreed upon after commissioning and evaluation of traffic demand.

Number of Ferries

It was established that if we operated one ferry between Bukungu, Akampala to Kagwara, it would take a ten-hour and thirty-minute return to Bukungu in one day. This implies that travellers would have one round trip per day. 

It is, therefore, necessary that a route is kept open by using ferries plying between Bukungu, Akampala and Bukungu, Kagwara at least two-time round trips per day. The possibility of the ferry docking both at Akampala and Okile also further confirmed that one ferry would not satisfy the need of the traffic to Kaberamaido and Serere at ago. Two ferries would serve the Teso sub region better than one visiting all sites and giving one trip a day. 

We now have a budget for one ferry. We need funds to cater for the second ferry. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Member who asked the question is not here to ask a supplementary question. Has he delegated anybody else? 

3.09
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Three weeks ago, when this matter of BKK was presented on this Floor, I rose on a procedural matter, inquiring about the fate of a smaller ferry that was promised to ply the route of Bukungu to Muntu because we were told BKK, a bigger ferry, would not go to Muntu - one of the confirmed landing sites that the minister talked about. 

As guided by the then presiding Speaker, I expected the response from the minister to cover the route from Bukungu to Muntu as well. I am surprised that the minister has only mentioned Muntu as a docking point but there is no specific reference in relation to the ferry that will go to Muntu. 

Mr Speaker, don’t you think we would proceed well if the minister gave information to that effect? People are watching.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. At times, it is right to look at things and wish they happen. At times, the realistic is different. That is why at Muntu, the bigger ferry we have designed cannot land. That is why we are looking at Akampala, which is close to Muntu. Of course, if resources allow, why not? We can also go to Muntu and have a smaller ferry. 

In compensation – the water at Muntu could not allow the ferry that was designed to dock there. That is why our technical people had to look for a place that is close to Muntu and that is why Akampala comes in the picture. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item –

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, when the design of the Muntu landing site was being made, there was a lot of promise, which caused a lot of anxiety to the people of Muntu. I am just wondering whether the response of the minister is insinuating that Akampala is now going to be a replacement for Muntu because initially – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is exactly what he has said. He said the big ferry could not dock at Muntu. Therefore, it will go to the other side, which is close to Muntu.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, my concern was on a smaller ferry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He added that if funds allow, they will then look for a smaller ferry for Muntu. 

3.13
MS VERONICA BICHETERO ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The ferry he mentioned is of a big interest to me, the Member of Parliament for Kaberamaido County. It is called BKK for Bukungu, Kaberamaido and Kagwara. 

I am very happy the minister confirmed today what was about to cause a “third world war” in Kaberamaido County because of the incorporation of Akampala, which was not originally planned for. I have heard him say the original site that was operated by the East African Ports and Harbours was at Okile. I thank the minister for confirming that site.

I also thank him for providing an alternative site. The residents were complaining that Akampala, which is the last village in Kaberamaido County, bordering Amolatar, is now considered for another ferry they have been lobbying for. 

Honourable minister, can you, please, make sure your people give enough information on the ground? I talked of a “third world war” and as I stand now, we will need to pacify the people of Ochero subcounty and the rest of the sub counties in Kaberamaido.

Can your engineers, before they go anywhere, report to the district? I thank you for confirming Akampala and Okile. Okile was a presidential pledge. The President actually launched electricity from Kaberamaido to the docking side. Engineers came and told us to prepare for the coming ferry but we were taken aback when we were told that the ferry was going to Ankampala without explanation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.16
MS HELLEN ADOA (NRM, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you. Mr Speaker, in 2017, the engineers told the members of Parliament from Serere, to come to Kagwara landing site. I went with hon. Okupa and the engineers asked us to collect people because they had a message for them.

The people were very happy and they said that “by December 2019, you will be celebrating your Christmas using the ferry.” So, when they start discussing where the ferry will be yet, during that time, everything had been confirmed to us and people were waiting in celebration for December 2019 to use the ferry that becomes a different matter.

Recently, when they started telling us that it might not be here but will be there, it has not been easy for us to explain to our electorate. Therefore, I pray that it does not start like then in 2021, they say that it is now about to come and it will give us a very hard time to explain to our people.

Therefore, if the minister is talking about the BKK Ferry to take care of Bukuku, Kagwara and Kaberamaido, let the ferry come before 2021 and not again starting to talk about it going to Ankampala or wherever. That is what I wanted to raise because it is giving us a hard time back at home. 

The engineers were there and we collected the people in celebration. Therefore, we are looking forward to receiving this BKK ferry. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. We will pause here.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. HENRY KAMYA MAKUMBI ON THE POOR PERFORMANCE OF LOANS FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK, EXIM BANK AND THE WORLD BANK ON ACCOUNT OF INADEQUATE SUPERVISION BY RELEVANT GOVERNMENT MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES (MDAs)  

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, there is a similar item on the performance of overall debt portfolio by the Committee of National Economy. I will just briefly -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Do you want to put your response in that report.

MR BAHATI: I think it will -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It will save time. Thank you. Okay, let us go to the next item.
 
RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED ON MEDIA REPORTS THAT FUNDS FOR DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS HAD BEEN RETAINED AT THE RESPECTIVE MINISTRY HEADQUARTERS

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, over the years, Government has been undertaking special programmes to reduce poverty by raising people’s incomes and tackling the issue of unemployment, among others. As such, a number of funds have been budgeted for under MDAs for transfer to local government votes during budget execution; for example, road maintenance funds under Uganda Road Fund as well as a number of centrally managed projects like Northern Uganda Social Action Plan (NUSAF III) and Luwero-Rwenzori Development Programme (LRDP). 

However, most of MDAs delay to remit these funds to local governments during budget execution hence delaying service delivery and causing huge unspent balances at the end of the financial year. 

In addition, most times, the local governments are not aware of such funds or projects and yet, the activities are implemented in local government localities.

Therefore, in a bid to find a lasting solution at the time of finalising the budget for the current Financial Year 2019/2020, Cabinet made a policy decision to rationalise all funds that are appropriated at sector level, to be directly appropriated to the respective local government vote. This was accordingly submitted to Parliament at appropriation. However, Parliament rejected the proposal and these funds were appropriated at a number of MDAs in the budget for the Financial Year 2019/2010.

Therefore, funds amounting to Shs 568.478 billion were appropriated under a number of MDAs during the Budget of Financial Year 2019/2020 as per attached details on schedule one.

Accordingly, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has already released 25 per cent of the Budget in quarter one, to respective MDAs for onward transfer to the local governments. Most of the MDAs have delayed to remit these funds to the beneficiary votes and most local government accounting officers have expressed concerns over the delay.

This notwithstanding, as we start the budgeting process for 2020/2021, we need to rationalise these funds to be directly appropriated to local government votes. Our ministry has started on the necessary process of engaging the MDAs and later a letter was sent, signed by our Permanent Secretary, to that effect, for the MDAs to provide information on projects of funds under their respective votes for the dissemination to local governments during the forthcoming Local Government Regional Consultative meeting.

We acknowledge that there are delays - and the point I would like to make here is that if you look at the Road Fund, it has to first send money to the district, then from the district to the sub counties. We came here with a proposal that let us Budget for the sub counties directly and send money to them but Parliament, in its wisdom, rejected this. Because of that, these are some of the consequences of delaying the funds to reach the respective sub counties.

Therefore, we would like to suggest that in the next financial year, some of these funds are sent directly to the sub counties instead of going from the centre to the district and later to the sub counties. Anyhow, we are handling this matter by cautioning the accounting officers to take action.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Mbwatekamwa is not here to ask a supplementary question. This is a matter for supplementary questions, which is the docket of the Member who raised the matter. (Mr Onzima rose_)Are you the one who raised the matter?

3.24
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): I am not the one who raised the matter but I am talking as the Chairperson of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. The issues raised by the explanation given by the minister seem to touch much on the Uganda Road Fund. 

However, this is not the issue. I remember that on this same issue, we had a workshop where Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was involved. In fact, Government was represented by the Prime Minister. The major argument, which was raised by these local governments, touched issues where activities’ mandates are given to local governments but being implemented by the various ministries. 

Under primary school construction, under decentralisation, a primary school is decentralised as well as the management. Issues to do with construction of classrooms are all supposed to be activities of local governments. However, these are being managed centrally. The money that is supposed to be sent to local governments does not reach there but it is retained at the centre.

That is the same with health centre construction and other activities. Even under agricultural infrastructural development, the money that is meant to go to the local governments is retained by the ministries. Therefore, ideally, this money is supposed to go to the local governments and the ministries are supposed to supervise and see how they are being implemented. Instead, it is the ministries going to implement these activities. That is the major argument.

I think the issue raised by the Uganda Local Government Association (ULGA) was that the money meant for local government should go. The ideal for local government was that these activities and projects are best known by the locals and they can best be supervised by them. The ministries should leave these issues to them.

The role of the ministry is to coordinate, supervise and advise. However, if they go and implement the projects by themselves, who will be there to advise and supervise them? This undermines the element of decentralisation.

It is not only the issue of the Uganda Road Fund but under the road situation, it is well known that community roads are for individuals, feeder roads are for the districts and trunk roads are for the national level. This does not arise in this case.  Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, is that clearer now or would you like to clarify some of those issues?

Mr Bahati: Mr Speaker, I was answering the right question and so, my answer is appropriate, only that I gave the Uganda Road Fund as an example so that Members can appreciate the fact that if we continue to send some of these funds to the district for onward transfer to local governments, you are likely to have some delays.

If we know the final destination and the law allows us to take that path, why can’t we do that? Why do we have to go through the district? Over time, we have realised that that has always caused delays. That is the point I was trying to make.

3.27
Mr Emmanuel ongiertho (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise as a member of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). In almost all audits for local governments, these issues come up. It sometimes becomes difficult for us to take decisions and make recommendations because you know that the money is lying with the ministry and yet, the implementers are supposed to be the local government. In this particular situation, what happens? 

Honourable minister, I do not want you to make excuses from the fact that you do not want to go through the districts to the sub counties. First of all, you have even failed to give the money to the districts that have a little more authority; what authority will the sub counties have in asking the ministry to give them the money?

We are talking about a situation where the delays are at the districts but these are not getting the money from the ministry. At the end of it, the Auditor-General queries these people. Many times, money, which has not gone to the districts is the money related to what is retained within the ministry. 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, the most substantive question is: “With whom does the contractor sign the contract if it is for building health centres or schools?” 

Mr Bahati: In some cases, it is the Central Government and in other situations, the district. However, these local issues have been attended to by the Minister for Local Government who is in the House. Maybe, she can also shed some light at this stage.

The Deputy Speaker: They are not local issues but local government issues. (Laughter)

3.29
The minister of state for local government (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Mr Speaker, I had resisted coming to contradict my brother. Most of these contracts are signed by line ministries. For example, for construction of health centres III, it is done by the Ministry of Health, while the construction of the seed secondary schools is done by the Ministry of Education and Sports. It is not true that the local governments sign the contracts.

The Deputy Speaker: Then there is a technical problem. The issue of sending money through the districts does not arise because the contract is with the ministry. The funding is supposed to be disbursed by the ministry. Therefore, it cannot go through local government. It is as simple as that; it is a contract relationship.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF INDEBTEDNESS, GRANTS AND GUARANTEES AS AT JUNE 2018

The deputy speaker: Honourable members and honourable ministers, please, alert the learned Deputy Attorney-General, the hon. Wilfred Niwagaba and hon. Medard Sseggona that I will be making my ruling on the issues they raised before on:

i) 	Externalisation of labour; and
ii) 	The motion by hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019.”

I will be making my ruling immediately after this motion. I have paused it so that they may be here and listen to my ruling rather than it being communicated to them about what I have said. I will give this ruling on this.

3.32
The vice-chairperson, committee on national economy (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Mr Speaker, I beg to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the state of indebtedness, grants and guarantees as at June 2018. 

Before I present the report, allow me to lay on Table -
a) 	The report of the Committee on National Economy on the State of Indebtedness, Grants and Guarantees as at June 2018, which is signed by majority of the members;

b) 	The minutes of the meeting of the committee that discussed Uganda’s state of indebtedness, grants and guarantees as at June 2018;

c) 	The report on public debt, guarantees and other financial liabilities and grants for the Financial Year 2017/2018;

d) 	Public Debt Management Framework of 2013;

e) 	The Medium-term Debt Management Strategy 2018/2019 to 2021/2022;

f) 	The analytical report on the state of indebtedness and public debt sustainability for Uganda that ended June 2018 by the Parliamentary Budget Office. 

I beg to lay.

The deputy speaker: Let the records capture the report of the committee, the minutes and other accompanying documents.

Mr bategeka: Mr Speaker, right away, I will go to the methodology the committee employed to come up with this report.

The committee studied and reviewed the following documents:

i) 	The report on public debt guarantees and other financial liabilities and grants for the Financial Year 2017/2018 produced by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in March 2018.

ii) 	The Public Debt Management Framework 20l3

iii) 	The Medium Debt Management Strategy (2017/2018 – 2020/2021); and

iv) 	The Parliamentary Budget Office Report on the State of Indebtedness and Public Debt Sustainability Analysis for Uganda.

Uganda's Public debt stock, during the period under review, increased by 22 per cent, from Shs.34.4trillion, recorded in the financial year 2016/2017, to Shs.42.07trillion, recorded in the financial year 2017/2018. The existing debt stock constitutes Shs.28.5trillion as external debt, while Shs.13.55599trillion is domestic debt. In terms of shares, external debt takes the largest share of total public debt at 68 per cent while domestic debt is 32 per cent of the total public debt. 

Mr Speaker, focussing specifically on external debt, Uganda's external debt exposure grew by seven per cent, from US$11.37 billion in financial year 2016/2017, to US$12.14 billion in the financial year 2017/2018, largely due to the need to invest in large infrastructure projects to stimulate economic activity. 

However, it is noteworthy that there has been an improvement in the disbursements where undisbursed credit has declined from US$ 5.15 billion, in financial year 2016/2017, to US$ 4.79 billion in the financial year 2017/2018, despite the rise in debt acquisition as indicated. 

The external debt that is disbursed is largely from China followed by the World Bank, as major creditors, constituting a total of 59 per cent of the total disbursements.

China has become the largest creditor to Uganda disbursing 39 per cent of the total credit in financial year 20l7/2018, surpassing the traditional creditors such as World Bank and the African Development Bank, which disbursed 2l and eight per cent of the total credit respectively. The UK Government Export Credit Agency together with Standard Chartered Bank are among the new lenders to Uganda. 

Both China and new entrants like the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (PTA) and UK Export Finance are providing non-concessional finance to Uganda, exposing the country to more expensive credit than the previous concessional finance from the World Bank.

The shift in the resources of finance is dictated upon by the need for Government to channel resources towards infrastructure, especially in the oil and gas industry, energy and the roads sector, which are priorities. 

The total Government of Uganda external debt service, by end of financial year 20l7/20l8, amounted to US$ 275.75 million, which was an increment of l29 per cent compared to US$120.62 million in financial year 2016/2017. 

Debt service of Uganda's external debt is on the rise and outstripping growth of the country's income, currently at six per cent. This poses risks for future debt repayments, especially as the country continues to acquire external debt at less concessional terms.

Performance of External Financing

The National Development Budget is partially financed through external resources, which takes the form of loans and grants. The two forms of financing are channelled through one, the national budget or to the consolidated fund for appropriation; and two, projects directly in specific areas/sectors.

Total foreign loan and grants disbursements increased by 16 per cent from Shs.4.56 trillion in financial year 2016/2017 to Shs.5.221 trillion during the financial year 2017/20l8.

Grant Disbursement

During the financial year 2017/2018, total grants received declined to Shs.774.2 billion, a decline of about l8 per cent, from Shs.949.74 billion, in financial year 2016/2017. There was a decline in grant disbursement performance from 54 per cent in the financial year 2016/2017, to 47 per cent, when compared to budgeted levels. 

Loan Disbursements

The total loans disbursed during the financial year 20l6/2017 amounted to Shs.4447 billion, against the budget of Shs.5.476 trillion representing a disbursement rate of 8l per cent. Loan disbursements increased by 25 per cent and the share of loans to total external financing reduced by 16 per cent in financial year 2017/2018 compared to the previous financial year, 2016/2017.

Mr Speaker, looking at a comparison of disbursements budgeted versus actual disbursements, we note that total actual disbursement is relative to the programmed budgets improved in the financial year 2016/2018 to 73 per cent from 59 per cent registered the previous financial year.

Domestic Debt

Domestic debt is intended to bridge government financing gap, operation of monetary policy by the Central Bank and development of the financial markets. As a result, Government in financial year 20l2/2013 started issuing Treasury Bills and Bonds for fiscal policy purposes. Since then, the stock of domestic debt has increased from Shs.12,064.89 billion, in the financial year 2016/2017, to Shs. 13,555.99 billion, in financial year 2017/2018. 

Public Debt Sustainability

Uganda's public debt position is sustainable in the medium and long term. The present value of public sector debt to GDP increased from 30.81 per cent in 20l7/2018 to 37.25 – the point here is that although the present value of GDP increased, the increase is still below the required threshold of 50 per cent for country policy and institutional assessment. 

External Debt Sustainability

External public and publicly guaranteed debt is found to be sustainable over both the medium and long term. 

The solvency and liquidity ratios all fall below their indicative thresholds throughout the projection period. The present value of external public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) debt to GDP increases from 17.49 per cent in Financial Year 20l7/2018 to a peak of 25.38 per cent in 2022/123, before reducing to 23.95 per cent at the end of the medium term. At its peak, this indicator is below the threshold of 30 per cent and the indicative threshold for CPIA medium performers of 40 per cent. 

However, Uganda is at moderate risk of debt distress at current levels of debt – (Interruption) 

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am trying to look for this report on my iPad - and I can see my colleagues also suffering the same - but I do not see it. I am wondering whether it is procedurally right for the Member to continue presenting when we are not following properly; given that this is a very important subject.

MR BATEGEKA: This report was uploaded and I requested the clerk to reload this report a while ago.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is on the iPad. Please, search properly. Proceed.

MR BATEGEKA: The problem could be with information technology. 

Domestic Debt Sustainability

The ratio of domestic interest cost to revenue (excluding grants) has declined by 2.7 per cent, from the previous year ended June 2017, although it remains slightly above the threshold. The interest cost has reduced the burden on domestic revenues due to Government switch to longer term bonds.

The ratio of domestic interest to Government expenditure has exceeded its threshold by 10 per cent (See Table 8). Exceeding the threshold by 1.2 per cent in June 20l8, implies that the amount of resources available for allocation to other critical sectors of the economy is constrained.

Observations and Recommendations 

Public Debt

The committee observes that:

    i. Uganda’s public debt stock increased by 22 per cent, from Shs 34.4 trillion recorded in the Financial Year 2016/2017 to Shs 42 trillion recorded in the Financial Year 2017/2018. The existing debt stock constitutes of Shs 28.5 trillion as external debt, while Shs 13.55599 trillion is domestic debt. In terms of shares, external debt takes the largest share of total public debt at 68 per cent, while domestic debt is 32 per cent of total public debt. 

    ii. The stock of debt has followed an increasing trend over the years due to the large investment requirements in various infrastructure projects that are required to stimulate Uganda’s growth.

    iii. In effect, the debt to GDP ratio increased from 38 per cent in the Financial Year 2016/2017 to 42 per cent in the Financial Year 2017/2018, increasing the risks of public debt sustainability if the productive capacity of the economy grows at a much lower rate. Despite the increase in sovereign debt, it is still sustainable and Uganda is not under debt distress if it stays within the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility budget deficit target (three per cent of GDP by Financial Year 2020/2021).

The committee recommends that:

a) 	Government expedites the implementation of all projects financed by debt to increase the country’s productive capacity in order to repay debt.
b) 	Government borrows for projects that are financially and economically viable and with rates of return higher than the finance cost of the loan.
c) 	Government avoids borrowing for consumption purposes as this will not increase the productive capacity of the economy, especially consultancies, salaries, purchase of project vehicles and workshops, among others. 

External Debt

The committee observes that Uganda’s debt exposure grew by seven per cent from $ 11.37 billion in Financial Year 2016/2017 to $12.14 billion in the Financial Year 2017/2018, largely due to the need to invest in large infrastructure projects to stimulate economic activity. However, export growth registered dismal growth of 10.5 per cent due to a fall in commodity prices of the country’s export commodities, which declined by l.9 per cent, compared to the previous financial year. 

The committee recommends that:

    a) Government expedites the implementation of the export promotion strategy and intervenes in areas where the private sector should become more competitive, compared to other exporting producers of similar goods and services.
    b) Government focuses on overcoming the export product space by promoting industrial policies that will enable the diversification of the country’s exports in key strategic sectors, especially in the agriculture and energy and mineral development sectors that will lead to the rapid economic transformation of Uganda.

The external debt exposure to GDP ratio remained at 44 per cent in Financial Year 20l7/2018. Of this amount, $7.35 billion was outstanding and disbursed, while $4.79 billion was committed but still undisbursed, indicating slow implementation of some projects.

There has been an improvement in the disbursements, where undisbursed credit has declined from $5.15 billion to $4.79 billion in Financial Year 20l7/2018, despite the rise in debt acquisition. While this is welcome, undisbursed resources continue to remain high, affecting project completion.

The low absorption of borrowed funds by MDAs, especially in education, energy, transport, water and agriculture is attributed to poor project designs, poor project/contract management, accountability and ensuring value-for-money, procurement-related challenges and financial management inadequacies and therefore creating delays in project implementation. In addition, since commitment fees are charged by most creditors, it poses a prospect of increasing the cost of debt.

The committee recommends that:

    1) Government, through the various public finance management reforms that are being implemented, strengthens the capacity of ministries, agencies and departments in project identification, design and appraisal processes.
    2) Parliament disapproves loans for MDAs or sectors with non-performing loans that have not taken off without a satisfactory justification to Parliament.

The external debt that is disbursed is largely from China, followed by the World Bank, as major creditors, constituting a total of 59 per cent of the total disbursements.

China has become the largest creditor to Uganda disbursing 39 per cent of the total credit in Financial Year 2017/18, surpassing the traditional creditors such as World Bank and the African Development Bank, which disbursed 2l per cent and eight per cent of the total credit respectively. 

China’s presence as a lender in Africa provides an alternative to the traditional donors with a development paradigm. The loans that China has provided to Uganda have contributed to financing critical infrastructure projects in the energy, works and transport sectors. Since china credit is largely non-concessional, the rate of disbursements increases the country's debt exposures much faster.

The committee recommends that Government ensures increased transparency in the procurement process, during the contraction of Chinese loans. This will improve efficiency in the implementation of the public investments in the energy, works and transport sectors, and improve public debt sustainability through favourable growth spill overs, as long as the baseline debt trajectory is sustainable.

Domestic Debt

The committee observes as follows: 

Before financial year 2013/14, issuance of government securities was for monetary policy purposes only. The Government in financial year 2012/13 started issuing Treasury Bills and Bonds for both fiscal policy and monetary policy purposes. Since then, the stock of domestic debt has increased from Shs 12,064.89 billion in the financial year 2016/17 to Shs 13,555.99 billion in financial year 20l7/l8. This is due to increased Government appetite to finance the budget using domestic securities. However, expenditure on domestic interest cost slightly decreased by 0.9 per cent from Shs l,954 billion in financial year 2016/17 to Shs l,936.4 billion in financial year 2017/18. 

Out of the total of government securities traded in the Financial Year 20l7/18 amounting to Shs 13,555.99 billion, Treasury Bills, which are short-term borrowing instruments, amounted to Shs 3,860.73 billion, while Treasury Bonds amounted to Shs 9,695.25 billion. This indicates domestic debt was largely composed of long term Treasury Bonds constituting 72 per cent of the total domestic stock leading to 70:30 ratio of T-Bond to T-Bill ratio. This is in line with the 2013 Public Debt Management Framework (PDMF) benchmark of T-Bond to T-Bill ratio. Hence long term borrowing still took up the largest share as recommended in the Public Debt Management Framework, 2013.

Institutional investors continue to dominate in the purchase of government securities in the domestic securities market. Commercial banks dominate the institutional investor category for the purchase of short term government securities, constituting more than 80 per cent of holdings in the market. This illustrates the level of concentration of investments by banks in the domestic securities market. Despite this dominance, individual persons’ participating in the securities market is increasing, a sign of progress towards the development of capital markets in Uganda.

The committee recommends as follows: 

    a) Government develops and deepens the domestic financial sector to increase participation in the various sections of the economy in the domestic financial markets. This will entail implementation establishment of the Tier IV Act, among others. Increase in participation in the domestic financial markets will lower interest charged on domestic issuance.

    b) In addition, Government limits domestic financing of the budget in the short run as the financial markets remain shallow and underdeveloped with limited players in the secondary market. The limited Government borrowing from the domestic market will consequently reduce the interest charged to private borrowers.

Performance of Project Financing

The committee observes as follows:

One, that total foreign loan and grants disbursements increased by 16 per cent from Shs 4,506.02 billion in Financial Year 2016/17 to Shs 5,221.58 billion during Financial Year 2017/2018; and

Two, that project-support loans still contribute the larger share of the external financing of the national budget. Project financing was below the budgeted levels by 30 per cent largely due to low disbursements under the grants category. This implies a policy shift from budget support financing to project support thereby crowding out other sectors that do not have projects.

The committee recommends that Government increases funding to sectors that do not attract project financing but are critical to the growth of the economy.

Loan Disbursements

The total loans disbursed during the Financial Year 2017/18 amounted to Shs 4,447.38 billion, against a budget of Shs 5,476.15 billion representing a disbursement rate of 81 per cent. Loan disbursements increased by 25 per cent and the share of loans to total external financing reduced by l6 per cent in financial year 2017/18 compared to the previous Financial Year 2016/17.

The increase in loan disbursement was due to the need for implementation of large government investment in infrastructure in the energy and roads sector. Loan disbursement performance improved significantly by registering a higher disbursement level of 81 per cent in Financial Year 2017/18 compared to the 60 per cent registered in the previous financial year. 

The higher disbursement levels compared to what was planned signifies improvement in addressing absorption challenges projects face during implementation, which adversely affect the achievement of the set goals in the planned period. 

The committee recommends that Government expedites the implementation of approved projects financed through external borrowing in order for these projects to achieve the desired project objectives, outcomes and impact.

Contingent Liabilities

During financial year 20l7/18, one guarantee worth US$ 13.8 million for Islamic University from IDB was approved. This therefore increased the value of contingent liabilities from US$ 39.58 million to US$ 52.85 million.
Contingent liabilities oblige Government in future to make unexpected payments leading to fiscal risk exposure and put public debt on an unsustainable path.

The committee recommends that Government undertakes a value for money audit in all enterprises that have benefited from government guarantees.

External Debt Service

The committee observes as follows:

    a) Debt service of Uganda's external debt is on the rise and outstripping growth of the country's income, currently at six per cent. This poses risks for future debt repayments, especially as the country continues to acquire external debt at less concessional terms.

    b) It follows that as interest rates increase, the debt service obligations of Government also increases. The rise in external debt interest costs attests to the fact that the Government is increasingly contracting non-concessional debt, which will increase the repayment burden.

The committee recommends that: 

    a) In the medium-term, the Government should continue to prioritise concessional financing as the preferred means of meeting financing requirements, especially aimed at social projects. 

    b) Given the constraints in accessing large volumes of concessional financing for large infrastructure projects, non-concessional borrowing by Government be earmarked for projects that have high capacity of increasing productivity and production in the economy, while at the same time implementing reforms that enhance efficient project implementation according to the planned timelines.

Public Debt Sustainability 

The committee observes that:

    a) Debt is sustainable if the economy does not in future need to default or renegotiate its debt or make unlikely large policy adjustments that may create unstable situations in the economy. Thereby, the country has to ensure that the rate at which her debt accumulates is lower than the rate at which her capacity to service debt grows. 

    b) The Country Policy and Institutional Arrangement (CPIA) rating for Uganda was lowered from stronger to medium performer in July, 2015 by the World Bank. This subjects Uganda to lower thresholds for external debt indicators, increasing the risk of breach. This downgrade underscores the importance of Government improving governance, transparency and financial management. 

    c) The committee is concerned about the high debt accumulation rate in the short and medium term due to investment needs of the country. However, this accumulation has occurred with increased levels of contracting non-concessional finance due to the rapidly changing financing landscape facing low income countries. 

Stemming this tide will critically depend on the reduction of fiscal imbalances, maintenance of strong economic growth and efficient and prudent public debt management. As government contracts new non-concessional financing of projects, it should observe the set criterion in the debt framework of 2013 where non-concessional borrowing below a grant element of 25 per cent should be for projects, which return direct revenue to Government in less than three years.

External Debt Sustainability  

The committee observes that: 

    a) If growth and export prospects deteriorate further in the future, it could adversely affect Uganda’s risk rating, as could additional reliance on non-concessional borrowing that would not lead to higher growth rates. 

    b) The present value of debt service to revenue ratio, which averages 7.9 per cent over the medium term, is driven by low domestic revenue mobilisation efforts while at the same time external debt falling due for repayment in the medium term increases.

The committee recommends that: 

    a) Deliberate efforts by Government be undertaken to enhance the country’s competitiveness to boost exports over the medium term, including effective investment to fill the infrastructure gaps. 

    b) As the country’s external debt position faces significant risks (deterioration of exports) that will lead to the downgrade towards a moderate risk rating of debt distress, debt contracting by Government should be scaled down to only projects that have a high economic and financial return in the medium term and target cheaper (concessional) loans to finance the investment plan. 

    c) In order to limit the impact of the ever increasing external debt service, Government should improve tax administration to increase revenue collection, while at the same time lowering costs of production to promote private sector development to take lead in the expansion of the productive capacity of the economy. 

    d) To limit the impact of foreign exchange risks arising from increased external debt, Government should significantly increase its foreign reserves through increase in the export capacity of the economy, attract foreign direct investments and minimise imports to only capital and essential goods and services.

Domestic Debt Sustainability Indicators 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that: 

    a) The ratio of domestic interest cost to revenue (excluding grants) has declined by 2.7 per cent from the previous year ending June, 2017 although it remains slightly above the threshold. The interest cost has reduced the burden on domestic revenues due to Government’s switch to longer term bonds.
    b) The ratio of domestic interest on Government expenditure has exceeded its threshold of 10 per cent. Exceeding the threshold by 1.2 per cent in 2018 implies that the amount of resources available for allocation to other critical sectors of the economy is constrained. 

    c) Domestic debt stock relative to private sector credit increased by 1.6 per cent from June 2017 to June 2018 and exceeded the debt framework threshold. The increase was due to a higher rise in domestic issuance reaching 1.8 per cent of GDP. Exceeding the threshold implies that Government’s domestic debt is constraining funding to the private sector. If this persists, the private sector will be outcompeted by Government for credit from the financial system.

The committee recommends that: 

    a) Government mitigates the domestic debt interest rate risks through a combination of stronger revenue mobilisation and deliberate efforts to extend average maturities over the medium term. 

    b) Government adheres to the domestic stock borrowing limit of 75 per cent to private sector credit in the public debt management framework of 2013, to minimise competition with the private sector for credit. 
    c) Government develops and deepens the domestic financial sector to increase participation of the various sections of the economy in the domestic financial markets. This will entail, for example, implementation of the Tier IV Microfinance Institutions and Money Lenders Act, 2016. Increase in participation in the domestic financial markets will lower interests charged on domestic issuance. 

    d) Government limits domestic financing of the budget in the short run as the financial markets remain shallow and underdeveloped with limited players in the secondary market. The limited Government borrowing from the domestic market will consequently reduce the interest charged to private borrowers.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, Uganda remains at a low risk of debt distress with both domestic and external public and publicly guaranteed debt found to be sustainable over the medium and long term, if it sticks to borrowing within the given macroeconomic framework.

However, this may not be the most likely scenario as most projects have been discounted and some excluded in the macroeconomic framework. With the development of the NDP III, additional project and other pipeline project related to the oil developments and other infrastructure will increase the financing requirement of Government in the medium term. The inclusion of the above projects will re-classify Uganda from low risk of debt distress to moderate risk of debt distress or high risk if the export shocks materialise.

A downgrade would have significant implications for the programme with the IMF, where Uganda’s credit risk rating will worsen; implying that accessibility of non-concessional financing will be limited. This will limit credit to Uganda to only concessional and grants financing. The slow growth of exports poses risks to Uganda’s ability to repay her debts. Enhancing export receipts in the short to medium term must be a priority. The depreciation of the shilling has also increased Uganda’s external debt repayment obligations. This poses a serious risk to debt sustainability that needs to be addressed.

The country also faces increased exposure to increased interest rates due to the increasing non-concessional external finance, some of which are contracted at variable costs. Therefore, Government should contract non-concessional finance for projects whose rate of return exceeds the cost of credit. Timely and efficient implementation of projects is critical for generating higher returns on investments.

Debt service of Uganda external debt currently at six per cent is on the rise and outstripping growth of the country's income. This poses risks of future debt repayments, especially as the country continues to acquire external debt at less concessional terms to finance the oil and other infrastructure developments.

The moderate risk rating for Uganda from the 2018 debt sustainability analysis is based on undertaking pipeline projects in the medium term like the standard gauge railway, oil roads, oil pipeline, oil refinery, the national air carrier, and electricity transmission lines, cultural and social projects. The implication of this is that concessional finance will be limited for such projects. 

Despite the improvement in contracting domestic debt of longer term maturity, Uganda still has a very high percentage of domestic debt maturing in one year at 37 per cent exposing the country significant refinancing risks. Refinancing means you borrow more.

The ratio of domestic interest in Government expenditure has exceeded its threshold of 10 per cent in the 2013 debt management framework. Exceeding the threshold by 1.2 per cent in June 20l8 implies that the amount of resources available for allocation to other critical sectors of the economy is constrained.

The fiscal space of critical expenditure in the budget is reducing overtime and therefore, minimising impact of any fiscal expansion by Government.

The ambitious plan for financed development spending has typically not been realised given a number of implementation challenges that have affected the growth dividends. Capital spending plans require improved project implementation capacity, which may take more time to build. Mr Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is that the Report of the Committee on National Economy on the State of Indebtedness, Grants and Guarantees as at June 2018 be adopted. That is the motion for your debate and the debate starts now.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, although there was some document on domestic debt posted on the intranet, what the chairman presented seems to be much more condensed than the one we have.

Therefore, I suggest if it is allowed that we be given the correct documents, we study them because this is a very serious matter and since this Parliament guides the economic growth in this country and we monitor how the expenditure vis-a-vis income is concerned; we need to understand the document before we can debate. 

Therefore, is it procedurally right for us to start the debate on the document before we are in grip with the substance of the subject we are talking about?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had seen that there were members who were ready to debate and they got up. Is the date on the document that we are looking at reading June 2019? It has been uploaded twice.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to what hon. Cecilia Ogwal said. I have the same document but as the chairperson was reading, I realise he was reading trillions where he was supposed to read billions. I do not know whether we were reading the same document or it is a different document altogether.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is the same document except that the chairperson said that where, for example, there is Shs 3.562 trillion, he would read it as 3,562 billion. Instead of reading the whole thing in trillions he was reading Shs 3,552 billion, which in essence was 3.552 trillion.  So, there is no problem with the figures. I prefer if there are any small substantial objections than those of trillions and billions.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I thank the chairperson.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are still on this matter.

MR SSEWUNGU: Yes, I am on the same matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, stop thanking the chairperson; let us deal with this matter.

MR SSEWUNGU: In addition to supporting what hon. Cecilia said, there is no single minister from the finance ministry. I have read the report but who is going to respond to our issues? Will it be the chairperson of the committee or the Minister of Local Government?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it does look like the members are not willing to debate at this moment and the chair is not ready to preside over debate where members do not want to debate a particular item.
	
I have heard the request and so, I will defer my ruling to tomorrow in my Communication from the Chair. Let the members who will be able to attend be there but this is to provide guidance on how we will proceed with the next item.

There being no other item House is adjourned to tomorrow but first wait. (Laughter) The adjournment is postponed. Anyhow, we should be able to debate this tomorrow. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 4.22 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 29 August 2019 at 2.00 p.m.)
