

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 24 August 2021

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members. I welcome you to this sitting; it is kind of my maiden sitting as Speaker. The other ones were the formal ones - the State of the Nation Address and the Budget and I think that is where I stopped. Today is, therefore, substantially my first time to sit with you in the 11th Parliament. (Applause)

I want to thank you greatly for the support that you extended to me through whatever you were able to do. We are here by the grace of God – and we thank God.

I am grateful to the Deputy Speaker and I want to thank her before all of you. She had not chaired Parliament before but when Parliament started, she had to hit the ground running because the overall commander was unable to do it. She became a very good deputy and did an extremely good job with your cooperation. I want to thank her very much. (Applause)

I have said this to her and I have said it in another meeting but I want to say it in the House for the record; that she did what she could and we have come this far and the House has not stopped sitting. I am very grateful.

Honourable members, the last few days have been difficult for this country and for all of us. We lost Lt Gen. Pecos Kutesa who was buried last Sunday. He was a Member of the 10th Parliament and we all know that.

As if that was not bad enough, last Saturday, we also lost Maj. Gen. Lokech, arising from a very simple thing that could have been avoided but it was not. He was an officer who many of you know because of his very high elevation of height and also from the things that he was able to do each time he was required to do it. I am delighted that his overall boss – former boss, Gen. Muhoozi – is here.

Gen. Lokech’s passing should be a lesson to all of us. From what we have gathered and what he told me when I last sat with him about four days before he passed, it was an injury that was so simple but a blunt one. Honourable members and all of you who are listening and watching, a “blunt injury” is the worst kind of injury one will ever have. The doctors will tell you that you bleed without bleeding and without knowing. The doctors here can confirm that.

There are things that must be done to avoid a situation where the blood could get messy. Sometimes we forget to do those simple things like taking aspirin and others - that can help to avoid situations of that nature and eventually, it comes to what the case of Maj. Gen. Lokech went through. A tall giant taken down by a little blood clot; it is sad. 

They have gone and left us with a task we must fulfil because we are here. By the grace of God, we stand in the gap and do just that. That is why God has spared us and we are grateful for that. For those two and the others that have left us who we know personally and who we may not know, let us rise and observe a moment of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: My second area of communication is to talk about a man in the Chamber - that man you may or may not know but is now here with us in a different capacity. If you look at the Table, you will see a very familiar face seated in a wrong place – if we were to go by the assessment of last year, we would have ruled him out of order for sitting where he is sitting. (Laughter)

I would like to introduce to you somebody that you know, somebody who belongs to a generation of Ugandans, who had to break through the hardest obstacles; who had to defy poverty, going through very difficult situations. Many of us belong to that generation and majority of the people there still belong to the generation I am talking about – whose mothers never went to school but their mothers and sisters continued to carry water on their heads and children on their backs. They ground millet on their knees so that the families could eat.

That generation of mothers and fathers inspired very many little children who did not know anything about anything to take education seriously. This generation’s story should be an inspiration to our children, that it is possible if you put your mind to it.

The gentleman I am talking about is part of that generation; a generation that was taught English in vernacular because there was no other way of telling you how to call a head, except by reference to the local language. I, too, belong to that generation.  But God is a great God; with sheer determination and hard work, we broke through the ranks and the gentleman I introduce to you broke through the ranks. How many of you did that? Many of you went to nursery school but we never did. In my case, Gulu was four miles away. In others’ cases, we used to share these things about the same distance. A young child could not manage that.  

These children who still find themselves in this situation must be our focus. We must inspire them as parents and tell them that it is possible. The facilities are there, we should support them. Let us have the systems work. In our case, there was no UPE but our families worked together and paid the then very little school fees to enable us go to school. 

The gentlemen I want to introduce to you this afternoon went through that. He went through the roughs and tides of early childhood to struggle for a future he did not even understand. Now from those barefoot walking children, one meal a day, they are here. We celebrate them but their story is told to inspire this country.   

I would like to introduce to you hon. Adolf Mwesige, our new Clerk to Parliament, who is also here. However, I think it is out of commitment. He was a minister of his times from wherever, he decided to, I think it was out of here too – and I don’t think when His Excellency appointed him to come here, he had the opportunity to say no or the option to say No. But he is here out of commitment to help us do what we must, as an institution, to serve the people of this country – and the focus is very simple; those mothers that we know, those children that we have seen, those old men and women that we know, should be our focus. The actions that we do here must reflect on them. 

We welcome hon. Adolf Mwesige, as chief executive of the Parliament of Uganda to facilitate the technical wing of this Parliament to support the political leadership of this House so that we can deliver on our purposes. Please receive, together, hon. Adolf Mwesige.  

Thirdly and lastly, honourable Members, I have a suggestion that has been bothering me for years but I have never had the opportunity to communicate it firmly in the House and get Members’ views on it. I am going to propose that we have a general debate without division on the Uganda we want to see in five years, as Parliament, from the parliamentary perspective. What do we want to see and how do we get to see it? 

The President has outlined what he wants to do and what the Government Executive will do but from the parliamentary perspective, what should we do? I propose that we have that debate where Members will come and speak their lungs out with conviction and commitment, remembering the people who sent them here to speak about those things that matter to them and not some imaginary stuff. 

We agreed at the beginning that this Parliament is going to be different. It is going to be a people’s Parliament and is going to focus on those things that affect the people and not things that affect us, as parliamentarians but things that affect those people; those matters and issues. The President called it, “socio-economic transformation.” How do we get there? He has even gone ahead and proposed the Parish Model as the vehicle to deliver. 

What is our understanding, as parliamentarians, of this concept? How do we shape and make it work? How do we interrogate this matter as the vital question and make the necessary changes in what has been proposed to make it work better; focusing on the national interest and better service delivery to our people? 

How do we achieve that? I am going to consult with the Deputy Speaker, the Government Chief Whip, the Leader of the Opposition, other whips and leaders in the Opposition and the Government side on how we structure it. This debate might take two weeks or three where we just crush out issues in perspective. You will not speak if you have not done research; it must be evidence-based. The era of gambling with speeches is over. (Applause) Let us do research. The era of throwing figures and statistics whose sources are us, is over. We want that when the people read the Hansard of this House, they should read it as an authoritative document that can be quoted by researchers, students and other people interested in knowing what is happening in this country. Things have truly changed in this House. 

Those of you who are still waiting, the bus is off the stage. Guess what? The society is watching and they are watching keenly what we are going to do with them and for them. They are watching freely so that they can see results. 

And guess what, in six months or another 100 days, there is a huge impact – that you we have done well with the interrogation of the Emyooga and so many other things. They are beginning to warm up to Parliament. Let us do more. 

Honourable members, those are my proposals to you. When this happens, you will truly see that these are leaders of the time and leaders, who fought at the right time. When the time is done and we are done, they will say, “We are not done with you” because you are doing well. So, they will return all of you arising from what we do and which is proper. You should never fall in the trap of what makes huge surprises to parliamentarians. You should not fall in that trap. 

Honourable members, I urge you to focus and put your eyes on the ball. Let us focus and work hard for those people we represent. The other day, I said let us sharpen our arguments not our voices so that we air out everything to the best interest of the people of this country and in their service. May God bless all of you as we embark on this important task.

Hon. Oshabe, on what matter do you rise? You should have announced to me what you are rising to do, Sir.

2.31
MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. I congratulate you for having gone through whatever you went through. I want to thank you for the passion that you want us to move with and many of us are ready to move with you.

I stood to raise two concerns, if you allow. First, you have indicated the need to debate about the Uganda we want, and I really want to thank you for that. I wish this debate can continue and the rest of Ugandans participate in the debate about the Uganda we want. My worry is: where are the results of our debates? Is the Government ready to take them on or the results of our debate will just go to the National Planning Authority, probably to plan for the future as they do often in the National Development Plan?

My second issue is on the matter of the quality of debate, which you have highlighted whereupon you said that the days of coming with figures, which are related to the person are gone. Mr Speaker, sometimes, we do research but when we take on the Floor of Parliament, we are given only two minutes to speak. There is nothing much one can say in two minutes. In that regard, it is my request that, although we are very many, ample time be created for us to debate about the country we want. This will enable Members to give you the right information so that the time we take doing research, can be seen on the Floor of Parliament. 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: There will be no other comments on this. I did not quite go to the tail of how this process would end. After the general debate that you have had, the technical people would compile the key issues, have them categorised and we submit them to the President and Cabinet to see what they want to do with them or what they can do with them. However, each time, they bring something, they know where we stand. They know what our expectations are so that there is no second-guessing about how we should move together to evolve a common ground on how we have performed.

2.35  
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last week, Parliament adjourned unceremoniously. Rule 50 requires ministers to attend Parliament, but there were very few at that time. Also, the leaders on the other side are always not here. This has reduced the Government Chief Whip into an office messenger; that he must be standing up every time to say – (Interruption)

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought when you communicated, Members were listening. I thought that you told us to make this House discuss issues that concern Ugandans and we focus on very important issues regarding national interest. 

Hardly had you finished than a colleague brought comedy to the House. Mr Speaker, is it in order for a senior legislator, who is a former Opposition Chief Whip and a current whip of a party to look at a whole Government Chief Whip with his height and reduce him to an office messenger, especially after the communication –(Interjections)– because he has said that I am an office messenger?

THE SPEAKER: When you are short, you only see things from that perspective. When you are tall, you do the same. I think hon. Ssemujju looked at these things that way. He thinks everything is normal and that is his nature. There is not much we are going to do to change this. 

 I would have been very surprised if he did not say it that way. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Maybe, hon. Tayebwa needs to know that – 

THE SPEAKER: Please moderate the language.

MR SSEMUJJU: That I am a graduate of communication. If he did, maybe, he would not have complained. I did not in any way mean that you are an office messenger and if it is implied, I am sorry. I meant that you should not be standing here every day to say that this minister is not around; I am going to inform him. I see office messengers do those things. However, I am very sorry if it was implied. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the point is that last week, this Parliament adjourned unceremoniously, hardly 10 minutes after commencing its sitting. Many ministers and leaders on the other side - I thought that maybe, in your communication or before we go to the business of the day, you would allow Government an opportunity to explain. If you look at our budget now, everyday taxpayers spend about Shs 2 billion on Parliament. If you come here and unceremoniously adjourn for a reason that is known - Mr Speaker, I thought that the Government owed this Parliament an explanation as to why they caused that.

The second point to your communication, Mr Speaker, is that I was in the gallery as a journalist when this Parliament was debating the –(Interruption in recording) - The contribution you made that day was monumental for me. 

It is not that the MPs were fewer but Parliament knew how to debate. The MP for Omoro that time, who led the debate, had done a lot of research and, therefore –(Interruption)

MS AVUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for your communication. Honourable Ssemujju rose immediately after your communication and I thought it would be procedurally right that he addressed his mind to your communication. However, he has taken us totally outside what you communicated. Are we proceeding rightly?

THE SPEAKER: I think he is making a great attempt to proceed properly. Please proceed properly. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, finally, I would like to thank you for the very inspiring address you have made. It is possible, even when you have thousands of MPs, to keep the quality of debate because you were not few that time. That particular day, less than 10 of you spoke. 

However, if you choose to turn Parliament into a talk show where everybody must speak even when they have nothing to say, even if there are 10 MPs, the quality will remain the same. That is the point I wanted to make. 

Mr Speaker, I was reacting to your communication but I think my sister was not following me properly. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Should we continue with this? Let us close this, Members. Let me allow the lady for gender. Unfortunately, it is only coming from this side but it does not mean anything. It is just that they stood earlier. (Laughter)

There were two Members who raised urgent matters. I will have the lady speak and we proceed with the urgent matters. 

2.42
MS SHAMIM MALENDE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Thank you very much for the words of wisdom. I think it is every person’s concern to see that we have a people’s Parliament. 

My concern is about issues that are being raised by the voters that send us to this House that I really want us to consider if we are to turn this Parliament into a people’s Parliament. 

This issue is about the credibility of Parliament – 

THE SPEAKER: That is the debate we are going to have. 

MS MALENDE: In that case, thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: You are very welcome. On the issue of the events that occurred last week, it was not brought to my attention; so, I did not know. Now that you know what happened last week, please, speak to it, Government Chief Whip. 

2.43
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform you and colleagues that we took note of the concerns of the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker and we are going to take action and ensure that things are put to order. 

Secondly, it is very important for me and my side, to welcome you back and congratulate you upon your maiden sitting. We are looking forward. Most colleagues are new in terms of being Members of Parliament and in terms of the positions we are holding. We are looking forward to learning a lot from you and we promise you all the necessary support in order to make this House very productive. 

In the same vein, we welcome the Clerk to Parliament, who has been our senior legislator. Colleagues, I implore you to take time and use him as much as you can. You will learn a lot from him as legislators. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition – 

2.45 p.m.
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Rt Hon. Speaker, I take it from where my honourable colleague has left to offer my heartfelt communication to you, to welcome you to the House of Parliament for the first time as presiding officer, since we passed the budget. Welcome, Mr Speaker!

I would like to assure you that the left side of Parliament is sharpening edges to act on its duty and we are here to execute the mandate sent to us to do by the electorate as we look forward to having the right side of the Speaker listening to the minority and we derive the convergence that we can execute, it is very important. We are very prepared, we are learning, we are unlearning and we believe we can make this House a House of Parliament. 

I thank you.  

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your communication, which has been very elaborate and eloquent and for the spirit that you have come back with to the House. I congratulate you so much. 

Mr Speaker, we are all aware that we have a problem in the country and COVID-19 is still here with us. Today, as you can see, the House is getting full every day with Members of Parliament sitting in the gallery. I am touched, as a backbench commissioner because this is part of our work to ensure that members of Parliament are comfortable. So, the procedural point I rise on, Mr Speaker, is that would it be procedurally right for us to continue siting in this small Chamber with air conditioning amidst the COVID-19 scourge that is still going on in the country and yet Members keep on coming and the population keeps on growing. 

I beg your indulgence. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we can handle that one at the level of the Parliamentary Commission but let me say this: I do not know whether it was more comfortable in the tent - to carry out and conduct serious parliamentary debate, where the Speaker could not even see Members. 

It was a complicated balance that we had to look at because the tents were okay and they were big and wide but the ends were far; you could not see anybody. As a result, Members would just rise and line up to face the microphone. They would have already selected themselves. It is no longer Parliament. It does not look like Parliament, to me - maybe to you. So, when we reviewed this thing, we said, “Okay, Sergeant-At-Arms, go and mark the seats in the Chamber by standards applied by the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). Mark them.” As you can see, they are marked so that the spacing is good. If you are sitting in a place that is not marked, you are already violating a core principle of this arrangement and if your seat is not marked, you are in the wrong place.

We counted and it came to about 114 Members who could sit here, with effective social distancing and masking. That is why you can see all the doors and windows are open to allow natural ventilation. These are compromises we are trying to make so that we can be accommodated in the Chamber.

The idea was that when this happens, on Tuesday, the 100 and so Members of Parliament who will sit, will not sit the next day. The next day, another group would come so that we keep rotating until we perfect it. 

This formula is not yet fully worked through; it is still work in progress but we are examining the weaknesses so that we can find something that can work better. I love this Chamber; I love the tent less. However, if Members think we should go back to the tents – 

Secondly, there are issues with the tents. The public was upset; unless we are going to buy our own tent and put it there. That tent will no longer be like the one we used to have; it will be one huge tent that can accommodate Members in a way that the Speaker can still control the proceedings of the House.

However, as of now, of all those evils, we find that this is the lesser one, if we maintain the standard of the marked seats. If a Member leaves, another can come in immediately so that we just make use of the situation as it is. It is not us; it is COVID-19 that has imposed this situation on us. Otherwise, we would be sitting like we did in the past and just proceed with business. As you can see, we are trying. Hon. Silwany, we are trying to make it work and I think it is more comfortable here.

The new Members especially should also have a taste of what this thing is about. Some of you have been sitting here for very long. These new Members who have just come only know the tent. The best I know, tents are for wedding receptions and related matters –(Laughter)– To have serious parliamentary proceedings in a tent –

Honourable members, the circumstances demand so. However, if there are options that can be usable, we can explore. If they cannot work, we change but if they work, we perfect them. This is what I can say about that. Can we now proceed, honourable members?

2.54
DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to begin by welcoming you back. I am among those that were waiting for you.

I rise on a matter of national importance on the escalating insecurity in the sub-region of Greater Masaka and in particular, Kimaanya-Kabonera.

In the past two months, a good number of our people have been murdered and others have been left hospitalised. There is panic and fear in my constituency and the region where I come from. In particular, yesterday night, we lost four residents who were murdered in one village. On the night of 23rd, three people were attacked in the same constituency and one of them died. On the night of 22nd, a 90-year old man called Edirisa Kakooza was murdered by people we do not know up to now. 

These series of murders have been going on in my constituency, in Lwengo District, Bukomansimbi District and Masaka District, particularly Bukoto Central. Mr Speaker, it should also be noted that several police posts were closed and it may be the reason for a security gap. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Internal Affairs comes on the Floor of this Parliament and – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, this being my first time to speak –(Laughter)–

THE SPEAKER: Since when? (Laughter)

MS OGWAL: I rise to congratulate you, Mr Speaker. I am extremely delighted to see the new Clerk, who comes from my region. I congratulate the Clerk, on behalf of the ordinary Members of Parliament – the backbenchers.

Mr Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter and a follow-up on your Communication from the Chair. I took note, very seriously of you following up – like the Acholi say - the animal you speared but has not died. You have always talked about quality debate and evidence-based presentation in the House.

The procedural concern is, can we start now - When I stand to inform Parliament about a series of deaths taking place in Dokolo - I may not know those who have killed the people. However, I should be able to mention their names on record so that the presentation I make is evidence-based and we are well informed. Otherwise, some people may think we are here to malign the image of the security forces in our areas.

Honourable members, let us try to implement the Speaker’s concern, beginning from now. Mr Speaker, my procedural concern is that you have spoken well and I believe the next sitting of the Commission will define for us the rebranding of Parliament, so that we know how we are going to rebrand ourselves, in terms of quality of presentation and debate. That is my concern, as far as the Masaka issue is concerned. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am being informed that the same matter was raised last week by the Member of Parliament for Bukomansimbi. It is now again being raised by hon. Bwanika. 

I think it is important, for purposes of a follow-up, especially for my friends on the front bench when they are taking their notes, to have some names, especially where they are available. It would help. It is because if we just say “murders”, it may sound like that. I am very uncomfortable to use the word “murder” because it is a technical term - at least where I come from. So, maybe the word “killing” may be friendlier in those circumstances. Murder has certain things before you call it so. 

Be that as it may, hon. Bwanika has raised those issues of security concern; the killing of some people which has occurred. It has been captured and I suggest that the Government says something about this and we move on.

3.00
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Rtd Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me welcome you back to the Chair. 

Regarding what the honourable member has raised, it is true we have heard of some insecurity in Masaka. I do not know whether they are the same he is talking about but we have taken note. Investigations are already going on and we will appreciate if we can interact with him to get more information so that we move together in order to provide security to our people. 

When we get a full report about this matter, we shall return and report to the House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us focus on a solution rather than anything else. We want a solution to the problem. The minister has responded. Let me now go to – yes, Hon. Kiwanuka?

3.02
MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of national importance. The New Vision of today, 24 August 2021, carries a headline wherein the Government appropriated funds and a facility to do transplant and donation of organs at Mulago National Referral Hospital. 

Up to now, many Ugandans are still going abroad for tissue and kidney transplant while spending on each patient more than Shs 100 million and yet we have a transplant facility that was funded by the Government of Uganda, that is not in operation only for one reason - that the Government has failed to bring to Parliament a Bill to operationalise the facility. 

It is against that background that that turns out to be a matter of great national importance for this House to prevail over Government to urgently bring a Bill to Parliament for purposes of operationalising the facility where the Government has already spent money. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Front bench of Government, rise to the occasion. 

3.04
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At the risk of accusing the ministers for not being here, I just want to first make a clarification that because of the few numbers designated to sit in the Chamber, we strive to ensure that the eight to 10 front seats that we have are usually occupied by Cabinet Members who have issues on the Order Paper so that we can give our colleagues the chance to be here. So, the Minister of Health today did not have any item on the Order Paper. Therefore, she is not here. However, I am going to relay this matter and ensure we report back to the House next week. 

THE SPEAKER: No, that one does not require next week. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: We will be reporting back on the status so that we work on the law. 

THE SPEAKER: That one requires tomorrow because all we want is information on what is happening. Can this be done? We do not want a full statement of background and stuff like that. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the statement tomorrow in the afternoon; some brief on the status of this facility and the way forward. Thank you. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, matters that are raised in this Parliament as matters of national importance begin appearing as matters for which ministers are going to make statements. Part of the reason is that the ministers are never here or they do not have information.

So, the procedural issue I am raising, which by the way offends our Rules of Procedure because sometimes they even attract a debate, is whether matters of this nature are matters where the Government Chief Whip can undertake to go and – because Government acts as one. That is why there is the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and not someone whose duties would be to pick matters from here and take them to someone else.

These matters, according to our rules, are supposed to be responded to immediately but they keep appearing on the Order Paper and statements are given. Mr Speaker, I am raising that procedural issue whether Parliament should continue proceeding that way in total disregard of our rules. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I have made statements about this matter very many times in this House that each time I try to talk about it, I hear myself. 

Rule 46 was created as an exception to the general rule of all matters that come to the House requiring notice. According to our rules, any matter that comes to this House must be with notice. In other words, give the Members and the Speaker notice. Let them know what is coming so that they prepare since we are talking about evidence-based decision-making. 

The exception was created to deal with situations that are so urgent that you cannot give notice. For example, a bridge has collapsed. “This morning, everybody woke up and found the bridge has been swept away.” For that, you do not require notice; you rush to the House and consult with the Speaker. The Speaker will say, “That is very urgent. Draw the attention of Parliament and the Executive to this”. Disease outbreak, landslides and the things that happened in Kasese recently are the things that are urgent. That is why Rule 46 was created - to deal with these emergency situations.

We have, however, abused this rule so much that it has lost shape and purpose. I want us to go back to it. (Applause) 
You do not raise policy matters as a matter of urgent public importance. That is why the wording is, “a matter of urgent public importance”. However, you have now substituted it with matters of national importance. No. Those days are over. Let us go back to the rules and play by them. (Applause) If there is no disease outbreak, do not show up in my office to ask for a matter of national importance. You have other openings under the Rules of Procedure; motions, questions for oral answer or statements that you can make. There are all these things. 

This inconveniencing thing of matters of national importance should be phased out and left to serve the purpose for which it was created and I am going to insist on this.

Therefore, if the matter is not about disease outbreak, a broken bridge, hailstorm that has destroyed crops and people are suffering, houses have been blown off, rivers have burst their banks or landslides, please do not come. Let us stick to the rules. That is why, when we are organised, the processing becomes very easy.

In the last Parliament, we would have three pages of urgent matters that were raised two years earlier. How can a matter raised two years ago still be urgent? It does not make ordinary sense. Let us stick to the rules. The exception was created for that purpose; so, let us observe it strictly. For the general matters, there are so many provisions in the rules that we can use to bring all those concerns to the House. 

I am not saying that you will never bring any issue to Parliament. There are provisions. You show up from any corner and you will be accommodated. The matter might even be debated. That is the advantage that this system has.

Hon. Ssemujju has raised an important matter that we should be able to deal with. For clarification from the Chair, you might have to cite for me the rules, honourable Member for Dokolo, because we do not seek clarification from the Speaker. The last time I read the rules, they did not say so. (Laughter)

Can we now proceed to the Order Paper? By the way, that was this morning.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE GENERAL OVERVIEW OF THE PERFORMANCE OF UMEME

The Speaker: Honourable minister, is this your maiden speech on these matters? Anyway, you are a veteran; so, proceed.

3.11
The Minister for Energy and MineralS Development (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, it is indeed my maiden appearance –(Interruption)

The Speaker: Hon. Ssemujju, I do not want to impute any other thing but let the minister proceed, please.

Mr ssemujju: Mr Speaker, this Parliament took a decision that the contract with Umeme must be terminated. It was taken here. The statement on the Order Paper is on the overview of the performance of a company whose contract this Parliament took a decision on.

Mr Speaker, you said we need to be serious. We take a decision to terminate then you come here to say that you are going to brief us about the defiance of a resolution of Parliament; to brief it about a company whose contract Parliament instructed you to terminate. That is the procedural issue I would like to raise.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable minister, are you going to communicate a termination?

Ms nankabirwa: Mr Speaker, I did not offer myself to bring this statement. I was directed by the Speaker to bring a statement on the overview of Umeme. It is not my request that I brief this Parliament; I am just obliging to the directive by the Speaker. Actually, this was supposed to be given last week.

I would like to request that the Members listen to my introduction so –

The Speaker: Only the introduction? I see the learned Attorney-General rising. Maybe you can give him a chance.

3.14
The deputy attorney-general (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to congratulate you on ascending to that seat. This is my maiden speech –(Interjections)– it is my maiden speech before the Speaker.

I wish to make a clarification or to inform my brother, hon. Ssemujju that the concession of Umeme runs up to 2025. As Government, we have obligations. If we terminate it, there are liabilities that come along with that. 

As the Attorney-General’s office, we have been negotiating with Umeme and the decision that was taken was that we let it run through its contract. It is safer for Government other than paying or getting a liability of over or close to US$ 600 million. I wish to inform.

The Speaker: Honourable Members, this is the kind of complication we get into. This was raised as an urgent matter of public importance. I am dealing with a procedural matter right now.

This is exactly the problem you get into. You rise under the guise of urgent matters and then show up with a huge substantial policy issue affecting substantial matters then we find ourselves stuck with it. How do we handle this? 

Now, we are expected to receive a full statement from the minister when it was supposed to be a face-to-face; you say something and I respond to it. It is now on the Order Paper. This matter must come on its own cause and it stands withdrawn from the Order Paper. Next item.

Mr oshabe: Mr Speaker, thank you for pointing out that, that matter came as a matter of question when Members were wondering why Ugandans are not supplied with Yaka metres. Ugandans are no longer connected to power.

We were here and requested the minister that as you come –

The Speaker: I have ruled on the matter. Can we proceed?

Mr oshabe: Mr Speaker –

The Speaker: I have ruled and we have closed it.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO RE-ALLOCATE FUNDS FROM THE RURAL ELECTRIFICATION AGENCY [REA] TO THE MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT; AND FROM THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION TO STATE HOUSE

The Speaker: Honourable minister, is it another urgent matter, which was raised?

Dr byakatonda: Procedure, Mr Speaker. 

The Speaker: On what matter do you rise, sir?

Dr byakatonda: On the motion. 

The Speaker: Which motion?

Dr byakatonda: I feel there are some gaps as a matter of procedure.

The Speaker: Are you rising on a procedural matter?

Dr byakatonda: Yes.

The Speaker: Proceed.

Dr byakatonda: Mr Speaker, the framers of the Constitution of Uganda under Article 29(e) allowed freedom of association, including the right to join Trade Unions. 

The point in issue, especially for the workers at the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, is that they have a labour union that has never been involved in this matter. I find that on record, 14 companies did not look at resources/financials but they basically looked at how the workforce is handled, especially the situation of the merger. 

The procedural point is that it is premature to look at financials before we engage all the stakeholders and the workforce. What are we now allocating? We do not know how many people we are absorbing, those affected and what their plight is. Are they being paid? How do we pay them? I think these are procedural issues, Mr Speaker. 

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Isn’t that a matter for debate? 

MR BYAKATONDA: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: If it is a matter for debate, then we should just debate it. 

MR BYAKATONDA: Yes, Mr Speaker. I have had an engagement with these people – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you will be the first to speak after the minister makes the statement so that you capture the substance of what you are saying. 

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. I would like to also take this opportunity to congratulate you on your maiden chairing of this House and for coming back safely from wherever you had been. 

I would like to move a motion under Rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure. 

“WHEREAS Parliament appropriated Shs 527,114,000,000 under Vote 123: Rural Electrification Agency and Shs 265.043 billion under Vote 023: Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation for the Financial Year 2021/2022; 

AND WHEREAS the existence and Vote status of Rural Electrification Agency Vote 123 was revoked under Statutory Instrument No. 29 of 2021 and its functions mainstreamed into the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Vote 107, as a Rural Electrification Department – A copy of the statutory instrument is attached to my motion, Sir;

AWARE that in accordance with Article 113 of the Constitution, H.E The President of the Republic of Uganda abolished the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and transferred its functions to the Office of the President serviced by the State House Comptroller under Vote 002; 

NOTING that Section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides that Parliament may, by resolution, authorise the minister to reallocate funds from one vote to another vote, where the functions of a vote are transferred to that other vote; 

REALISING, THEREFORE, that in order to streamline the operations of Government, there is need to reallocate: (1) Shs 527.114 billion, hitherto, appropriated under Vote 123: Rural Electrification Agency to Vote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; and (2) Shs 265.043 billion, hitherto, appropriated under Vote 023: Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to Vote 002: State House; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that in accordance with Section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the Minister responsible for Finance is hereby authorised to reallocate funds as follows:
  
From Vote 123: Rural Electrification Agency (REA) to Vote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development as follows:

I beg to move that under Vote 123: Rural Electrification Agency, a total of Shs 527.14 billion be transferred to Vote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Once this occurs, the Vote for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development will amount to Shs 1,203,583,987,433. 

From Vote 023: Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to Vote 002: State House as follows: 
A total of Shs 265.43 billion be moved to Vote 002 and this will translate into Shs 675,278,751,537.” 

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Yona Musinguzi. [Members of the Frontbench rose] I am not taking any secondments from the Frontbench. It is seconded by the Member for Adjumani District. Is there any further secondment? It is seconded by the Member for Terego District and Nabilatuk. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

At this stage, you are actually not required to speak and the reason is simple; this is a substantive motion involving finances, shifting documents, figures and numbers. You will have another day to speak on this. Depending on how the committee works, that day will come very soon. (Applause)

Therefore, this particular motion cannot be processed as is. It stands substantively referred to the Committee on Budget to examine it and come back. Thereafter, the honourable minister shall eloquently speak to the motion. Hon. Yona will also speak to the motion as seconder - the chairman of the Budget Committee would have reported. This matter, therefore, is referred to the committee.

Thank you very much, honourable minister. Next item. 

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO URGENT QUESTION ON THE DELAY BY GOVERNMENT TO HONOUR ITS UNDERTAKING TO COMPENSATE FISHING COMMUNITIES IN KAMULI DISTRICT THAT SUFFERED BRUTAL, INHUMANE AND DEGRADING TREATMENT AT THE HANDS OF THE UPDF FISHERIES PROTECTION UNIT IN CONTRAVENTION OF ARTICLE 44 OF THE CONSTITUTION

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries not here? Honourable minister, are you ready to proceed? Proceed.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to congratulate you and thank God for giving you the grace to head this institution. Yesterday, I had an opportunity with my technical team, to meet over 60 honourable Members of Parliament representing the fishing communities. It was one of the best meetings I have had since I became minister. I thank them very much for turning up in a big number.

In that meeting, we could not resolve the issue of compensation because:

    1. We needed more time. Very many people were mentioned, including His Excellency, who had sent a team to investigate the same matter. Therefore, it needs us to have time to consult with him and we cannot tell when we can meet him and get his views.

    2. The honourable Members of Parliament, by that time, did not have enough data from their constituencies so that we could put this data together; who was offended, when, by who and to what extent? In that meeting, we agreed that we were going to put all these together and have another meeting.

    3. We have to consult with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and see how we can be able to compensate these victims.

    4.  The Fish Bill we are using is of 1964 – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you using a Bill? 

MS ADOA: Sorry, the fish law that we are using –

THE SPEAKER: I was getting very worried.

MS ADOA: I am sorry. The fish law that we are using was enacted in 1964. At the moment, the Act we are using is of 2011. Therefore, there is need to replace this law. By the end of the previous Parliament, we had already brought this Bill to the House and we pray that soon, this will guide the fishing communities when they have the law in place.

Mr Speaker, we understand that some people were injured and tortured. However, we still need time to put the data together before we come back to this House. 

This is what I can say for now. Bear with us, we shall come back at a certain time and share with you our findings. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Same problem - matters of urgent importance involving huge policy issues and so on and so on. Let us find a way of processing these things. Since the communities are affected, we will accommodate this one. When you are ready, honourable minister – which should be soon so that we give confidence to the population that something is going to happen about their situation. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise?

MR KATUSABE: Procedural matter. First of all, I would like to welcome you back. We have been missing you, as a country. We thank God for His grace and perfect health.

I would like to thank the minister. Our fellow citizens, especially those that derive their livelihood from fishing activities, are going through a lot of pain. They can hardly place food on their tables and the minister has asked for more time.

Mr Speaker, I would like to know whether it is not procedurally right for you to direct the minister to make a commitment in the short-term? We have seen fellow citizens being tortured on the lakes, their fishing nets burnt and boats broken. 

What is going to happen between now and when the minister reports back to this House? I represent a fishing community and literally, their livelihoods are shut down. They do not know where to go. They keep coming to my home, expecting me to feed them. I do not have money to feed them. Is it not procedurally right for the minister to be directed to make a commitment, specifically on what Government is going to do in the immediate term? I appreciate you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I listened to the minister carefully and she stated that the matter had gone to the H.E the President, who had appointed an investigation team. She is not able to tell how long that will take. 

However, as minister, what are you going to do in the interim period to deal with the affected communities? Some of them have been grossly affected - and I have personally watched some of the things on television. What do we do in the interim period while we wait for your comprehensive response to this matter?

MS ADOA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, yesterday in that meeting, we also had the commanders heading the Fisheries Protection Unit. As you are aware, for the last one year or so, the commitment of Fisheries Protection Unit is that they have changed the approach that was hard and harsh and the cases are not as bad as they used to be. 

The second issue is the displacement of people who lived in the fishing community by floods. They need food. Some of the boats that were illegal are no longer allowed. 

Mr Speaker, I have already written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that they support us to reach these communities in order to support them in one way or the other. 

The other thing we are trying to do still comes back to finance. This is to give the youth and women some alternatives that can help them in a short time, as we wait for the long term plans. What we are going to do now is to follow up with finance to see whether they can squeeze something small for us in order to save the fishing communities. 

MR KAYONDO: Thank you very much. I do not know whether we are proceeding well. Otherwise, the honourable minister on the Floor is telling lies. 

The hostility on the shores of Lake Victoria are escalating each and every day; people are being tortured and they are dying. Their boats are being broken every day and they are being killed. For the minister to stand here and say that there is some improvement on Lake Victoria is a lie. Therefore, are we proceeding right, if the Minister stands on the Floor of Parliament and tells lies to this Parliament? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am going to be kind to you because words like “lies” grossly offend the records of Parliament and appropriate use of language in this place. 

You never call another Member a liar or accuse them of telling lies. Those words are too strong. You can use statements like factual in exactitudes (Laughter). They will be more appealing to the Hansard and the rules of the House. You can also use statements like, “It is not entirely true, the minister is not being truthful, and the minister is being mean with the truth”. Such statements are better than the one you used. (Applause)

Honourable members, let us respect each other and use words that are acceptable. Even when you are talking to me outside, if you say you are a liar – even without being in Parliament, the eyes will change. Imagine now saying this on the Floor of Parliament. Let us moderate our language. 

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I initially wanted to seek clarification from the honourable minister – 

THE SPEAKER: But you said procedure.

MR MPUUGA: Initially, but then she took leave. I would like to pick it from where she left because I thought the issues Members raised related to livelihoods. The minister, of course, spoke to the future yet livelihood is about the present. Without the present, the future does not exist.

The minister mentioned that they had a conversation with the finance ministry to make short-term provision for the communities. Would it be procedurally right, if the minister, by way of trying to calm the nerves of the communities, makes clarification as to what nature of conversation took place between the fisheries ministry and the finance ministry so that the communities can know and take care of their short term expectations and we do not leave this matter lying in abeyance without clarification. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it would have sat comfortably with me if you had said, “Mr Speaker, these are new matters and they keep evolving. We are going to constitute a team to visit the sites to assess the situation, talk to the communities affected”. Otherwise, this matter has been here for a while and it has been a great offense to some institutions because of the way it has been handled. Some of them have not taken it lightly. 

We want a situation where we work harmoniously. I would have loved to hear something like we are going to dispatch teams, do the assessments ourselves, talk to the communities, hear their grievances and come back to the House after devising a mechanism on how to deal with it. You would have also given a timeline when this will happen. 

Your meetings with the finance ministry, in the boardrooms of Kampala and other places may not speak to those ordinary people who now feel abandoned. You want to show a positive Government presence in those situations. That would have appealed to me and honourable members, I am sure. Are we now debating by procedure? 

MS ADOA: Mr Speaker, my colleague who said I am lying – 

THE SPEAKER: No, that has been concluded. 

MS ADOA: I understand him. I too represent the fishing communities – he had to do that because it is very frustrating sometimes. I do understand. However, as I said, for the last one year, the Fisheries Protection Unit has tried to calm down. In fact, the fishermen have started killing some of the Fisheries Protection Unit soldiers. Recently, we lost a soldier that they abducted and killed in Lake Victoria. 

Coming back to how to rescue our people faster, we had a meeting yesterday where we agreed with the honourable Members of Parliament that within the next two weeks, each of them will be going to their area so that we set up committees. The ones of Lake Victoria will choose their chairperson and have a meeting and bring a report in the next two weeks. The ones of Lake Albert, Lake George, Lake Kyoga and Lake Edward will do the same as above.

THE SPEAKER: Did you agree on anything in the interim, while these consultations are going on? That is the issue. 

MS ADOA: Mr Speaker, we agreed that in the next two weeks, we will have come with this data. Otherwise, it is not easy to decide when you do not know exactly what you need to do. 

Secondly, we also agreed to follow up with the Shs 6 billion that was passed and given to the Office of the Prime Minister in the last Parliament. That money was directed to the fishing communities so that they are able to be saved in a short time. Please allow me to follow up with the Prime Minister. Meanwhile, in the next two weeks, the honourable members will bring this data and then we take action. 

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, could you guide whether we are proceeding well. The matter on the Floor of Parliament was compensation of the fishing communities; the people that had suffered torture by the army. 

From what the minister is explaining, I am hearing things that are completely new in a meeting that transpired between her and Members of Parliament from the fishing communities. May I know whether we are proceeding well to be receiving matters that are completely different from what we expected? We expected to hear from the minister on how far Government has gone in compensating persons who suffered torture by the army officers and men who were manning the fishing communities. 

I beg to know from you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable member, if you recall, at the beginning of her presentation, that is exactly what she dealt with – discussions with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and others to try and see where money can be found to handle those people who were affected. They have been identified and that kind of thing.

We have now come to the issue of the activities that are on-going – people who are currently being either displaced or whatever is happening. While all these processes are going on, what happens now? 

That is what we are interrogating with the minister, to see if we can speak to our people and give them the confidence that there will be a response from the Government, so that they can settle down and wait for the Government to deal with these things, together with the Members of Parliament from those areas, just like it has been stated. 

That is where we are, okay? The other one was dealt with earlier. Honourable minister, please come and we finish this matter quickly. Hon. Oshabe, what is the matter?

MR OSHABE: Mr Speaker, thank you very much –

THE SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise?

MR OSHABE: I want to debate the –(Laughter)– To give my opinion on –

THE SPEAKER: To do what? (Laughter)

MR OSHABE: Mr Speaker -

MS ADOA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of fisheries is not a one-day thing but I ask for your patience. Within a short time, I will reach the much-affected communities myself and make sure that we support our people, in one way or the other. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You raise matters of clarification with the minister, not with the Speaker.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues to applaud your commitment to see the Uganda we want. 

Mr Speaker, I had –

THE SPEAKER: First of all, on what matter do you rise? (Laughter)

MR KIBALYA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter.

THE SPEAKER: Procedure? Okay.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I was saying, I had restrained myself from commenting on this matter. To be specific, when the President visited our area, it is I, who read the document, on behalf of the fishing community in Buyende, Kamuli and Kaliro. 

The President had committed, during the time of campaigns, that in less than three months, something was going to be done. The pressure has been high. That is why you saw my colleague from Bugabula North had to rise and present that issue. That is why I had kept quiet because the issue is tough in our area.

Mr Speaker, the minister called a meeting yesterday. I did not attend, simply because this was a collective meeting for MPs where we would not get the solution because issues that affect the community of Buvuma are very different from those of Kamuli –

THE SPEAKER: Now, the procedural matter?

MR KIBALYA: The procedural matter I am presenting is, has the minister presented the future plans? We told them that some people lost their husbands. Some people were displaced; they have nothing to eat. However, up to now, the minister is presenting the future, not the current solution, as you have requested.

My procedural issue is, are we really continuously proceeding well, as we fight to see the Uganda we want, when ministers come and continue saying, “We are going to… We are going to… We are going to”, without saying that we have agreed to implement A, B, C, D. That is my concern and area of procedure; on whether we continue moving, when “We are going to”, “We shall”, “We will”, “We are planning”, yet outside, you are saying, “We have agreed to do A, B, C, D”. Are we proceeding well, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the point is well taken but that is just where I have been pressing the honourable minister to tell us. For example, in the interim period, what is going to happen? While all these big plans are taking place, what happens now, as we wait?

We are dealing with people and that is the most important thing. We are dealing with people who are watching, reading and are in a situation that we are not in; probably suffering. We do not know the full situation but they are in trouble somehow.

We want them to listen and say, “Okay, the minister said in Parliament that this is going to happen.” Honourable minister, please help us with that. In the interim period, what is going to happen so that we close this matter and give you time to handle with the honourable Members of Parliament? 

Find solutions – common ground - on how we are going to deal with this matter with finality so that if the lakes have to breathe, they breathe without drowning people. I think that is the conflict that is there. 

Honourable minister, please come, close this matter and we move. [Ms Ababiku rose] Are you taking the point of clarification from the Woman MP of Adjumani?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have been missing you. We are grateful that you are back – Thanks be to God. 

The clarification I am seeking is when exactly the minister is reporting to this House. This matter has come here as a national matter now and she explains how far she has gone with honourable colleagues. However, that aspect of when she is going to report has not been said by her.

So, my sister, can you tell us when you are reporting so that as a House, we can make a follow-up. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us do this. From my assessment from the responses of the minister, you can even see she is trying to consult. Honourable minister, would you like to do short consultations now and tomorrow morning and come back tomorrow afternoon to speak to the communities that are affected - through this House - on what you are going to do in the interim period. Is that okay?

Do your consultation and come back tomorrow at two o’clock with what you are going to do in the interim period.

MS ADOA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: At two o’clock, we will have this matter back and hear from the minister what is going to happen in the meantime, while all these plans for dealing with this matter with finality are going to be handled. [Member rose_] On this same matter? It has gone. Thank you very much. 

Can we go to the next item? [Member: Procedure] We are not going to carry debates by procedural matters. Honourable minister?

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT ON HIGH ELECTRICITY TARIFFS THAT HAVE CURTAILED ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT IN THE COUNTRY

3.57
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to welcome you to the House. I was about to do so but hon. Ssemujju could not allow me to say so.

I congratulate Members of Parliament. I have never congratulated you and I wish you very fruitful deliberations, and total cooperation between you and me as your Minister of Energy and Mineral Development.

Mr Speaker, hon. Opolot Okaasai Sidronius, the Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development has been handling this matter since it came to the Floor. He is in the House. I would like to leave him to present the matter, which is on the Order Paper.   

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable minister. 

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Mr Speaker, this is my maiden presentation as a minister. This issue was actually raised at the 14th Sitting of the First Meeting of the First Session of the 11th Parliament of Uganda held on Thursday, 5 August 2021 by hon. Sauda Kauma, Woman Representative of Iganga. She raised concern over the high electricity tariffs that have curtailed enterprise development in the whole country.

Mr Speaker, I wish to make the following statement on the matter. The electricity tariff is the price that the customer of electricity pays for electrical energy consumed and/or services rendered by the utilities that provide the services. 

The electricity tariff is set to recover the reasonable cost of providing electricity service. These costs also referred to as revenue requirement include costs of generation, transmission, distribution and supply of electricity.

Principles of Electricity Tariff Determination:

Recovery of all reasonable costs and reasonable rate of return for licensed activities include:

    1. Revenues adequate to cover reasonable levels of the operation and maintenance cost.
    2. The recovery of investment capital and the approved return on investment.
    3. Incentives to reduce cost and improve operational efficiency.

The electricity tariff is determined by Electricity Regulatory Authority under Section 10 of the Electricity Act –(Interruption)

MS AISHA KABANDA: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. As a matter of procedure, I think it is procedurally right for the minister to share with us his presentation – 

THE SPEAKER: You have already ruled. 

MS AISHA KABANDA: I beg to know from you whether it is right for the minister to go on and make a presentation without sharing with us his statement. I do not have it, I have checked in all our e-communication media and the statement is not there. I do not know whether my colleagues have it. Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, it is right. This is a matter of national importance that was raised, so it does not require a written response. So, we are proceeding very well. The minister is just briefing himself on what he is going to say.

NR OKAASAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to proceed. 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed. 

MR OKAASAI: The current approved tariffs. I am going to put it in Uganda Shillings and also convert it into U.S. Cents –(Interjections) Okay, I will read it in Uganda Shillings. 

The applicable electricity end-user tariff for the period of July to September 2021 is indicated as below.

The end-user tariff for July to September 2021 in Uganda Shillings is dictated by time of use. Different times of use of electricity have got different tariffs. The category of users also have different tariff rates. 

On average, on the different categories - We have category 01; lifeline. This is for a household in a rural area who just require two or three bulbs and one socket for powering their radio and maybe television. The lifeline average cost is Shs 250 per kilowatt hour. 

Above life –(Interruption)

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister is talking about something that touches us all. The question raised by the Member was, “What is the minister going to do to reduce the ever increasing indiscriminate electricity prices?” 

Is the minister, therefore, proceeding well to tackle a different issue; telling us the definition of a tariff when the Member simply wanted to know what is going to be done to reduce electricity prices so that our voters stop giving us a lot of pressure? I seek your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: The minister had announced, at the beginning, a plea that this is his maiden speech. However, the protection accorded to such maiden status of speeches is only to the extent possible. The protection has not been to the extent possible because there has now been interruption of your debate and presentation because the Speaker has also been waiting patiently to hear when you are going to deal with the actual question. This was an urgent question. What are you going to do about electricity tariffs? They are killing people.

You have outlined how the final figures are generated. In those components, which ones can be reduced and what are you going to do about it? These other statistics are for the future. For now, this is what we want. You will have cleared us. Proceed, honourable minister, along those lines. Please abandon these other huge texts and just proceed.

MR OKAASAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I actually went that way to make everybody understand how the tariffs are derived. However, I will go to what measures the ministry is putting in place to reduce the tariffs. 

Before I present that, I wish to correct the claim that I do not have my presentation. It was uploaded onto the laptops – 

THE SPEAKER: It is not even a requirement. Just proceed, honourable minister. 

MR OKAASAI: Implementation of Tariff Reduction Measures

The Ministry of Energy and Minerals Development has undertaken several measures geared at mitigating tariff increases over the long term. The following measures are being implemented to ensure reduction in electricity prices:

a) Debt refinancing of Bujagali Hydroelectric Power

In June 2018, Government finalised debt refinancing of Bujagali Hydro-Electric Power, reducing the extra-large industrial consumer category tariff to $0.88 cents/kwh and $5 cents/kwh at off-peak time of use of electricity.

b) Distribution efficiency 

The energy losses by Umeme Limited have reduced from a target of 27 per cent in 2011, to a target of 14 per cent in 2021.

c) Implementation of extra-large customer category

In 2017, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development implemented the extra-large industrial consumer category. This category includes 43 industries, consuming 27 per cent of the electricity and the overall cost structure and competitiveness is very sensitive to the cost of electricity. Twenty seven per cent is consumed by just a few large industries.

d) Public financing of large Hydro Power Projects

Government financed Karuma and Isimba Hydro Power plants. Isimba was commissioned in April 2019 and Karuma is expected to be commissioned in June 2022. The tariff for both Karuma and Isimba are less than $5 cents/kwh, during the loan repayment period and reduces to $1.2 cents/kWh. 

e) Rebate policy 

My ministry has implemented the rebate policy where consumers, who finance construction of electrical installation, are refunded through a rebate against the electricity bills/invoices. This has reduced the turnaround time for industrial new connection. Demand estimated at 60MW is being implemented under the rebate policy. 

f) Declining block tariff 

My ministry has implemented a declining block tariff for large and extra-large industrial consumers. This is where the tariff reduces as industries consume more electricity based on a pre-determined consumption threshold.

g) Hedging of foreign exchange risk 

The fluctuation of the exchange rate of the Uganda Shilling against the United States Dollar is one of the biggest challenges affecting financial sustainability of the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI).

My ministry has commenced a pilot foreign exchange hedging of Power Purchase costs amounting to one million US dollars per month, effective January 2021.

h) Implementation of the free connection policy 

In November 2018, Government approved implementation of the free connection policy, targeting to connect 300,000 consumers per year. However, due to the re-aligning of the Government of Uganda's expenditure priorities, in part caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government has thus, starting March 2021, provided for a dual connection system where customers with the ability to pay for their connections will be connected while the free connection continues for those who cannot afford – (Interruption)

mr kayondo: Mr Speaker, the question was clear and it was about the tariffs. Even if you give the free connections, it does not affect the tariffs. I understand the minister knows it very well that in Uganda, we generate more electricity than we use and pay for that excess. How does the construction of Isimba and Karuma reduce the tariff of the electricity we are talking about?

Therefore, I do not think we are proceeding well if the honourable minister is not giving the right answer or is giving twisted facts to the question he was asked. Thank you.

The Speaker: Technically, that is not a procedural matter. That is a matter of clarification from the minister. How do you expect me to rule on that one?

Now that you have sought clarification in that way, the minister will find time to accommodate it in his response to deal with that situation as well. Honourable, that is clarification for you but not the Speaker. You either accept or reject it.

Mr okaAsai: I would wish to clarify on his question. I have actually indicated how this one is affecting tariffs. At construction, it is already down; it is $5 cents/kwh. After the construction and repayment, it comes to $1.2. That is a big reduction. That intervention of construction of new dams has led to a huge reduction in tariffs –(Interjections) – can I be allowed to proceed?

The Speaker: Please proceed, honourable minister. Honourable members, can’t the minister just complete a sentence? –(Hon. Oshabe rose)– Honourable member, I have not allowed you. Please, resume your seat and wait for the Speaker to allow you. If I have not allowed you, do not access the microphone. You have no right until you say, “Procedure” then I say, Point of procedure. Please do not begin any movement. Stay where you are until I give you marching orders to go and speak. From this occasion, the penalty is that you lose your chance to raise that matter. (Laughter) Yes, minister, please proceed.

Mr okaAsai: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

i) 	Improvement of reliability and quality of electricity supply My ministry has determined a new set of minimum standards of reliability and quality of electricity supply for Umeme Limited and the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited based on the financial reward and penalty structures, which have been established controlling Umeme and electricity transmission. 

j) 	Engaging with Uganda Manufacturers Association (UMA) 

My ministry holds quarterly meetings with UMA to discuss:

1. 	Power reliability challenges faced by individual industrial consumers;
2. 	Electricity tariff trajectory;
3. 	Demand growth initiatives;
4. 	Investment plans for the various users
5. 	Implementation of directives by His Excellency the President to electricity tariffs. We are considering what the President is directing to reduce the tariffs, especially to the industrial consumers. 
6. 	Direct connection of power from the generator to the big industries. 

l) Charcoal to power initiatives 

When we increase the consumption of electricity, the tariffs will be forced to come down. My ministry has commenced implementation of pilot projects towards ensuring that Ugandans and institutions use electricity for cooking. If we increase the number of people using the electricity, the costs of generation, transmission and distribution will come down so we want to get more people into using electricity as a way of reducing the tariffs. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. This was a question for an urgent matter. Does the Member that raised it have a supplementary question? Rules are meant to be followed. If the Member that raised this initial question is not there and he is supposed to raise the supplementary question, then that matter poses no other debate. 

Thank you very much. Honourable members, there being no further business to handle, this House stands adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 4.19 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 August 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 

