Thursday, 1 August 2013

Parliament met at 10.42 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I apologise for starting a bit late. Let us go to business.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee. Are the documents there? Okay, we will deal with the documents in the afternoon.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is not here. Go to the next question.

QUESTION 65/09 TO THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT

10.44
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro):“Would the Minister for Works and Transport explain to the House the specific measures that have been put in place to counter the potential diseases that may be contracted by motorists who are subjected to the breathalyser tests by Police?”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister for Worksand Transport is not here too.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 6JUNE 2013

(Debate Continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (An hon. Member rose_) Procedure onthe ministers? No, we will deal with that in the afternoon. Please, let us use this time.

Honourable members, this debate had started. The Members who are ready now can start the debate, starting with the honourable member for Bukooli. Are you ready to make your contribution now on the State of the Nation Address? 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We had issues with the appointment of Gen. Aronda Nyakairima. We asked the Speaker and the Speaker promised that the Committee on Appointments would give a report to Parliament but I now see him seated on the Front Bench.(Applause)

The procedural point that I am rising is whether Gen. Aronda Nyakairima sitting on the Front Bench should precede the reporting of the Committee on Appointments. What should come first? As far as I am concerned, Gen. Nyakairima is a stranger on the Front Bench –(Interjections) – I still see him as a soldier. So the procedural issue is: what should precede the other - is it the reporting to Parliament or Gen. Aronda Nyakairima occupying the Front Bench?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Constitution of Uganda regulates the appointment of ministers, and the Rules of Procedure provide how appointments should be done. It is true that the Committee on Appointments sat and approved the appointment of Gen. Aronda Nyakairima and to my knowledge, he has since taken oath of office as minister. 

The reporting to Parliament of the dealings ofthe Committee on Appointments is a requirement of the rules but cannot stop any member who has been properly approved by the committee and taken oath to sit on the Front Bench. (Applause) The issue for Parliament is for information purposes and not for decision purposes. The Speaker will, at an appropriate time, brief Parliament on the appointments so far conducted and the issues around them. That does not stop anything as it is for information only.

Member for Bukooli, you have five minutes.

10.48
MR PHILLIP WAFULA-OGUTTU (FDC,Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you,Mr Speaker. I stand to comment on the State of the Nation Address and to reiterate our position put forward in the statement of the Leader of the Opposition. 

In his speech, the President mentions one of the first bottlenecks for mismanaging our country as ideological disorientation. I used to know the President in the 1980s and 1990s and I thought that he had a certain perspective ideologically, but the things that I see him doing are definitely proof that he is the one who is suffering from ideological disorientation. 

At that time, the President used to talk for the people.If you lookedat the Ten Point Programme -it was later improved to 15 points - you could see that it was authored by somebody who cared for the interest of Ugandans; you do not see that in the practice ofthe President and his team. What we have built or what he is building is a society or an economy that is meant to benefit a few people, to the extent that he has now built a Uganda of a few people who have and a Uganda of people who do not have but form the statistics to vote. 

The people who do not have are impoverished and are simply there to vote. Later, he can come around with sacks of money for distribution, like you have seen in the past few days; he moves around distributing sacks of money. That type of economy, that type of ideological orientation, is disorientation from the President that I knew in the 1980s and 1970s.

The other day, the President was in Rwanda and he talked about the problems he has at home here.Yesterday, I heard many MPs making reference to Rwanda as the best thing which has ever happened. Good things are attributed to Rwanda. Mr Speaker, Rwanda is a country which suffered destruction of its human resource some 15 years ago. They have been rebuilding that country and the people who are rebuilding Rwanda studied in Uganda, stayed in Uganda and they worked in Uganda. Why are they able to do things which we cannot do? Why do you go to admire and you cannot do what Rwanda is doing? It is the question of governance of the country. They could be having problems of democracy but they are benevolent and patriotic, which we lack here. 

We do not have benevolent and patriotic people in leadership here. If you look at the budget, what we allocate money for does not benefit the rest of the country but just a few people. The President says he wants to make Uganda a middle income earning country in three years. That was a big joke. It could be done but not under the current government. It is very difficult because there are no things being done to indicate that that can be achieved. Countries have achieved in 20 years what Uganda has failed to achieve in 30 years. The issue is governance. You cannot have a first – (Member timed out.)

10.55
MR ODOO TAYEBWA (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to capture some three areas that the President addressed on page 9 of the State of the Nation Address. 

The President said railways will be built. It is just a simple sentence, but what about those railway lines which existed before and have been vandalised? We used to have a railway line from Kampala to Kasese which used to help that area so much. We would get produce from Kamwenge to Kasese as well as transport fuel from Kampala to Kasese and the people of the west would get fuel by truck from Kasese. The train would transport people especially during Christmas; you would see an exodus of so many people working in Kampala passing via Kasese. If such a railway line was vandalised - and we used to have a very strong railway corporation with staff and so on - and you come up 30 years later and say that railways will be built, then I do not understand what you mean!

We used to have our Uganda Airlines, which we were proud of. In fact, when I was in P.7, we came and visited Entebbe Airport and we saw a good plane with a crested crane poster and you would actually feel our plane flying. Recently, I was at the airport with my children and my seven-year-old saw a plane written on “Kenya Airways” and he asked,“Where is Uganda Airways?”At that time, Uganda Airways was vibrant. So, we should wake up and redeem Uganda’s future. 

Let me also talk about agriculture, which is the backbone of this economy. On page 15 of the address, the President said the sector that can enrich many Ugandans and quickly is agriculture. Yes, it is a nice statement but what strategic plan and programme have we put in place to make sure that the 95 percent of this population, who may be benefitting from agriculture, can now earn a living? We should come up and save this country. 

When you go to eastern or Northern Uganda, you see virgin land. Western Uganda has a favourable climate for agriculture, but are we doing much? We cannot come here and say we are going to modernise agriculture when we are going to modernise agriculture with a hoe. We used to have institutions which trained farmers.We used to have irrigation schemes, which were even part of our O’Level syllabus; for example, the Mobuku Irrigation Scheme. We visited this irrigation scheme when we were in O’Level but it is no more. So, in talking of modernising agriculture, we should be serious and I –(Member timed out.) 

11.00
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I attentively listened to the President during his State of the Nation Address and I found a few issues that I want to address you about. 

Like many other speakers have said, the President talked about constructing the Uganda Railways in his statement on page 6. I am a member of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises but the situation now is that everything that belonged to the Uganda Railways has been sold off. The estates just near here in Nsambya are already gone. Recently, this same government gave out a concession to the Rift Valley Railways to take over the activities of Uganda Railways Corporation. When you come back today and say that you are going to reconstruct – to make matters worse, the President promised to construct an underground train tunnel. I think this is a dream. If you fail to construct on the ground, how can you manage to construct underground train tunnels? We have to just dream about this thing as far as this Government is concerned.

The President has always shifted goalposts in talking about the oil sector. At first, he promised that the government was going to construct a refinery but moments after, the same person is promising a pipeline. I do not want a government which does not stick to its position because of different influences from other sectors and other interested persons. If we are going to construct a refinery, this should be the position we stick to.

I expected the President to talk about the increasing fire outbreaks throughout the country. In my constituency, which is a new district, the police station does not have any equipment that can be used to fight fire. Recently, three children were killed ina fire outbreak just opposite the police station simply because there is no fire-fighting equipment. I think this is the right time for the government to equip all police stations with fire-fighting equipment so that we avoid destruction caused by fire. 

On the road sector, the President has always been promising to construct roads throughout the country, including my own road from Villa Maria to Sembabule. We have heard about 10 promises every year but it has never become a reality. I think it is high time the government concentrated on just a few items where we can register achievements. 

In the education sector, I want to inform this House that the government has tried to construct laboratories to ensure that students are taught sciences. However, as I speak now, in my constituency there is a sub-county where we have a laboratory which is well built and fully equipped but since the equipment was delivered, nobody has ever touched it –(Member timed out.)

11.05
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, People with Disabilities Representative, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to thank the President for his clear exposition of government policy as contained in the State of the Nation Address. I believe that our President, the government and the NRM have done a lot for this country. What has been done is clear and visible to every one of us. 

I thank the founders of the NRM and its members who have worked hard to ensure that the achievements registered so far are consolidated for the benefit of the current generation and generations to come. I believe with the achievements made so far, the NRM is here to stay for our children and grandchildren. I only hope that one day our friends on the other side will see the facts and then they will also join us so that we can all consolidate what has been achieved. 

Mr Speaker, we all know that we, as MPs,give promises and pledges but none of us have ever been able to fulfil all of our promises. If there is any MP here who has managed to fulfil all the pledges and promises he or she made to her constituents, I am ready to be challenged. (Laughter)

Our government has made many pledges and some of them have not been fulfilled but I believe that instead of criticising the President, we should work with his government to ensure that these pledges are fulfilled. I believe that through constructive and positive criticism, our friends on the other side can also contribute to the fulfilment of these pledges.  I do appreciate, for instance, the great contribution made by some of our friends who criticised, but in a constructive way and by giving facts. 

Mr Speaker, I have praised my party but I want to mention one point from my constituents. I have been here for very many years and I know our government has done a lot in terms of empowering marginalised groups in this country – women, workers, people with disabilities and others. I also know that under state policy, the President is expected to make reference to these areas of achievement. However, I feel disappointed to note that our government, especially some ministers, fear to talk about the achievements we have made in the area of empowering my constituents. Why don’t you want to say that you have done this and that for people with disabilities? Are you the traditional group of people who are scared of meeting with people with disabilities? (Laughter) In future, I want to see these achievements enumerated and clearly articulated by our government. Why are we shying away?

I also believe that we have made a lot of achievements in empowering other interest groups in this country, but these should be mentioned over and over again so that whoever comes into government is able to build from where we have reached. For some years, we have worked with the people to generate a Bill referred to as “The People with Disabilities (Amendment) Bill”. We have been waiting for this Bill to come to Parliament and on several occasions, the President has promised that the Bill will be coming to Parliament. I hope that the Cabinet will soon be tabling this Bill. With these few remarks, I support the motion. Thank you. (Applause)

11.11
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, People with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. I had thought that maybe some of these issues I want to raise would come up during the debate on the policy statements but let me raise them now so that the committees, which are considering these issues, can take what I am talking about into consideration.

Mr Speaker, I want to talk about education and specifically special needs education. You know very well that in Plenary here and also in the committee, we have continued to talk about the enormous challenges faced by children with disabilities in schools, and my colleagues have also talked about this. However, what we are seeing and what we continue to see in the ministerial policy statements is the lack of a specific budget vote for special needs education.

The challenges children with disabilities face are enormous. There are no teachers, no scholastic materials and the distances to school are so long. In the Eighth Parliament, we visited His Excellency the President as a group and he promised that he was going to ask the relevant ministry to construct regional schools with accommodative facilities but nothing is reflected in the budget speech.

What I am going to talk about does not only benefit disabled people but also soldiers, and this is the issue of production of mobility appliances. Mobility appliances were mainly produced by Mulago Hospital and other referral hospitals. However, what is happening today as we talk about health necessities is that we do not have a budget vote for production of appliances. Mulago orthopaedic workshop does not have monies of its own. The monies allocated are within the general pool and it is very difficult for the orthopaedic workshop to get the money to produce appliances.

When we go to secure these appliances, it is not only us, the disabled people, who line up but also the army, the people who have been affected by wars. When I visited Mulago orthopaedic workshop, I was told that even with their small budget, the ex-military men go there and secure appliances on credit and this money is never paid to the hospital. Basically, this department cannot continue to produce adequate appliances with the little money they have.

Honourable members have been approaching us and saying the disabled people in their constituencies want appliances, but we are not the manufacturers of these appliances. I just want to request honourable members to support us when the Committee on Health is considering the budget and provide a specific budget vote, which is independent of Mulago Hospital and other referral hospitals, so that adequate appliances are manufactured and given to the people who need them.

Lastly, I want to talk about the issue of maternal health. Women with disabilities face a lot of challenges and we have talked about this over and over again. What is most disappointing is that even with the National Reproductive Health Roadmap, disabled women are not considered. Initially,when we were reading the roadmap, we saw abbreviations like DPOs and we thought that this meant disabled peoples’ organisations but it carried another meaning.

My prayer is that all these committees, which are considering these issues,the Committee of Education and Committee of Health, will kindly consider specific budget votes for these issues that I have talked about. I thank you.

11.16
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the President for fulfilling his constitutional duty. However, when you look at how the country was reported on in the last year and how we are going to perform- I would actually invite the Members on the Front Bench to compare the speeches of 2011, 2012 and 2013 - you will realise that the President is performing alone. I have read all of them and most of these sectors are not reported on. I do not know what these ministers are doing.

In this State of the Nation Address, we do not see the performance of the Judiciary. The other day, I went to the Land Division in the High Court and I found that there were three judges and each judge had 3,000 cases. If one judge is handling 3,000 cases, are we okay? Shouldn’t the President have reported that there is a crisis in the Judiciary? Why should a judge have 3,000 cases and the country keeps quiet? That was as per 18th July.

When you got to the Court of Appeal, each judge had about 300 cases and if it is a panel, it means there are 400 cases in a panel. The Supreme Court has never functioned for five years. They cannot handle constitutional matters because it would require that there are seven judges, and they had 69 cases which had been there for a long time. So, are we okay? Did the President report correctly?

Also, did the President report on regional peace? We have our soldiers in Somalia and a number of them have died; may their souls rest in peace. I expected the President, in the performance of the State, to say something about this.

The President’s interest is on page 1 and I want to quote him - “My main concern, as you may by now know, apart from peace, is economic transformation of society and integration, both economic and political, of the African Continent.”Honourable members, some of our colleagues and ministers do not want to tell the President bad things but if you do not give correct feedback to the President then you are not performing. You cannot have regional integration, whether economic or political, without harmonising the existing legislation. We have legislation here which will definitely conflict with the desire of the President; so how are you going to integrate without harmonising the laws? How many laws has the Attorney-General brought here to be harmonised?

When you look at what the President talked about concerning capacity in three page 1, developing human resource through education and improved health for all - health is not a building, health is human resource! If you have built human resource and you have the capacity to recruit them, have you retained them? 

You know, we have been talking about short supply of human resource. Last month, when I talked about short supply of human resource and technical retirement of the human resource when it is lacking, many people understood that issue. It was not politics. I call upon my friends to stop over politicising everything. Where there is short supply, what should the country do? Do we get experts from outside when we have our experts? 

Why should you pay a Chief Administrative Officer in KampalaShs 40 million per month and you pay the Chief Administrative Officer in Kisoro Shs 1.1 million? How would you fight that corruption? You realise that even the minister who is supervising the person paid Shs 40 million is being paid Shs 1.5 million. Hon. Frank Tumwebaze supervises Kampala but he is paid Shs 1.5 million as take-home salary and the person he is supervising is paid Shs 40 million – (Member timed out.)

11.22
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just hold on a little. In the public gallery this morning, we have pupils and teachers of Bright Day and Boarding Primary School, represented by hon. Latif Ssebagala and hon. Nabilah Sempala, Kampala District. They have come to observe the House proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome.

We also have pupils and teachers of St Benedict Secondary School.Where are those students? Okay, there they are. They are represented by hon. Florence Kintu and hon. Vincent Ssempijja, Kalungu District. They have also come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming these too. Honourable member for Bubulo East, please continue.

MR MULONGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been taken up by the uniform of the school that has put on yellow; it is very exemplary, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. With all due respect to the smartness of the pupils on both sides of the House, I rise on a point of order regarding our rule that does not allow a Member of Parliament to address the gallery. Is it in order for the honourable member – (Interjections) – that particular rule, which talks about – is it in order for the honourable member holding the Floor to address the gallery and not the Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I heard the honourable member for Bubulo East saying the pupils are dressed smartly in his opinion. He said that through the Speaker; he did not address the pupils directly.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion in which Parliament records its gratitude for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address on the state of the nation by H.E. the President to Parliament on Tuesday, 06 June 2013.I managed to pull out one or two issues, which I would like to talk about. 

The first one, which is broadly encapsulated in his speech, is the fact that Government has managed to address the question of both the State and human security. The people of this country, for over two decades now, have experienced stability that had not been known for a long time in the history of our country.The government has evolved and developed a security architecture that ranges from the State security institutions such as the Police, the military, Prisons and intelligence agencies to the common security systems that are undertaken or managed by the population through the local government system of the LCs. This is fundamental in terms of extending the statehood from the centre to the peripheral and ensuring that the State is felt in the countryside. 

This is not common among very many African or developing countries where statehood is mainly felt in the urban areas and also mainly during the day. At night, you cannot sense statehood or once you go away from the urban areas, you donot see any statehood. In this country, however, because of the LC system and the attendant supported state institutions such as the Police that are dotted all over the place, you can really feel secure and you can be attended to.I feel that this is fundamental in contributing towards the stability of the population so that they can contribute towards development and growth of our country. 

I also would like to re-echo the fact that the policy statement contains the issue of Uganda’s national security not only from within but also from outside, where we contribute towards the stabilization of our neighbours and our missions both in the Central African Republic and Somalia so to say, are doing exactly that. We are trying to fulfil our mandate in ensuring that other nations other than Uganda also can enjoy peace, security and stability. To this end, the President’s statement was on the mark, that Uganda’s contribution is supposed to be felt not just by Ugandans but also by those abroad.

Having said that, it is my call that the State of the Nation Address, in the future, should also include things that I feel were missed out. One of those is the standing question of the districts, which some Members support but which others donot. I support the issue of granting a district status to my constituency to be called Namisindwa, and my people are very serious about this. It was promised, they qualify, there are very good reasons for it and they want it.

The second aspect that I also felt should have been mentioned was to prioritize among periodization of public roads; for example, the road from Rwakhakha through Manafwa to Mbale has been talked about – the first time this road appeared in a national budget was in 1989 but up to now, it has just remained a promise. I feel that next time this road, among others, should be mentioned specifically so that the people of Manafwa and Bungokho can have it constructed.

With those remarks, Mr Speaker, I would like to support the motion to thank the President for this clear and precise exposition of the policy contained in the State of the Nation Address. 

11.29
MS FLORENCE NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the President, the Government and the Ministry of Health for the good services extended to the health sector. I also thank the President for having delivered that precise State of the Nation Address.

Honourable colleagues, I rise to comment on the issue of maternal mortality. As you may be aware, H.E the President addressed two solutions that he said had been put in place to reduce the maternal mortality rate. These were sensitization on radio and the improvement of health centres III and IV.

I would like to support the motion but at the same time request Government and the Ministry of Health to seriously look into this issue because the rate of maternal mortality continues to rise in all health centres. I suppose it is happening in all your districts. The issue is not only about carrying out sensitization; it is also about the lack of enough blood reserves and the lack of enough manpower as a result of poor pay.

Most of the employees in the health sector in the rural areas especially in my area, Butaleja, donot stay on their jobs for more than three months because the money is not enough to cater for their needs. I want to request the Ministry of Health to consider this matter and see if they can carry out some campaigns. 

I did some mobilization in my constituency against maternal mortality and through this campaign I observed that people were willing to donate blood. Probably, that should be one of the things that the Ministry of Health should look into in its effort to promote sensitization in that regard and also encourage people to donate blood. 

Another issue that the ministry should look into is to make sure that information is available to all expectant mothers in all health centres, to assist them in terms of knowing how to look after themselves during pregnancy.Another issue that the government and the Ministry of Health should look into is to encourage men’s involvement in this matter. Most of the time, you find that women go to health centres by themselves. They go for scans and check-ups by themselves and the men are not involved in this whole process. We would like to encourage the government to put it in their programme and add money in the budget so that sensitisation can be carried out in all health centres and regular hospitals in Uganda.

Another issue that is probably cropping up in all districts, and I suppose in all your constituencies, is that the regular hospitals are not being adequately supported. There is no equipment, there are not enough staff and if it is not looked into, five years later most of these major hospitals are not going to have an adequate workforce in place. 

In districts like Butaleja, we have only one doctor serving the whole hospital and most of the workers are nearing their retirement age. So, we would like to ask the Minister of Health to ensure that most of the regular hospitals are provided with the necessary equipment, enough health workers and enough money to cater for their salaries so that the workers remain working in our hospitals and health centres in the country. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

11.33
COL PHINEHAS KATIRIMA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I specifically want to address one point which was raised by His Excellency the President on page 1 of his address. His Excellency talked about 10 strategic bottlenecks that have hindered socio-economic transformation, not only of our country but also of our continent. 

Mr Speaker, about 26 years ago, the population of Uganda was about 14 million. Today, the population of Uganda is about 35 million and it is continuing to go higher. There have been some efforts to educate Ugandans about where we have come from, where we are and where we want to go so that by 2040 we may be a first world country. However, when you look at the number of children who are sharing this knowledge, the number remains very low. There is need to make deliberate effort to mobilise the youth of Uganda so that they understand what has been able to bring us stability, addressing the challenges of political and constitutional instability of the past as we move on to a middle income country in the next three years and attain first world status by 2040.

There should be deliberate effort to establish regional schools in addition to the National Leadership Institute at Kyankwanzi. These schools should be cascaded to the districts and the lower levels so that as many Ugandans as possible participate in rendering national service to the country, in sharing and learning about the challenges that face their country and plan for the socio-economic transformation of the country. 

This will need a budget, and we need Parliament’s support in order to appropriate those funds so that this programme, for the better future of Uganda, can be activated. I know it is going on but it is on a low scale and we need not only enhance it but try also to accelerate it and give it more momentum.

11.37
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take the opportunity to thank His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address and also to highlight the issues I think should have been highlighted. One of them was the issue of food security, which was not adequately addressed. 

Some of us come from areas that neighbour national parks, like Queen Elizabeth National Park. When you consider the populations that are around national parks in the country, you will find that directly there are over five million people and indirectly you get more than 15 million people. This means that we have got a population of over 20 million people that risk not having enough food. 

For the case of Bunyaruguru, the people are highly food insecure basically because as Government, there has been failure to tackle the issue of animal-human conflict. Elephants and other wild animals come and destroy people’s crops and there is no compensation at all. When you go to other countries like Kenya, they have been able to control that using a fencing system as well as planting of thorn hedges that have prevented the animals from destroying the crops.

Apart from that, we have got so many lakes in the country and at the moment almost all of them have been depleted, making the country food-insecure in terms of protein and other resources. I believe to us who have so many lakes the answer should not be putting more money into digging of ponds but exploiting the resources that we have. 

In my area, we have got over 38 lakes and 20 of them have got fresh water. However, even for the big ones like Lake George, Lake Edward and even Lake Albert, the Government has failed to protect the Ugandan population from the Congolese who have depleted the stocks in their area and are now coming to our water with bad fishing nets. The security keeps on looking at them and even harassing Ugandans. If you can control that, I believe as a country we could also have some good food security.

Lastly, I come from a banana growing area and for the last four or five years, we have been attacked by banana bacterial wilt. Whereas they have been sending fliers and so on, the amount of money that has been put into fighting this disease is very minimal. As I talk, people from my area and the wider banana growing region of Bushenyi are about to face starvation –(Interruption). 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I do understand and bear with you the pain of the farmers caused by the diseases which are eating up our crops. The information I want to give is that as a country, we are in the process of having the Bill on biotechnology which is supposed to be an answer to some of these problems. Hopefully,we shall quickly support the Bill and have a solution. I thank you. 

MR CADET: Thank you for the information. However, when the Bill is not matched by resources, I doubt whether it will be of any help. What we need now is more resources to be sent into agriculture. (Interruption)

DR OMONA: Thank you, honourable colleague. The information that I want to give you is that it is actually known that if banana wilt and other diseases affecting bananas are not biologically addressed, in the next 50 years we risk losing bananas in the whole world. However, the good news is that scientists involved in biotechnology andgenetic engineering, including our own scientists in Uganda, are already working on disease resistant bananas. Actually, what we only need now is a law that will enable the rolling out of this disease free banana in Uganda. 

The other good news is that, just as my colleague, hon. Anywar, said, there is a Bill that will soon be brought back to Parliament. I want to urge colleagues that we pass this Bill as it will give leeway to accessing these technologies that will save the human population by providing disease free bananas. I thank you.  

MR CADET: I thank you very much. In conclusion, I think that unless we consider tackling the problem of human–animal conflict, we are bound to have more people becoming poor not because they cannot cultivate or they have no land but because the animals are eating up their crops. This is happening as the Government is looking on and claiming they want to get more money from tourism, forgetting that the conflict there will even make the animals get killed.

We need more money in agriculture so that we have the issues of food security solved. Unless we solve the issue of food security, then we shall have inflation going up and we shall begin suffering. Right now, inflation is up in Uganda not because Bank of Uganda is not working – (Member timed out.)

11.45
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have afew issues to comment about on the State of the Nation Address by the President. 

The President talked about accidents in this country and he said that 20 percent of them are because of reckless driving. However, the President forgot that much as reckless driving accounts for 20 percent of the accidents, the state of the roads in this country is very appalling. Remember a situation where you are supposed to keep right but because of the poor road, you keep left; an example is the Mbale-Soroti Road. As I drive towards Soroti, I am supposed to keep left but because the road is in a very poor state, I must always be on the right and any mistake therein automatically leads to an accident.  

I caution the Government to be very serious on the state of roads in this country. When the roads are in a very good state, we shall realise a very good transport network and when there is a good transport network, many business transactions and developments can be conducted –(Dr Bitekyerezo rose_) Because I have very little time, honourable colleague, you will allow me to utilise this time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members! Let us have some order.

MR AMODOI: Two, in the health sector, the President concentrated on the six killer diseases but I want to inform this House that in my constituency and in the whole of Teso, there are a number of other diseases, for example, Hepatitis B and many others. Some of these diseases emerge and they have even challenged the doctors. There is no substantial research that pertains to these diseases.So, it would be important that Government carries out enough research so that we will be able to come up with solutions for new diseases that are emerging day and night.

Thirdly, in the education sector, Government recently came up with a programme of every sub-county having one secondary school. You may grant the school but there are no buildings, and if there are some few buildings, like in my constituency, there are no teachers. 

Also, when it comes to issues of construction of some facilities in school, there is what we normally call a central bidding process; if they are supposed to construct some classrooms in my constituency, there is a contractor who is centrally hired.In most cases, however, - I am very optimistic that this cuts across every part of this country - these centrally secured contractors do not accomplish their work. They just use Government money and at the end of the day, the work is not accomplished. I would advise Government to always find a mechanism in which these centrally secured contractors fulfil their obligations. 

When it comes to remuneration of teachers, their welfare is very poor. They need accommodation but it is not there. The salary is very meagre and it delays. Recently, teachers were complaining of two to three months’ salary delay and yet we passed money here. Where does the money go, Mr Speaker?

The student to teacher ratio - I visited a school in my constituency and I found that in primary 1 there were around 450 pupils with one teacher. I doubt whether that is very proportionate. 

The other issue is infrastructure. I have moved throughout so many parts of this country; my constituency has no power at all but when you move to other parts of this country, you find that even goats have got electricity –(Laughter)- (Member timed out.)

11.50
MR JOSHUAANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): I thank you very much for this opportunity, Mr Speaker. I rise in support of the motion to thankthe President for a very clear and precise exposition in the State of the Nation Address. I have no doubt in my mind that in what he said, most of the things are really well stipulated and they are actually practically proven.

The President talks about agriculture on page 9.The concept of so many products per home is traditionally what people from the North have been practicing. The problem that we have right now, that maybe the President needed to focus on, is non availability of markets for most of the products. From Northern Uganda, particularly Nebbi where I come from, if you went to a market where a woman sold mangoes two years ago, if her mangoes were not sold, you would find two basins of mangoes just left abandoned by the woman in the market. We would also have families that have planted bananas and have a handful of cows being reared and so on. So, the concept of so many products per home is a very good concept but I think it is not new. All we need in Northern Uganda is the supportfor the concept to grow these crops not at subsistence level as it has been.

My other disappointment with the President was when he mentioned cotton; of course, he has always said that cotton is not good for poor families but that it is groups of people or rich people that must grow cotton. I actually grew up and was educated by cotton. So, what we would need is to find market and become world producers of cotton. During Amin’s regime, we were producing almost 500,000 bales of cotton but now we hardly produce 120,000 or even 60,000 bales of cotton. 

On education, I think the President has done very well. My only problem with UPE and USE is the quality of education. That goes to the quality of the teaching staff, the quality of the structures that we have and the quality of the curriculum. I have a document in my hands; in a school called Erussi Secondary School, where I come from, we have USE and the enrolment is about 1,200 students but we do not have even a single science teacher.The number of teachers in that school is supposed to be 36 on government payroll but we have only 12. So, much as we are talking about USE and UPE, I think we need quality education. 

On page 5, on infrastructure, kudos to the President, kudos to the Minister of Works for the good works on most of the roads in Uganda. When you go to Masaka, the work is very excellent. They are working on most of the highways including the Northern Uganda highway. My only issue is the standard and the design of the highways. The Kampala-Masaka highway is very wide but when you take the road that even the Speaker uses to Northern Uganda, the narrowness of the road has remained the same but reconstruction is taking place. It is as narrow as Obote left it. Why can’t we have a national standard for all highways? 

When I was going to Masaka, I found a place where, as you drive, there is a provision for trailers. They tell you which side to go and they will tell you when you reach the end of the climbing point so that other vehicles are not endangered by heavy vehicles.When moving on the Gulu highway however, that is not there absolutely. 

Still on infrastructure, the whole of the West Nile has been in total darkness. When the government talks about electricity and the national grid, we are now connected –(Member timed out.)

11.56
MR VINCENT BAMULANGAKI SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to thank the President and support the motion that thanks the President for his precise exposition of government policy. 

During his address on the state of the nation, the President on page 9 talks about the importance of agriculture and he also says that 68 percent of our population are practising subsistence agriculture. The President mentions that this scenario and trend is uncalled for and must change. The only problem is that the concerns and the good ideas of the President are not represented in the budget. That is why in the national MTEF, agriculture is only getting three percent. Out of the Shs12.9 trillion, agriculture will be getting Shs382.5 billion this year. 

I sincerely support the idea and the government’s decision to prioritise infrastructure, that is, the construction of roads, railways, electricity and so on.However, my problem is that there are areas which have had tarmac roads since 1960but they are still stuck in abject poverty. You do not see much when you go through Mawokota, Masaka and even Busoga. Even in some areas where we have very good murram roads, you can drive for 30 miles without coming across a lorry from the opposite side. So, putting in place this very good infrastructure, as alluded to by the previous speaker,should go hand in hand with supporting the agricultural sector so that as you launch a road, there are lorries which are going to use it.

I have been wondering why planners and the Ministry of Finance do not really implement the Maputo Declaration. I think we do not share the same thoughts on the objectives of the agricultural sector. In my view, this is a very important sector, and one of the three major objectives which I have thought about is to increase agricultural exports. One day, we should really see Uganda exporting more in volume –(Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information I want to provide is that in many of our constituencies, we have experienced drought. In some constituencies people have starved and died, and this is in a country that is endowed with resources like water and fertile soils. It is very embarrassing. That is the information.

MR SEMPIJJA: Thank you very much. The other objective, which I have thought about for this sector, is to provide jobs for the youth. We are sitting on a time bomb because most of the youth are unemployed. One day, we should –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is midday now; you remember that we had deferred some decisions on item No. 7 –(Interjections)– We are coming back to this. We need to take some decisions on item No. 7 and then we can continue for another one and a half hours. Sorry, I meant item No.6.

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall what happened yesterday.We reported but before the vote on the third reading was taken, there was a motion moved for re-committal of clauses 7, 8, 9 and 10 by hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi. The debate was intensive and we could not take a decision because of the composition of the House at that time. It would now be a proper time for us to take a decision on those matters; whichever way, at least we should take a decision on this subject. 

The motion was for re-committal of clauses 7, 8, 9 and 10 of the Bill. I will put the question to that motion –(Interjections)– We had concluded debate on this matter. 

MR PAUL MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to applaud your guidance and the manner in which you presided over the House yesterday. The reason as to why we did not take a decision was because we had no quorum. Today, we are in this House and Members have been mobilised to the extent that –(Interjections)– Yes, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, we received a message from the Office of the Clerk that today there was a sitting at 10 O’clock and we have obeyed and come. Moreover, we have been debating the State of the Nation Address. Is hon. Mwiru, therefore, in order to say that we have been mobilised? For you, who mobilised you? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House proceeds by rules and the rules say that a third of its Members will take a decision. We have 375 voting Members of this Parliament and if they were all here at once, there would be no space for them to sit. However, what is here currently, I am sure, is one third of the total number of Members of Parliament. I do not know how they are here but yesterday we agreed that at 10 O’clock today, we would be continuing with the sitting so that we conclude this matter. 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, the point I was driving home was that yesterday, when there was a motion to recommit, we vehemently put forward a reason as to why there should be re-committal. I am now wondering if it is in the interest of our Rules of Procedure and our Constitution that someone who was not here yesterday, when arguments were being put across to re-commit, can take a vote on an issue where they have no idea where we are. I am of the view that it is only fair – (Interruption)

MR PETER LOKII: Mr Speaker, according to our Rules of Procedure, all Members of Parliament have a right to vote. I would like to know from hon. Mwiru which Rules of Procedure he is referring to, which do not allow Members to vote or to attend Parliament when there is a vote to be taken. Is he, therefore, in order to quote Members out of context?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, any Member who is inside this House is entitled to vote. The only rule is that we do not allow proxy voting; if you are inside the Chambers of this House, you can take a vote. The only people who cannot vote are the exofficioMembers of Parliament.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence. We are deliberating on a very pertinent matter and I am passionately contributing to this issue. Today we can take a vote to close the only right we have, as politicians, to participate in the democratisation process of this country. However, should this space be closed, we are leaders who represent people out there; they have been pressurising us as leaders of the party that whatever conditions existed then for President Museveni to go to the bush exist today. We have told them, as leaders, we shall never participate in any undemocratic process in this country; we want to use democratic processesonly. 

For people to take a decision on matters over which they have not listened to the mover of the motion, they have not listened to views raised by us – Mr Speaker, yesterday we agreed with you that even as we concede, when court ruled on this matter, there was a problem and the problem was that the Police powers were reduced as far as regulation is concerned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedure you are raising? 

MR MWIRU: The procedural point I am raising is whether we are going to take a sound decision today with people who did not participate in yesterday’s proceedings. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on three procedural concerns. One is in relation to rule 116, because it looks like they have mobilised numbers and they want to push certain things down our throats. Rule 116 says: “No Bill, motion or amendment shall be introduced in the House which, in the opinion of the Speaker, is likely to result in the derogation from the enjoyment of any particular human rights and freedoms specified in Article 44 of the Constitution.”

Mr Speaker, the first procedural question I am putting to you, because it looks like the “voting machine” is well mobilised and in the circumstance, rule 116 provides – (Interruption)

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, I have a lot of respect for my colleague, hon. Odonga Otto, who speaks with wit and humour, and I learn a lot from him. However, when he stands up to refer to his colleagues, honourable Members of Parliament, duly and properly constituted and seated, as “voting machine”, it implies that these Members of Parliament referred to have no logic, no reason and no capacity for cognisance of reason. Is he, therefore, in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I made a passionate appeal yesterday on the journey we have made thus far on this Bill. I stated that the first objection to key provisions of this Bill actually came from the NRM members. I was briefed on the meeting by hon. David Bahati about the strong objections that were raised by members of the party,and those have been changed. 

When the debate started, strong objections were raised from either side of the House, and in that spirit we have been processing this Bill to make sure that the interest of the country is taken care of. That is what we have been doing so far. So, it is unfortunate to make references of that nature, honourable member for Aruu County, calling honourable members of this House voting machines. It is not proper. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I did not in any way mean hon. Mbabazi or hon. Owoyesigire who have just appeared today are voting machines. I am very sorry.

Mr Speaker, I am seeking your procedural guidance as to rule 116, whether this Parliament is not about to legislate on human rights and freedoms. This rule specifically calls you to book, to take charge and ensure that fundamental human rights and freedoms are not curtailed. That is the first procedural guidance.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, when the Opposition walked out of Parliament on the appointment of Gen. Aronda, it became urgent, in the wisdom of this Parliament, that they proceed with the Public Order Management Bill. When we returned to Parliament in good faith, because we know you were missing us – (Laughter) -I do not want to mention the names of those who were missing us. We are seeking your indulgence that we present a case for recommittal of clause 8 in the Public Order Management Bill. This is so that Members who were not there yesterday, like the honourable Prime Minister and hon. Gen. Aronda, can have the benefit of listening to us before they vote.

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I thank my honourable colleague for giving way for information. I thought he knew better, that in my position as Prime Minister/Leader of Government Business in this House, I am constantly in touch with the affairs of this House, whichever distance I am away from here.

Secondly, this one he may not know, but given my background, capacities and abilities that I have built over the years, I want to assure you and the House that at no time do I miss anything that goes on here. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: With all due respect, I agree with the Prime Minister. However, the one who is to implement the Bill, Gen. Aronda, has just arrived in the House today. He does not even know which clause we are going to vote on and he is the Minister of Internal Affairs – (Interruption)

GEN. ARONDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague, hon. Otto, that as a Member of Parliament for three terms, I have been following national security issues of this country. When this Bill was introduced, I was a Member here and I followed it. Even when my colleague was introducing it, I followed it and I have been working with him. So I am absolutely aware of the Bill and I am following it. I thank you very much.

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, I have respect for the former CDF and I do not doubt his capacity to follow when he is present. Last time, we were voting on the Budget, he actually came on a bodaboda so his work in this Parliament, it appears, is to come running when there is a matter on which to take a vote. Is he, therefore, in order to allege that he is following evenwhen he is not in Parliament and simply comes here to vote? Is he in order to turn himself into a voting machine?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am only a human being and now you invite me to exercise powers only exercisable by God. This is to expect too much from me. How would I, for instance, know whether Gen. Aronda has understood anything? How would I know whether he has understood or not? I cannot rule on that, really.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, before hon. Magyezi’s motion, which was well rehearsed before coming into this House, I seek your indulgence to give me a last shot to present our case to Members who were not here. Thank you.

Mr Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you finished?

MR ODONGA OTTO: No. Mr Speaker, thank you so much. Yesterday we were here-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you were on a procedural point. Have you finished, so that I can respond?

MR ODONGA OTTO: I have finished the procedural point but I have sought your indulgence-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I now respond, because you have raised a procedural point?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am informed that some children want to leave and they are in the public gallery. In the public gallery, this morning, we have pupils and teachers of St Peter Cleaver Namilyango Primary School represented by hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Kusasira Peace of Mukono District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them.

We also have pupils and teachers of Nebinene Adventist Day and Boarding Primary School represented by hon. Edward Ssekandi and hon. Kase-Mubanda, Masaka District. They have come to observe the proceedings too. Please join me in welcoming them.

Honourable members, procedural points have been raised to which I should respond. Rule 116 has been raised by the honourable member for Aruu County as imposing discretional power on the Speaker to assess the suitability and propriety of Bills in relation to issues of human rights in line with Article 44 of the Constitution.For the avoidance of doubt and to make sure we are all together, Article 44 reads as follows: 

“Prohibition of derogation from particular human rights and freedoms 
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, there shall be no derogation from the enjoyment of the following rights and freedoms-
(a) freedom from torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; 
(b) freedom from slavery or servitude; 
(c) the right to fair hearing;
(d) the right to an order of habeas corpus.”

Rule 116 states, “No Bill, motion or amendment shall be introduced in the House which, in the opinion of the Speaker, is likely to result in the derogation from the enjoyment of any of the particular human rights and freedoms specified in Article 44 of the Constitution”.  I have just read Article 44.

I find no relevance of this particular provision in the application of this particular Bill. I find no statement to the effect that there is any matter raised that relates to the question of torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, slavery or servitude, fair hearing or the right to habeas corpus. In the opinion of the Speaker, therefore, this Bill is proper before the House.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I am at pains about this Bill. I was in my constituency-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedural point?

MS ANYWAR: I am coming to the point of procedure, Mr Speaker. The people of Kitgum, who I represent in this House, were also followingthis Bill and they are concerned about its outcome.

Secondly, when we had the Bill on marriage and divorce, the people of Uganda were consulted after money was found. Thirdly, this Bill relates to how a Member of Parliament – the point of procedure is that it is quite clear that this Bill is very controversial and is bringing pain to some of us as we rush to conclude it today. 

So, wouldn’t it be procedurally correct that the way money was quickly found for us to consult on the Marriage and Divorce Bill – a referendum is an option for controversial issues  - this very important Bill be considered for such an undertaking so that the people we represent, you and I, are given the opportunity to give input before we rashly organise to vote on it when the very people we represent in this House are going to be disconnected from us, as their representatives, in a manner that when some of us go to consult with them, we will be regulated and not allowed to do so. So, wouldn’t it be procedurally correct to give this Bill another option for the people to have a direct input in terms of either further consultation or a referendum done on it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have come this far, as I stated before. The key issues that were evolving around this Bill have been discussed extensively for a long time; there would be no necessity for referring this Bill to any other process other than conclusion by this House.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker – (Mr Magyezi rose_) – Which motion? You have not even apologized to this House for giving fake reports. Please, apologize to the House –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Gulu District, you stood on a point of guidance. Please, continue.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of guidance. We are in a Parliament and we have all accepted democracy in a multiparty Parliament, but today I have seen some other people say that they can actually deliberate here by proxy and when it comes to voting on a very contentious issue, everybody comes running. I need your guidance, Mr Speaker, whether all of us will now debate in this Parliament by proxy and only come in to vote. If we are in a multiparty Parliament, whether the rights of the Opposition have to be respected?

Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on the rights of the Opposition in this Parliament – whether the rights of the Opposition must be tampered with kangaroo laws –(Interruption)

MR PETER LOKII: Mr Speaker, the Public Order Management Bill has been in this House for more than one year. Every Member of Parliament had the opportunity, in their individual capacity, to carry out every consultation they wanted to. I recall that the Opposition that praises democracy walked out of this House sometime back. How could they participate in the proceedings if it were not through proxy that she is referring to? Is she, therefore, in order, having acted by proxy, to insinuate that the members on the NRM side are acting by proxy?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are five principles of parliamentary proceedings. The first one is that all Members of Parliament have equal rights. It does not matter whether the member belongs to the majority or minority, in the Opposition or on the Government side, all Members have equal rights.

Two, every proposition presented to the House must receive a fair, extensive debate and must receive a decision. Three, the will of the majority shall carry the day but the rights of the minority must be observed and represented. All the interests of the individual Members of Parliament must be subsumed within the general purpose of the House.

Honourable members, those are the principles that guide our debates here. I do not see any violation of those principles. I also do not see any violation of any of our procedures given the way we are proceeding. 

There are issues, other than procedural issues, which we want to address at this stage. However, there must be a point when to resolve a particular matter, one way or the other, and when it is done that way there will be recourse for an avenue to address these issues. However, we cannot just be like this, undecided, year in year out, month in month out. That is not proper for the House. (Applause)

We should take a decision, whichever way it goes and any person who will be aggrieved by this decision will have recourse so that other people can look at what this House has done and criticise it and take appropriate decision on what we will have decided on. So, honourable members – motion from the honourable member for Buikwe South.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, I have listened attentively to your guidance. I also take cognisance of the fact that the Opposition has issues on the goings on. I move a motion that a vote on this issue be deferred until further notice.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the deferral to take a decision on this matter but there are two other issues. There is a motion that was almost being moved for the third reading of the Bill but there is also a motion for recommital. So, the honourable member is saying we should defer the motion for recommital. Is that what you are saying? Okay, if we defer the vote on the motion for recommital –(Laughter)– Okay. 

Hon. Members, there is a motion that is seconded by the honourable members of the Opposition – Please, honourable member for Kumi- No please let me process this issue first then you come in. There is a motion that the decision on the motion to recommit be deferred. That is the motion. Can we vote on that motion for deferring that? I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

12.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Hon. Dr Lulume moved a motion which was seconded by this House that the decision on the motion moved by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi be deferred. The point of order I raise is: is the minister in order to attempt to arise on the Floor of the House before we get the date on which that deferred decision will be considered? This House has just decided that that decision be deferred. It is only fair for the House to tell us when that decision is coming before the House instead of the minister coming for the Bill’s third reading. Is it in order when there is a pending decision –(Interjections)– what are you talking about and which constituency are you from?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the Order Paper, we have decision points for this House. We are in the process of processing a Bill, and let me be clear on this just for the record. We took a decision on a report on third reading on the committee stage of the Bill, that the Bill was passed with amendments. A motion has been moved for recommital. The substantive motion would be the motion whether the motion for third reading - and that is why I was asking for guidance whether the motion for third reading is the one to be deferred or the motion for recommital? If a decision is not taken on recommital – because recommital is a transient step and not the final step - listen and listen carefully. You might need to listen carefully because this might be a basis for you to go to the next level. 

The motion which was for recommital has in turn had a motion moved for it to be deferred. So it has been deferred. However, we have a substantive motion which is for the processing of this Bill and that is the motion for the third reading of this Bill – Yes, we have a motion for the third reading of this Bill. That is how we process the Bill. So, by deferring that decision, that decision will remain deferred if you like it. 

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have comprehended the process very well at the stage where we are. There is a motion that was moved by Dr Lulume and passed by the House to have the recommital deferred. When it is deferred- (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, I seek your protection. When the motion is deferred, there is a process that will be handling it at a certain stage. The procedural issue I am raising is that, will it be right for us to proceed to another level when we have not concluded the matter that has been deferred?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A decision has been taken on the vote of recommital of these clauses. So, clauses 7, 8, 9 and 10 have not been recommitted, therefore, because the decision to recommit has been deferred. Would that affect a decision on third reading of the Bill?  

12.39
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I am constrained to advise that since there is a deferment of the motion to recommit, we would be at pains with ourselves to proceed with the motion for third reading. It is about lunch time and I propose that you consider it fit to adjourn this matter for some minutes and we come back in the afternoon and have this matter concluded. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the basis for deferral of this vote on recommital was raised by the honourable member for Jinja Municipality East, that the people who are about to take the vote were not present to listen to the submissions that were made. They were therefore not competent to take a decision one way or the other because they did not listen to the presentation. So can we adjourn for the following purposes and then after the adjournment, we accord the person who moved the issue of recommittal to explain the ground for the recommittal to the rest of the Members and then we see how to proceed from there? Is that okay?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will that be okay?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, this sitting is suspended – hon. Members, today is Thursday and not Friday. Today is a full parliamentary day. So can we adjourn for – yes?

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, this Bill has been with this Parliament for two years -(Interjections)-  I would really suggest that let whoever wants to explain to Members explain now because we are here to listen. Let whoever wants to explain, explain now and we listen and we take a decision.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal from the Government Chief Whip is to the effect that the submission of the honourable member who is seeking deferral could be listened to now – please, honourable members, that is the proposal and it is not from me. What I am saying is that for me I had proposed – no, no. For me, I was now proposing and I was going to take a decision to the effect that we adjourn but the honourable member has moved saying that we can listen to the opinion – can we, hon. Members, adjourn the House to – 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the decision of recommittal of some clauses of the Bill –
	
MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The principal legal advisor to Government, who is the Attorney-General, has advised on your request that this House defers its decision and the Attorney-General advised that it can only be prudent that the House adjourn because there was a deferment.

Is hon. Rukutana in order to come and give a motion which is contrary to the suggestion of the principal legal advisor to Government, the Attorney-General? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will seek your indulgence that we come back here. The House is suspended until 2.00 O’clock.  

(The House was suspended at 12.46 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.27 p.m., the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a motion for recommittal, a vote on which was referred to 2.00 O’clock. It is now 2.30 p.m. and I had said that the honourable member who moved the motion can summarise these issues to the House and then we see how to proceed. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a guidance and procedural matter. I rise on Rule 62 which states: “Close of debate. No Member may speak on any question after it has been put by the Speaker, that is, after the voices of both Ayes and Noes have been given on it.”

Mr Speaker, further to that, in context that a decision was made - and I want to quote again Rule 209: “Reconsidering a decision of the House. It is out of order to attempt to reconsider any specific question upon which the House has come to a conclusion during the current Session except upon a substantive motion for recission by a vote of half of all the Members of Parliament participating in that decision.” 

Mr Speaker, our Rules of Procedure provide that decisions are made by the majority of the Members and majority of the Members made a decision to defer recommittal. I would like to seek guidance, procedurally, on how you rescind a decision that has already been made; in this circumstance, a vote was taken by the majority of the Members to defer recommittal. So, in these circumstances, I want guidance on that.

Mr Speaker, I think also before we left, a Member who had moved this motion had referred to the issue of Article 92 about restriction on retrospective legislation -“Parliament shall not pass any law to alter the decision or judgement of any court as between the parties to the decision or judgement.” I remember the Attorney-General last time guided on the implication of this ruling and at that time, you also read something to the effect that the court decision gave power to the Police to facilitate assembly. So, in this respect, it would also be good for you, Mr Speaker, to guide us on this constitutional provision so that while we move, we know how we are moving but most importantly, how do we, as a House, rescind a decision that was voted on by the majority of this House. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, on the constitutional matter, we will refer that to a substantive submission that was made by the learned Attorney-General on whether the gap created by the expansion of section 32(2) of the Police Act is curable by what is being proposed now. The question we debated for a long time is whether the proposed cure to that gap exceeds what amounts to regulation within the provisions of the Constitution. I think that will be for the Attorney-General to restate.

On Rule 62, regarding close of debate, the debate that we conducted here was on the motion for recommittal. We did not put the question to that motion and no decision was taken on whether to recommit or not. We did not put the question as to whether to recommit or not; the question that was put was to defer the vote on the motion for recommittal. The honourable member did move that motion and we voted on that motion, that it be deferred, and it was deferred to 2.00 O’clock. That is the time I allotted to bring back the motion so that we can take a decision on it. 

You see, we do not want to get very legalistic about this because to defer without a timeframe ordinarily would mean you have dispensed with it. To defer with a timeframe would mean you have actually postponed that debate until that time, but we do not want to get legalistic about these things. So, I put a timeframe of 2.00 O’clock this afternoon and that is why we are here, to proceed with that issue. 

On the question of Rule 209 - rescinding of decisions - we are not rescinding any decisions, so the issue does not arise. We have complied with the motion as was moved and we have deferred decision for the time we have deferred, until now when we will see whether to take a decision now or not. The condition I gave was that I would give the Member the opportunity to address the House on his earlier proposal on why he wants a recommittal. That was the framework we agreed on. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I remember that my brother, the hon. Dr Bayigga, actually moved a motion. His motion was clear and if even the records were checked, he moved a motion for deferral until further notice. I do not know whether it was upon – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. 

MR AMURIAT: May I just seek clarification?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you are seeking clarification for the record, restate the facts correctly. I asked the Member two times what it was. He said he was deferring the vote on the motion for recommittal. That is what happened.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, even if that were the case, I do not know whether it is or it was upon the Speaker to set a timeframe for this particular deferral, or it was upon the mover of the motion to do this. That is the clarification I would like to seek - whether the Speaker has the powers to amend the motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have just stated it for you and we do not want to get legalistic about this. If that kind of motion was moved without a timeframe, it would amount to an abandonment of that motion because that motion is transient pendant on something else. But I am just being magnanimous on this occasion to avoid being legalistic and let the spirit that we have tried to devolve in this House be the one to guide us as we move forward. That is why I am moving this way. Otherwise, I would have stood by my earlier decisions and a challenge would have gone to the court - and by the way, the court would have agreed with me. 

There are two options for deferral; if you defer without assigning a timeframe, you have frozen that issue – it is not there and you have abandoned it. It is as though you were saying it is a waste of time and it will divide the House so let us leave it. But if you defer with a timeframe, that means you have postponed it. That is the legal situation we have here, but I do not want to go into the legalese of this argument. 

What I am saying is: What we did was that we debated a substantive motion on re-committal of clauses 7, 8, 9 and 10. When we were about to take that decision, that is, when we were about to take a vote, the honourable member said, “I now move a motion that the vote be deferred.” That was the motion and we took a vote on that and indeed the motion was deferred. As we were summarising, I said that I would give a timeframe of up to 2.00 O’clock and then we would come back to deal with this motion. I explained that the deferral came because opportunity was sought for the Member to explain to the other Members who were not there initially for them to understand where the motion for deferral was coming from. I think that is the agreement we reached before we went for the adjournment. So then we adjourned to 2.00 O’clock to come and finish this business.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I moved that motion and I remember the exact words I used. The motion was to defer the decision on that motion until further notice – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ah, no!

DR BAYIGGA: This is what is on record. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no. (Laughter)

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, it is I who said it and I know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, you might have wished to say something but that is not what came out of your mouth; I asked you twice.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, you asked me twice as to which motion was supposed to be deferred and I indicated the one we later deferred. It was I who moved this motion and I am here; you do not need to recollect. (Laughter) Therefore –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to move a motion for adjournment – (Interjections) – Yes. There seems to be two positions being maintained here: a position that the motion mover is advancing against the position the Speaker is advancing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I did not advance any position on these matters; the motion was moved and I framed the question myself and the vote was taken. If you are moving your motion, just do it.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, just for the avoidance of doubt, I know that there is an official record of this House – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no doubt in my mind on this occasion. 

MR AMURIAT: Well, I doubt myself. I am just like the majority of our Members here, who are expressing doubt. The motion mover says that what he said is different from what you think he said. 

Mr Speaker, that being the case, I want to move under Rule 55 for the adjournment of this sitting to allow Members to be availed with the true record of this House as regards the decision that was actually taken when the vote was taken so that we proceed in a tidy manner. For now, we seem to be proceeding in a rugged manner and I think this is not in the best interest of this House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Member for Tororo County, Member for Kitgum District, Member for Kilak and Member for Dokolo County. Yes, the motion is now properly before the House.

Hon. Members, the motion is for adjournment of this House - I think this is a straightforward motion. A motion for adjournment is not a motion that you debate. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, based on the history of parliamentary practice and democracy - it is that principle on which this House operates and that is why we have the Hansard department – for proper record. In the Seventh Parliament, when this House was taken to court, the court relied on the Hansard to make a decision. After that court decision, this House came back and we had a constitutional amendment. Therefore, in order to protect the integrity of the Speaker and this House, it is paramount that we draw back, and it does not cost much –(Interruption)

MR PETER LOKII: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Ekanya for giving way. I now want to give him information. If the Speaker says that his mind is clear on what he has said, what other integrity of the Speaker does he want to protect?

MR EKANYA: Thank you, hon. Lokii. Mr Speaker, the integrity of this House permeates to every citizen of this country and to organisations where we are members like IPU and the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. The Hansard is the official record of Parliament and therefore justice demands that the Hansard be availed for clear scrutiny by this House and then we take a decision. This is because the Bill before this House touches the fundamental human rights of every citizen of this country, including visitors to this country. Therefore, colleagues, I beg that we support the motion. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adjournment of debate. But for the record once again, let me state that I am absolutely sure about what I heard and about the vote I processed in this House; the Hansard, if they are to come, will confirm that. However, the motion now is that this debate and this House be adjourned. I now put the question to the motion for adjournment.

(Question put and negatived.)

2.46
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to move a motion – (Interruption) 

MR SIMON MULONGO: Mr Speaker, you did, by word of mouth and gesture, give hon. Magyezi the opportunity to move a motion – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, please resume your seat. Let me guide you. Honourable member, please wait. If a point of order and a point of procedure come at the same time, the point of procedure takes precedence. However, in this particular issue, the point of order was raised earlier and was in the process of being raised and then you rose on a procedural point. There is no contestation on that.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As Members of Parliament, we are guided by custom and practice by the Rules of Procedure, which rules we are supposed to obey to the letter and spirit. Our colleague, the hon. Raphael Magyezi, rose to move a motion and by deed and word, you did indicate clearly that hon. Magyezi had the Floor. On that account, is the honourable Member of Parliament for Kitgum in order to insist to speak and also move a motion when the opportunity had been accorded to hon. Raphael Magyezi? Is she in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us try and handle these things properly. Please, I seek your indulgence on this. The honourable member had risen on a motion - Honourable member for Kasilo, there is a motion on the Floor and you are raising procedure; now which one do I take? 

Honourable members, the honourable member rose on a motion but he has not even said anything. Can we wait and he says what he wants to say? Hon. Magyezi, please sit down. Honourable members, please resume your seats. Please, let us have some order. 

The honourable member rose on a motion and he was standing up to raise the motion. He had not even said anything yet; he was just beginning. How could an order arise from that? (Interjections) Please Members, there is no way we are going to proceed like this. No, we cannot. Honourable member for Aruu, honourable member for Kitgum, respect the Chair, and that includes you, the honourable member for Kumi. Please, resume your seats.

Honourable members, I do not even know how to proceed with this. We have matters before the House; we have the State of the Nation Address to proceed with and we have to conclude that debate today. What has happened is that we resumed this House for purposes of processing the last bit concerning what decision we should take about what has happened. A challenge has been raised whether it was a motion but the issue is, we deferred in my summary of the decision we took. I summarised and said, let us resume at 2.00 p.m. and proceed with hearing the Member who had raised the motion for recommittal. That is what I said when we were adjourning and that is why we are here now. 

I had given the Member who raised the motion for recommittal the opportunity to raise those statements so that the Members who were not present can listen to his appeal. The spirit that has brought us this far is the same spirit under which we are going to proceed. So the issue is, can we – please, unless the honourable member no longer desires to speak on his motion for recommittal. Let me hear from the honourable member for Butambala. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry for insisting. I am rising on a point of procedure. When hon. Betty Amongi raised issues here, there was one that you referred to the Attorney-General to respond to. Before we move to any other part, can we hear from the Attorney-General to that effect? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, that issue is in the debate. That issue is substantial to the debate that we are talking about and it cannot be answered at this preliminary stage. 

What hon. Betty Amongi asked is whether this legislation is not re-enacting what the courts decided in expunging Section 32(2) of the Police Act and the Attorney-General has spoken on that subject three times in this House. He is going to speak again and that is why we need to process it so that he can do that but he cannot do it at this stage. The stage at which that can come is if the honourable member restates the issues and then those issues, which hon. Betty Amongi is raising, would be responded to for the fourth time in this House by the Attorney-General. That is where we are. 

So, can I find out from the honourable member for Butambala whether he still wants to speak to the House on his motion for recommittal? Please, can I find out from him and then we deal with the procedure? I know we will deal with it but let me find out from him if he wants to or not.

DR BAYIGGA: Yes, I intend to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member intends to address the House on those same issues as to why he is asking – You see, we cannot run away from the substance of this debate. The honourable member for Butambala raised serious issues and he seeks the opportunity to be accorded to him to raise them again with all the Members who are now present and who may have missed out on his submissions. The honourable Attorney-General can respond to those same issues then we see how to move forward. If we cannot move forward, we do not move forward. If we can move forward, we move forward. So, would you like to address the House – yes procedure?

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, I understand the need to hurry to go to the next stage but I think we need to do it properly if not for ourselves, at least for the people who sent us to this Parliament.

The hon. Betty Amongi raised procedural issues at the resumption of Parliament. One of them was that once a matter has been deferred, you cannot substitute it by either standing over it or suspension. In your guidance, Mr Speaker, you said that if no time has been attached to the matter, either it is lost – the procedural issue I am raising is that I participated in taking a decision that we defer this matter. I did not participate in it because I wanted to support someone; I had reasons for participating in this motion. Therefore, to reduce it into a matter of hon. Muwanga Kivumbi or that of hon. Dr Bayigga Lulume is just to deny the people of Kyadondo East the opportunity to advance the issues for, which their Member voted to have this matter deferred.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, if we have – (Interjections) – I know you are in a hurry but I am not here on invitation; I am here on merit. The second point is that if we have concluded a matter by vote and time has been omitted by this or that reason, will it now be the practice and procedure of this House that the Speaker will now be the one to attach the time, that now a matter has been deferred from, for example, midday to 3.00 p.m.? Already, a decision had been taken and the mover of the motion had reasons. So, will that now be the practice that the Speaker can amend the motion after the vote and some other decisions are taken on top of a decision we took as a House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion that was moved was to defer debate for a period that was not granted. The basis for that deferral was that the Members who should have listened to the argument for the recommital had not been given the opportunity to do so. In my conclusion, at the time we suspended the House, I guided by saying exactly that. I said we will now go and allow the Member to address the whole House on why it is important to recommit clauses 7, 8, 9 and 10 so that the House can see where he is coming from . That was the purpose for the deferral. That is what I summarized and we agreed to come back at 2.00 O’clock and we are all here for that purpose. 

I have now asked the honourable member whether he is prepared to address the House and he said he is. So, why don’t we allow the Member to articulate his issues – no that motion is done and you cannot speak to the motion after the vote – No, please, the way we are proceeding now does not make sense. Let me have the Member for West Budama South.

DR BAYIGGA: This was my motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We already voted on it. So, it is not there.

DR BAYIGGA: But I did not speak to it. We need to get the rationale why –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we already voted on that motion. So, it is not a motion any more. Yes, Member for West Budama South.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I can almost appreciate and understand the intention of the House now and the intention is that we should move on. That is my understanding.

I listened to the motion moved by hon. Dr Lulume and you have rightly guided. In my limited understanding, a motion that seeks to defer - and deferment is an English word but has legal connotations; only two meanings can be attached to that. If you have your dictionaries, you can consult. You can defer to either put it off –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, I had no intentions of disrupting my colleague but in his preamble, he said he is of limited understanding. The point of order I am raising is whether this Parliament has now started admitting views of people with limited understanding and whether they should even be allowed to talk.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, for the wise ruling, Mr Speaker. I know that was very entertaining from hon. Ssemujju Nganda. I have very good faith, and I am saying this in good faith - this is the first time I am speaking to this Bill.I was saying, and I want to insist, that in deferring, you can either defer to postpone and when you do, there should be some time in future or you just put it off – (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank my friend, hon. Oboth-Oboth, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking, as he labours to define the word “defer”, is: who, in his view, determines this? I am saying this because as far as I am concerned, Mr Speaker, the honourable Dr Lulume moved a motion here and it is him who knows what he stated. Dr Lulume is alive and kicking and is in his clear sense of mind. I do not know whether I can be helped by you, honourable colleague from West Budama South, to tell us, in your limited understanding, who should specify this period. Is it going to be the Speaker or the mover of the motion?

MR OBOTH: I am glad that you are seeking clarification from a person with limited understanding. That you acknowledge of the limit not defined by anybody but by I. The reason I rose is the understanding that we have a Bill, which is a substantive matter before this House, but a miscellaneous matter arose to the effect that from the Bill, there are few clauses for recommital. That is stage two.

The third stage was that another miscellaneous issue arising from a miscellaneous one arose to the effect that the decision or the vote or debate on that be deferred. My understanding is whether the honourable members here are with the view that it should be deferred sine die without any time limit. There is no any other meaning to that than saying, “We have no interest in the recommital –” (Interjections)– well I am not interfacing with the law. This is English. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, if that was the position in this House that any Member can rise with a miscellaneous matter to defeat the purposes of a substantive matter then this Parliament has no reason to exist. (Applause) And in any case the miscellaneous matter was handled and the person who moved the motion clearly stated that the matter be deferred. The Speaker in his own understanding – (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The honourable colleague, in his limited understanding –(Interjections)– is trying to insinuate that some deliberations in this House can be called “miscellaneous” yet, Mr Speaker, you allowed every Member that stood at a microphone and submitted, to do so with your authority. Is he therefore in order to classify the submissions of Members of this House that you allowed as “miscellaneous” and therefore insinuate that they are not important? Is the hon. Member in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do appreciate when the hon. Member for West Budama South says that at times we all - including the Speaker - have limited knowledge on some issues. The term “miscellaneous” in the context in which he was using it is a legal term. (Laughter) “Miscellaneous” simply means that – Well, I understand you have raised a point of order. It takes a lot of courage to stand up and speak but it takes bigger courage to sit down and listen. (Applause) 

So, the word “miscellaneous” is used where there is a main subject. If you have a main subject that you are dealing with, any issue that arises in the course of dealing with the main matter is called “miscellaneous matters” leading to that decision. (Laughter) It does not mean it is any less important. No. It does not mean that. For example - I am trying to guide you, hon. Member. For example, you can have a petition in court and a person wants to be joined in that petition. There is a petition No.5 of 2013 and the member wants to be joined to the petition which he is not party to. The member will file a miscellaneous application arising from that main application, petition No.5 of 2013. It will be named a “miscellaneous application” arising from this – yes, but it is all a process of coming to the decision on the main subject. That is all the Member was trying to say. So, please, let the Member complete his submission. Can he finish what he is saying then I grant your guidance?   

MR OBOTH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. I am influenced by the nature of my training. So, I may not be able to volunteer other information other than the one I know. (Laughter) 

As I was saying, this House has to make the decision on the second issue that was raised, whether or not a recommital of the various clauses should be made in similar understanding as people have taken it as a joke, and I said “limit” you could benefit from it. Why I say so is that you have discharged the duty to deal with No.3 which rose from No. 2. No.2 is the sub-main- I do not want to use the word “miscellaneous” arising –(Laughter)– from the Bill. 

Mr Speaker, it would be prudent that we go into the matter on whether or not the specific clauses should be recommitted or not. But we cannot be delayed in this House with the No.3. I was about to conclude but hon. Otto usually seeks very clear clarification and I would yield. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, he has given way for clarification. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you. I am seeking clarification from my learned colleague. If you have a main application battling over Parliament land; then you have a miscellaneous application where someone is applying for an injunction that the destructions on Parliament land should not continue; then you have another miscellaneous application arising from this miscellaneous application challenging the interim order, in normal legal practice, what do you consider first? Won’t you dispose of the interim and go to the main or you start with the main and come to the interim? What are you talking about?

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Odonga-Otto. As I rightly said, he would seek clarification which is clear and indeed he has done so. The answer is with you: what is interim is dealt with first and in this case what was interim was Dr Lulume Bayigga’s motion and it has been disposed of –(Interjections)– In my understanding, when the Speaker adjourned the House with the view that the matter is deferred to 2.00 p.m. you cannot come again and reopen –(Interjections)– let me conclude. I want to conclude.  

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me take the Member for Kwania. Procedure?

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure, in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, Rule 69(1)(a). I would like to raise a matter of privilege. It is my privilege as a Member of Parliament to deliberate in this House. I had risen to move a motion before the House was adjourned. The motion of hon. Bayigga came after mine but I respected your decision. I rose again after adjournment to raise a motion which you permitted. I have been interrupted continuously especially by the Members across without any justification.

Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of privilege which is not interrupted in accordance with our rules, seeking your protection of my privilege as a Member of Parliament to be allowed to move my motion without any further interruption. Mr Speaker, I beg your protection.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you saying that it is a motion?

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, I have a motion to present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have raised it as a matter of privilege. I think that I summarised it in the beginning of one of my rulings that all the Members have rights equal to any other Member and a Member has a right to address the House at any time that the Speaker allows the Member to do so. You can present what you want to present.

MR MAGYEZI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for the protection. I raised the motion that having debated this matter exhaustively, the motion as tabled by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi since yesterday; cognisant of your magnanimity in allowing Members who even do not have – Mr Speaker, I beg to raise the motion that you now put the question on the motion presented by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. I beg to move this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a motion has been put for the question to be put - can I deal with this? Honourable members, order please.

Honourable members, let me make one last attempt and that attempt is this; that the law that you are going to enact is not for anybody in particular. The law you are going to enact is to deal with issues on regulation. The debate that has arisen is that the proposed regulation goes beyond regulation into prohibition and that is the substance, hon. Members. 

All this time we are spending on these issues of who said what is not helpful to the substance of what we need to take a decision on, because we have to take a decision on this subject and that subject is – because you see that is the explanation that we need.

The issue is and let me summarise it again. The issue is that when the Constitutional Court repealed Section 32 (2) of the Police Act, it created a regulatory gap on the authority of the Police and that is the argument and therefore it necessitated bringing a law that would feel that gap.

Now what we are debating - honourable for Kitgum, you are going to rise on clarification when you have not listened to what the Speaker is saying. The argument now is that the proposed provisions for regulation to replace the gap created under Section 32 (2) of the Police Act exceeds  the regulation and imposes prohibition, which was initially ruled against. That is the point and all these other things that we are wasting time about are not substantial.  

Now is this Parliament capable of taking a substantial decision on this kind of matter or not? If it is so, and that is why I was saying that let the honourable member who raised the issue of re-looking at clause 8 particularly which he has articulated both in his amendment and submissions before where he has been very clear on this subject - Can he restate it - no, he chose to and wants to. Yes, he has said that he wants to speak so that the Attorney-General can speak and we see as a House if we can move forward. If we cannot move forward, so be it.
 
So can we deal with the substance? The Member is here – please, honourable members, I am the one guiding this House and if you think that it is easy, I would ask you to sit here for just one second and your brain will blow. (Laughter)

Let us get real – this issue of motion, please, do not force me to use words that are not proper. That is the substance on which we must take an informed decision. So can I now ask the hon. Member to restate clearly?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I think that the last few hours tell us one thing: how emotional and passionate members feel about what this Parliament is about to do, and that puts an extra weight on the decision that we are about to take and this calls for a little more care than the ordinary.
My humble plea to Members of this House is that there are not so many occasions that we stand in this House and vote on a matter putting aside our political colour. If there is no other occasion, this is it because a law is blind as they state it and it will catch up with anyone as it is not about to catch DP, UPC or NRM but the ordinary citizens of this country who may not have the privilege to stand at this microphone.

Long before, I was a victim of this law and never had the privilege to be where I am. It takes a lot of effort in our politics to get here. Now that I am here, I have the noble obligation to protect even those who do not have the privilege to speak for what I am talking about because the political dispensation in this country has been to such a level.

I have very passionate love for this country – and Gen. Katumba Wamala was not here – the reason as to why we came this far is because I petitioned the Constitutional Court and it is because the Police of Uganda behaved in certain manner. The reasons as to why I went to court is not that I never applied for permission. 

The preamble of this judgement is very clear at all occasions and that is evidence that I place before the courts of law. At all instances, I applied for permission and complied with the law. In one instance, I went to the extent of applying for permission from the Minister for Internal Affairs and I was replied to by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. That is the extent that I went to and that is why when I placed this evidence before the courts of law, they deemed the Police of Uganda to have exceeded the powers of regulation and went into prohibition. 

Where I see a critical mix particularly in clauses 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 only by infection – incidental because once you recommit clause 8, it will affect others in a small way but the substantial recommittal I seek is on clause 8 and I am very particular. The reasons are very clear; the right of freedom of association and assembly are fundamental rights and are given by the State.

Article 20 of our Constitution is very clear; it places a burden on all persons and all organs of the state not only to uphold, to protect but also to promote the enjoyment of rights. I know that Article 43 put limitations to those rights but be very clear – we have even made ourselves or put ourselves in a tight corner – purely to public gatherings and processions. We must be very careful now that we do not infringe Article 43 on perception because we cannot pass a law that will amount to political perception and we are intending to go that extent. Actually, we are making it worse than it was. 

The other one was general but now we are specific, targeting a particular group who are called politicians yet the Constitution of Uganda on limitation says that you cannot go for political persecution. I have been persecuted before and I know how it hurts. We are only here because we chose to be non-violent. Had we had the intentions of some people, you know what you did in the 80s -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, hon. Member, your submission is that what is being proposed is even worse than what was removed by the court in Section 32 of the Police Act?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, it is even worse –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, speak to the House on that.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: It is even worse because you have now narrowed down to target – when we were defining a public meeting- and that is why we had proposed that we have a lot of space, but you narrowed down to public space and public prosecution hence you narrowed it down to political participation and if you extrapolate it a little; you go on the limitation imposed by political persecution and that makes it worse.

So, why do we want to contend? We have humbly come a long way from that hardcore position I have. We have suggested amendments that I think can cure this kind of quagmire that we have as a Parliament. 

Also aware, Mr Speaker, that Article 92 of this Constitution bars this Parliament from making a law in retrospective legislation and the Attorney-General agrees with us on that, and you don’t have a firm position on whether the provision under page 3 does not offend Article 92. Clause 8 does not affect Article 92 –(Interjections)– no, let me make my submission.

Mr Speaker, I am privileged to have moved with a copy of the said judgement – this Parliament has a duty to make a law that regulates political gatherings and it is not a one off. I have had the occasion to look at the Public Order Management Act of the UK and that of the US – yes, I have them here. This is for the UK – they have a Public Order Act of 1986. During the recommittal, and we are being as sober as can be, because it is not at that level, we intend to really see what they did in this Act. We are not re-inventing the wheel because this is commonwealth practice. I have a couple of legislations from the various states in the US. What we are trying to do here – from Albama to Dalia to California and courts of law have pronounced themselves that those regulations we intend to pass have been declared null and void and offending the second amendment of the American Constitution.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the courts of law have already spoken on this matter. That is why I am here with this very humble appeal. Let us be judged when it matters. Allow us revisit this; only then if we don’t give you a compromised, which you have not permitted to because yesterday, outside, we were told to go and consult – I don’t know how this Parliament works, I am a man of integrity and I always keep my word. As Churchill said, “a man’s word is a source of honour; he surrenders it in totally”. Speaking one on one, they told us to go and frame a plausible compromised position. We worked the whole night and to this moment, from hon. David Bahati to the minister and to everybody, I have circulated a compromised position. I have also given it to the Attorney-General – (Interjections) – yes, I have it and we have been consulting in actual spirit, Mr Speaker, of which you have been conducting this debate. 

So, I want to humbly appeal to this House to allow us revisit Clause 8 for the betterment of this country. There is a country above all of us and that country is called the Republic of Uganda and it will long live after we have died. So, let us make a law. It is the pride of every Member of Parliament to make a law that will endure. I have been to the courts of law and I can go there and win or lose but it takes time and resources that can be invested elsewhere. 

Mr Speaker, my humble appeal and prayer to the honourable members of this House – I am not asking for heaven to come to earth or for the skies to come down; I am only saying today, we will make the decision and we are ready to be party to that decision but let us revise it in the manner we have always adopted it and not on the question of numbers. Even the communist apartheid law or laws that have repressed humanity were properly passed. The French say that the most perfect law can constitute the most perfect injustice. So, it is not a question that we should come and make a law and it is not a question of saying we will go to the courts of law. I have been to the courts of law thrice and won and I know what it takes. Therefore, Mr Speaker –(Interruptions)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for giving way for this information. I was part of the group of those who were consulting to come up with this compromised position. Needless to say, some of us are no longer interested in elective politics. So, I am not making this law for myself. It may be of more help to some of you. 

The proposal from the United Kingdom, if you contrast it with what we currently have in Clause 8, the Ugandan version gives powers to the Police to say that this venue is not suitable for a public rally because someone is selling airtime there. We have said lawful business; as long as there is any lawful business whether it is a garden or whether someone is just selling sweets, if in the opinion of the Police that venue can interfere with that lawful business, it is enough for your rally to be stopped and yet we do not have rallies in forests hon. Members and not even in postal gardens; even a forest is a lawful establishment.

But the UK version, if the police feel that that venue is not prudent or proper for you, you discuss with the Police there and then and you agree on an alternative venue. So, if – (Mr Tony Ayoo rose_) – no, if you can only listen, hon. Tony Ayoo, because we were here with Members in the last Parliament who could not listen and when they lost their seats, they had no forum to express themselves –(Laughter)–  and the rate of turn up of this House will always be 60 percent, whether you like it or not. Sixty percent of us will not come back here. So, it is in your own interest that you listen - (Laughter) – yes, including I.

So, the information I want to give is that if we can get a compromised position, we all want to meet out there and shake hands. If we could get a compromised position so that tomorrow when hon. Remigio Achia is contesting for NRM primaries, this law is not used to say, “Where you want to address the rally –” – because that one would be in-house fighting; NRM versus NRM, even before the big brother, FDC or DP comes in. So they will use this law to say, “Hon. Remigio, you cannot address a rally there because there is a woman engaged in lawful business; she is selling mandazi. So get another venue.” When you go in front of the kiosk, the Police will say, “There is okay but we are not sure of the crowd’s behaviour after the rally.”

So the information I am giving is that, it is in your interest that we have a second look. The acrimony arising from both sides of the House will not help us. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR EKANYA: Thank you. This is supplementary information: In 2007 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us listen.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, we are in 2013 but in 2007, I informed Police that I was organising my victory thanksgiving party but when information came that the party was going to be attended by Dr Col Kizza Besigye, the Police immediately informed me that the venue was near a primary school. I had already paid for the chairs and everything else because visitors were coming from all-over, but I was told the venue was near a primary school. I called the Inspector-General of Police, Gen. Kayihura, who I had personally worked with when we were dealing with cross border trade. He told me he would first consult and after that he said the party could not be allowed. I told him that this was the venue we always held meetings from since the creation of Tororo County. It took the intervention of the then Minister of Internal Affairs – hon. Matia Kasaija; may God bless him. (Laughter) Yes, he is there.

It took the intervention of that man there – the current state minister for finance to call the Inspector-General of Police and tell them to allow my party to proceed. He said that whether Col Besigye was attending the party or whether it was near a primary school, the Police should ensure that there is law and order. But the way we have framed this Bill, the minister will no longer have power to advise because his hands are now tied.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was that information?

MR EKANYA: The minister will no longer have power –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to hand back the microphone now?

MR EKANYA: Yes, but let me just conclude. (Laughter) The minister will no longer have power because we have now given the power to the officers. That is the information I am giving this House – that let us make a law that will outlive us. Thank you. 

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I appreciate all the information; it only enriches our understanding of the gravity of the decision we are about to take. My point of contention as I was speaking, I have here the laws of America that I was referring to. My humble appeal –(Interjection)– Well, in good faith, if they are needed, I will lay them on Table. 

Mr Speaker, my humble appeal is that for once, let us do a noble job; let us revisit this clause – (Interjection) – No, people have reason; let us not say they are not reasonable, even those opposed to this have good reasons. But my point of contention is that humbly we can reach out to each other and forge a compromise; it is not beyond us. That is why Mandela is a great man; he reached out to the apartheid fellows with open hands and today South Africa is peaceful. Nations will not build on the strength of a rigid legal regime but on the love and the feel for each other. (Applause) That is why I want to humbly request this august House that please, I have knelt in front of policemen before because I strongly believe to that extent whoever feels he is mighty, it is high time in this country we said, “Might is not right”. And we can go to that extent to make a point if that is what it requires. And for me it is a point of courage. Therefore, my point of contention and my plea to the Members of this House is that for once, let us agree to revisit Clause 8. If we do and reach there and we disagree, that will be it. But give us one last chance! I beg to move. Thank you.

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I have, like you have rightly stated, spoken on this matter several times. I have read much about this matter and I have swallowed in a lot of words and if words were to cause indigestion, I think I would be having a problem by now.

Let me tell you one thing that I normally say here: When I stand here to support a Bill I do so with all conviction. And I have told you before and will tell you now that a good law should be blind. If you make a law while looking at individuals holding offices, you are going to be in problems. We should make a law that will stand the test of time. I want to make a law in which all state agencies and organs perform their responsibilities responsibly. The Police of today may be your Police of tomorrow assuming your dream ever comes true. That is the basis of my support for this Bill and no one should misconstrue me. 

I said here yesterday that on 27 May 2008, the Constitutional Court issued a ruling in the constitutional petition of Muwanga-Kivumbi v. Attorney-General. This was Constitutional Petition No.9/06. And in this petition, section 32(2) of the Police Act, which previously empowered the Inspector-General of Police to prohibit public assemblies for demonstrations where they posed a likelihood of breaching the peace was annulled. As a result of annulment of this particular clause, the Police no longer have the power to prohibit a procession or assembly on a public road or at any place of public resort even where the Inspector-General of Police has reasonable grounds to believe that the assembly or procession is likely to cause the breach of the peace. 

This ruling, therefore, like the Speaker said, created a regulatory gap in the management of assemblies and public gatherings, making it very difficult for the Police to maintain law and order to preserve peace at public gatherings and events. 

Now, let me go a little bit in detail; section 32(1)(b) of the Police Act, which was saved gives the Police the power to issue orders for the purpose of directing the conduct of assemblies and processions on public roads or streets or at places of public resort and the route by which and times at which any procession may pass. However, this provision, which was saved, does not require for instance an organiser of an assembly or procession to notify the Police of the intention to hold the assembly or procession.

This presents a challenge in maintaining law and order because without the information about an intended assembly or procession or its location, the Police will not have the opportunity to exercise the powers given under Section 32 clause 1(b) making it hard to enforce the provision.

Secondly, while it is the constitutional duty of the Police to maintain law and order, with the annulment of Section 32 clause 2, the hands of the Police are tied because the Police no longer have powers to regulate the conduct of assemblies or processions in public places especially where, and reference should be made to Clause 8, for instance two meetings are scheduled by the organisers to take place on the same date, at the same time and at the same venue, which is likely to cause disorder or pose a breach of the peace or where the venue is considered unsuitable for purposes of crowd and traffic control or to interfere with other lawful business of non-participants.

The section is also silent on the procedure that the Police should follow in the exercise of its power under Section 32 clause 1(b), which was saved. It is also silent on the procedure that the organiser of an assembly or procession should follow such as notification by the organiser to the Police of the intention to hold the assembly or procession and (c) the procedure that the participants in assemblies and processions should follow in order to ensure that the processions and assemblies do not take place in a lawless manner.

Mr Speaker, to prohibit the convening of a lawful assembly or procession in any public place on subjective reasons is not regulating the assembly or procession but a denial of the enjoyment of rights under Article 29(1)(d) of the Constitution. This was also the position of the Constitutional Court. The section that was saved is also silent on the duties and responsibilities of the Police, the organiser and the participant at an assembly or procession.

Therefore from the foregoing, there are no specific guidelines on procedure to help the Police, organisers and participants in ensuring that the assemblies take place in as disciplined a manner as possible and in accordance with reasonable standards.

There is certainly no re-enactment of what was annulled and therefore, the statement made by some colleagues that this Bill offends Article 92 of the Constitution should not arise. Yesterday hon. Lubogo clarified very well on the implication or applicability of Article 92 of the Constitution. Article 92 of the Constitution states: “Parliament shall not pass any law to alter the decision or judgement of any court, as between the parties to the decision or judgement.”

The Constitutional Court observed that the law that was in place was prohibitive. Go and put in place a law that is regulatory. Therefore you cannot come here and say that what is contained in this Bill is prohibitive and therefore re-enacting what was annulled. If you feel and it appears that we have actually bypassed that stage - Even committees of this House were formed so that we go and harmonise. We went, harmonised and came back to the House. 

This provision- Maybe that is what hon. Odonga-Otto wants clarification on. Article 92 is to the effect that for instance if I owe you, hon. Odonga Otto, Ugshs 100 million, we go to court and court adjudicates in your favour, Parliament should not come here and make a law to say that I do not owe you that money. I am stating my position, you can state yours but this provision does not stop Parliament from legislating under Article 79 of the Constitution. That is my position, you can have yours and you can even challenge mine at a future date in an appropriate forum.

Finally, Mr Speaker, this Bill intends to apportion responsibility to organisers of assemblies, participants and the Police before, during and after assembly so that there is accountability for every commission and omission by all persons envisaged by the Bill. This will promote unfettered enjoyment of the participants’ fundamental rights without compromising the public interest or interfering with the rights of third parties unconnected with the event. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I take the point from the person holding the chairmanship of the Legal Committee on this?

3.54
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. You will permit me this afternoon to start with a preamble, which is from our Rules of Procedure. Every afternoon when we come to this House, we recite prayers and growing up as a little child I was very religious and I tried my hand at becoming a Roman Catholic Priest but failed very miserably. Probably, that is the reason I am here.I have a very solid foundation in – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Simon Lokodo is also here. (Laughter)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: So, Mr Speaker, every afternoon this is what we say and this is what I think we believe in. Please permit me to read it, “Let your blessings descend upon them here assembled and grant that they may, as in your presence, treat and consider all matters that shall come under their deliberation, in so just and faithful a manner as to promote your honour and glory and to advance the good of those whose interests you have committed to their charge.”

Honourable colleagues, we live in a country called Uganda and it is our responsibility, jointly and severally, to make sure that one, Uganda is peacefuland governable; to make sure there are no chaos; to make sure we protect the rights of every citizen but to do so, we must recognize the fact that we have a responsibility – there can never be rights to the exclusion of responsibilities! You can never have a country that only promotes rights from the beginning of the year to end without responsibilities. And it is in this regard that I want to address you, honourable colleague, especially those on my side of the House. We need to –(Interruptions)

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, you guided and as person I was persuaded that this debate was reduced to two things. First, that we acknowledge that the court ruling created a lacuna and we also accepted that there must be a law to address that. However, we are saying that that law should not be prohibitive but regulatory and that is the point we were.

Hon. Fox Odoi has actually come out to show that he has a problem with us on this side of the House. So, is it in order for a Member of Parliament who is a chairperson of a committee to continue deliberating but having it in mind that he is legislating for a certain group of people yet you had already guided on that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for West Budama North, you are addressing Parliament and the people of this country. You cannot segment your address and please continue with the spirit of what we want to achieve.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered every clause of this Bill. The tests we subjected to every clause on this Bill were the following: One, does it conform to the standards set out in our Constitution, which is the supreme law of the land? Does it in any way – we asked ourselves over and over again in respect of every clause on whether it in any way contravened any provisions of the Constitution; whether any clause was inconsistent with any provisions of the Constitution and if the answers was a no, we made recommendations to this House that we adopt it. If the answer was yes, we made recommendations that we amend to make modifications that would conform to the standards set out in the Constitution.

Now in respect to Clause 8 - and I addressed the House yesterday at length over this matter – the committee was of the view that Clause 8 (1) (c) offended the Constitution. We recommended to this House that we delete it and it was deleted. Now what remained, in our view as a committee does not in any way offend the Constitution and this is what remained and I want to read it verbatim: “Upon receipt of the application under Section 7, where it is not possible to hold the proposed public meeting for reasons thus: 
a)	 notice of another public meeting on the date, at the time and at the venue proposed has already been received by the authorized officer or 
b) 	the venue is considered unsuitable for purposes of crowd and traffic control or will interfere with other lawful businesses, the authorized shall, in writing within 48 hours after the receipt of the notice, notify the organizer or his her agent that it is not possible to hold the proposed public meeting and the notice shall be delivered to the organiser’s address as stated in the notice of intention to hold a public meeting.”

It is our view, honourable colleagues that in a free and democratic country you cannot and you should not allow a situation where there are two meetings at the same place and at the same time and you call that order. It is demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic country to impose this limitation on the enjoyment of a fundamental right and this is not prohibitive; it is just permissive; it is only for the promotion of law and order. In this same House, one time, the Speaker had this to say that where my nose begins, your rights end. There can never be the enjoyment of rights where I have my nose and that is what this provision is saying –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee. In principle, we all agree that you cannot hold two meetings in one place. For example, when the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly are sitting here, we are always not here. That is given. But you see in this country, our democracy is growing. 

So, please listen to our fears. Our fears are that if our institutions or the police – once we are well facilitated and had all the necessary tools and resources and we are independent, we would not mind about all this. But the fear is and which is known to all of us is a situation that most of these venues are known but are private places. Where we hold our meetings right from LC I up to the district are known places but are private places.

Hon. Fox Odoi, I want to find out from you, how does this law take care of this situation? Assuming you are my competitor in Tororo County and you are friendly to the officer in charge there but you also know that we are going for NRM party primaries and so, you book all the venues –(Interjections)– yes, what I am telling you has been happening – we have been living here. You can book all the venues and – you may not be there as hon. Fox Odoi but because you have your structure, the youth will meet here, the women there and so forth  and because the law talks about 48 hours and yet we have a timeframe to conclude elections – you get the point – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude your information.

MR EKANYA: Okay, we have a timeframe within which to conclude. So, you will go to the next venue and you will find it booked, the next venue also booked. How does this law protect my interests to consult? That is one issue.

Clarification to hon. Fox Odoi, how does this law take care of a situation where the owner of the venue, himself/herself says they have a programme in that place and so are not allowing it. If you want this venue, pay Shs 1.0 million. How does this law protect –(Interjections)– yes because these are private places; we do not have Government gazetted places. How does this law protect – (Interruption) 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, hon. Ekanya. [Mr Amuriat: “Clarification.”] I will take the clarification but let me first of all deal with this matter. I will return to the concerns of hon. Ekanya who comes from the same district as me and I have plenty of respect for him.  

Mr Speaker, these are the provisions of 1(b): “The venue is considered unsuitable for purposes of crowd and traffic control or will interfere with other lawful business.” It is again cast in stone. There must be evidence that the venue is unsuitable for crowd control. When you are dealing with crowd control you are dealing with the safety of people who participate in a demonstration; the safety of people who participate in a public meeting. It is the duty of the Police to maintain law and order. It is the duty of the Police to maintain public peace. It is the duty of the Police to protect the lives of persons and property. (Interjections) Mr Speaker, can I please be protected from my honourable colleagues?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of procedure.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 69 on interruption of debate on a point of procedure. Mr Speaker, you did guide this House that we must only resolve two things. On our side we have conceded that there is a gap which must be filled in terms of regulation. That one we have conceded; and we are saying that the amendment brought by the Executive prohibits our rights. So, at that point, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to look for a compromised position? But hon. Fox Odoi is trying to convince us that what exists - actually it is like he is debating and trying to impress upon us –(Interjections) – Mr Speaker, if you would protect me from our colleague in this House. I am new in this House and I know that our rules must be respected when a Member is speaking. 

It is on that point, Mr Speaker, that I did appreciate your guidance; and if my colleague hon. Ogwang did do the same, I think we would be moving now towards solving the problem instead of pushing yet we are about to reach a compromised position. 

So, I am wondering whether it is not procedurally right for us to deliberate in respect of getting a compromised position. We have agreed that, yes, there is a problem and whatever we must do in this place is to help Police to regulate. Isn’t it procedurally right for us to proceed in that style other than the one in which hon. Fox Odoi is taking us?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my guidance remains the same, that there is a matter we need to deal with: The matter as raised by the Member for Butambala and the response that the learned Attorney-General has given. That is what we need to deal with. I do not know whether the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has an – yes. 

4.11
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (MR AMAMA MBABAZI): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I love hearing hon. Odonga-Otto expressing words of encouragement to me. I wanted to thank you, Mr Speaker, because this is unprecedented. It is absolutely unprecedented that after a decision has been taken, because you consider the matter to be exceptionally important, to revisit it; in so doing to set the kind of precedent that you have set.  There is a member who does not know what is happening today because his knowledge of the rules - 

Anyway, Mr Speaker, the unprecedented action today was that - because the main argument by hon. Kivumbi was made when some of us were not here, now that we have come then he should repeat his arguments. I was saying that of course I welcome it but I hope it will not be repeated many times because if it is- (Interjections) - it will be setting a very dangerous precedent that each time someone presents an argument and other people come who were not present when he presented his arguments, we repeat the whole thing again and again. 

I want to inform this House that I was not here. I said I had been following and as a matter of fact my conclusion is that there is absolutely nothing new that has been put here. All the arguments that have been made were made in the course of the debate. When we were debating that Clause 8, the same arguments – there is no single dot or comma that has been added or omitted. It is the same.

When we defined the word “regulate”, because this was the most important thing to do - because the court said the Police can regulate- In that ruling of Kivumbi, the court explicitly stated that the Police can regulate. And what you are trying to do is to put a law in place that enables the Police to do what the court said they can do. And in the debate we had extensive discussion on the definition of the word “regulation” and again there is nothing new. 

So, Mr Speaker, I am glad that finally we have had the opportunity to go over this again and again. I am happy that it is time to decide. Because if we do not decide, this Parliament is enjoined by the Constitution to make laws for –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister for giving way. I understand the urgency and the need for this law. Mr Prime Minister, I will pose this to you as a question and please answer me honestly. After 27 years in office, as a ruling Government, Mr Prime Minister - through the Speaker - do you feel in your heart of hearts that this is an urgent piece of legislation that this country needs? Given the fact that when you look at the preamble of our Constitution; given the history of how your Government came to power, do you think this very piece of legislation and this particular clause is good for the young democracy of this country? Do you feel that given the way not so long ago you held primaries of the NRM and suffocated people that resulted into quite a number of Independents in this House, that the spirit of this piece of legislation will promote democracy and good governance in this country?

MR OLANYA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Looking at the current situation whereby without this law, other people are not allowed to address people, others are not allowed to move out of their homesteads - the clarification I want to seek from the Prime Minister is, when this Bill is passed into law, are our people going to be free and what impact shall it have compared to the current situation? I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Let me answer the clarifications that were raised. Actually what I was saying answers hon. Bako’s point because the primary function of this House is to pass laws for the peace, order, good governance and development. What I can tell you is that, that law as it stands today and we have said this many times before that where there is no prohibition in the law, then anything that is not prohibited can be done.

Actually by passing this law, we are limiting the powers of the Police because we are defining them. It is therefore important for the proper maintenance of law and order and good governance of this country; it is absolutely necessary. We should have passed this yesterday and the time is now to do so. Yes, the laws are blind as the Attorney-General said - I will be a victim if I behave like you –(Interjections)- I would be a victim if I behaved in breach.

Now this also answers the question whether the present limitations that are going on are within the law or outside the law. It is important that the law is very clear and so all that I ask you colleagues is that do not fear numbers. You know this problem –(Interjections)– yes, I will answer, just a second. This problem of fearing numbers - you know decisions in this House –(Interjections)– what is democracy? Democracy means numbers – (Interjections) – absolutely. How did you become an MP? It is because you had more numbers. Now this fear about numbers and calling us names - imagine someone calling me a voting machine –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MS BAKO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. It is not usually my habit to put the Prime Minister on order but I am constrained to put this order for the following reasons:
One, much as we appreciate that democracy is a game of numbers, there must be country above self and country above numbers. And if you so believe in this and put Uganda first, then you will know that collective responsibility does not mean irrationality. It does not mean that you will use numbers to make laws that in the end will jeopardise the future of this country –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you already ruling on it? 

MS BAKO: No. Is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to suggest that numbers can be used to legislate things that will jeopardise the safety of our grand children and our children? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Rt Hon. Prime Minister said that we cannot avoid numbers after all that is how hon. Members came to Parliament, which I think is factual because those who did not get the majority votes would not come here but the advice given, I think you take in good spirit.  

MS ALUM: I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Prime Minister for accepting to get this clarification. Mr Speaker, I want the Prime Minister to clarify this issue to me. First of all, he is saying that this Bill is even limiting the Police. I want him to clarify on this because when you read (a) and (b) you find out that (b) for example is saying that the venue is considered unsuitable for the purpose of crowds or traffic control. I would like to read the words, “considered unsuitable”. Unsuitable is unlimited. Even if you are a kilometre away and the Police consider it unsuitable, it means that the Police have the power by this Bill to stop or prohibit you from having that meeting in that venue. That is the judgemental power that we are giving the Police and here you are telling us that we are giving the Police limited power. I want some clarification from that.

Then another power that we are giving the Police is that when the Police have – that the date, the venue and time at the place has already been booked - I want us to deal with reality here, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We have been having meetings and the closest example that I can give is the National Theatre here where there are always meetings time and again, but I have never seen people colliding in the National Theatre saying that they each booked. That has never happened. 

We have the Serena here and there are meetings and weddings and even Members of Parliament always have meetings there but I have never seen Members colliding there. So, the clarification that I am seeking from you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is that are we dealing with reality or we are dealing with what? 

Secondly, the Attorney-General told us that this Bill is for apportioning responsibility but up to now I have not understood the responsibility of the owners of the venue. For example, we always have public meetings and just now, hon. Ekanya was giving us an example of a public meeting in a primary school. What is the responsibility of the owners of the venue of these public meetings? So, until you really give me those clarifications – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.   

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From yesterday’s debate to where we are today, my sense was that you had given very good guidance on how to proceed and it was essentially our view, against the view of the learned Attorney-General, on whether we can proceed with the Bill in particular Clause 8, without offending Article 92 of the Constitution and we did not get guidance from the Chair because only views were exchanged on the Floor from my side of the isle and when the Prime Minister came to make his submission, we seemed to be again digressing from your guidance. 

May I be guided as to whether we should not resolve that first before delving into whether there is nothing being spoken today because the reason we considered sub-section (b) of Clause 8 as problematic is because we felt that the nomenclature in that third clause alluded to a prohibition and we seem to be not caring to resolve that. May I be guided on whether we are proceeding right, Mr Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my guidance still stands. We need to resolve this matter of the point raised by hon. Kivumbi and the reply made to that issue by the learned Attorney-General. We do not have anything beyond that. There is nothing beyond that that we need to decide on. 

Honourable members, it might be in our interests to take a decision one way or the other because given the firm and spirited arguments presented by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and the very elaborate response provided by the learned Attorney-General, it does look like the two positions are irreconcilable, in my opinion. 

I have been listening to this side and I have been looking for a way of how people are going to move forward so that new positions can be derived but I see no such movement. It does seem to me that the two positions that are presented before the House are irreconcilable by a debate and we are going into discussions on what our supervisors would decide - whether we are right or wrong on legal matters, the courts of law, the arguments are the ones we are advancing now but the positions have been clear. 

The position raised by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi is that in an attempt to cure the gap created by the nullification of section 32(2) of the Police Act; this side has exceeded the power of regulation and has now gone to prohibition. That is the point he has made and the Attorney-General is saying no, we have complied with the ruling of the Constitutional Court and the provisions of the Constitution and what we have done is to provide a framework for regulation. 

Now, those are the two positions. How much debate can we have to resolve these two positions? Well, if there is a middle way, I have not seen it. There is a motion which I had deferred to allow the opportunity to see if we can search right, left and centre and see if there is any new position that we can evolve. 

Honourable members, don’t you agree that this far, we should be able to take a decision whichever way? Don’t you think it would be proper to take a decision whichever way so that we pass this thing out of our hands and other people handle it because the way the debate is going is like there is a wall this side, like there is a mountain this side and there is another mountain that side and to ask the mountains to come together would be the difficulty we have. Let the Prime Minister conclude. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay, the point I made, on which I probably have no more clarification to make is that we have heard these arguments from hon. Kivumbi and we heard the effective response by the Attorney-General and as I said, there is nothing new. I really think, honourable members, that let us make a decision and move on. 

There was a motion that the question be put. I fully understood your explanation that in light of the importance of this matter, let it wait until we have heard. I am saying in my assessment that we are not getting anything new, we are repeating ourselves and it is time to take a decision now on this matter and conclude it. I therefore –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if I have to move to take a decision, then the records have got to show who was for it and who was against it and who abstained. If we reach there, that is the order I am going to make, that the people stand up and be counted for their positions. If we are to go to decisions, let there be a record of who decided what. Hon. Members, please resume your seats - procedure from the hon. Member from Youth Western.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point of procedure I am raising is basically derived from your guidance that you just gave us a few minutes ago. You properly stated the state of affairs over this matter, right now in this House. You stated clearly and positioned what the hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and largely this side is saying and also what the other side is saying. And it was clearly shown – your words – that the positions indeed are reconcilable. 

Mr Speaker, the question that is before this House is indeed a question of a technical nature. Don’t you think it would be procedurally right that this House should set a small committee to resolve this question of a technical nature? I would like to appeal to colleagues very passionately that it is very critical on a technical matter, where we are very certain, that we get some legal brains; it can be a small committee that can resolve and guide this House. Therefore, I would like to move a motion that this House constitutes a small committee that can technically resolve this matter and harmonises these positions so that we can move together as Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion has been moved. But, honourable members, the terms of processing another motion, I will have a problem. This is because I have a motion that I have not put to vote – just to see avenues. Now to introduce another motion might spell a procedural challenge for me because there was a motion that I did not deal with because I needed input from Members. It will not be proper to introduce a motion that does not seek to amend the other and is not related to this one and moreover, the other one cannot be amended according to the rules.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday you made a statement that touched my heart; there was a lot of excitement in the House and the mood was very high. You cautioned Members that it is not about numbers because the law we are making is to cater for all of us. I think that is very important and it is the reason I have been trying to catch your eye so I can remind you of that statement.

Mr Speaker, I have been in this struggle for long – the struggle to see that we level the ground politically so that we move together as a country. I have looked at this law and I feel that however much we feel strongly whether or not we should pass this Bill, we must reflect on our history. I happen to have been party to the making of the Constitution itself – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a point of guidance.

MRS OGWAL: And I have risen on a procedural matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of guidance.

MRS OGWAL: Yes, on a point of guidance – so that we know how to move. Mr Speaker, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi made a passionate appeal that can we be given time for consultation. This is a human rights issue! We need time for consultation. But we are now moving because of numbers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just wait. Please let me guide on that. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi’s point is that we need to recommit Clause 8 and by doing that, by implication, clauses 7, 9 and 10 would be affected. His plea is that we recommit clause 8 for substantial consideration and the rest will be by implication. He did not say that we need to go somewhere and consult; his motion was that we recommit Clause 8. And the debate that has been – because the substance of that decision is based on what I have summarised. His justification for recommitting is that the proposal now exceeds regulation and imposes prohibition. On the other hand, the Attorney-General says it is simply regulation. So the way to resolve that matter is to take a decision on whether to recommit or not. 

MRS OGWAL: That is why –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you hon. Ogwal. The information I would like to give you is that during the adjournment today, hon. Ekanya was sent to us and he informed us that our colleagues in the Executive had wanted a meeting so that we would sit together and harmonise this matter.

Mr Speaker, as you know, I can understand the intolerance from my colleagues; they will not hear anything but let me just say it. As you are aware, I actually came to the VIP room together with hon. Ekanya and hon. Mpuuga but we were told that we needed to wait for them until they finished their lunch. So some of us came back in the afternoon, trusting that that gesture would materialise – that we would sit together and agree and make proposals in a more comfortable atmosphere rather than the one we have had here. 

So the information I would like to give my colleague is that that proposal – even the one advanced by hon. Karuhanga – was actually something that had been communicated to us during the adjournment and I was hoping that we could pursue it for the good of this country.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you for the information but next time when you are taller than I, remember to push down the microphone after talking. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I am making an appeal; I am aware of all the proposals which have been put before the House and I am aware of the fact that this particular law will touch the core of the human rights, which is embodied in Article 29 of our Constitution. And that is why I am saying that before we vote, let us be given a long rope to hang ourselves; let it be given every avenue to search for a way of reaching a consensus because this is a human rights issue. We need to reach a consensus on this issue. Personally, I believe I need a law on public order but it should cater for the interests of everyone: my children and grand children who will want to enjoy their rights tomorrow. 

So, Mr Speaker, I am just appealing that if the Prime Minister, who happens to be my relative, could just see sense that I want to visit my relatives in their area and now the Police will chase me away. This is what we want to avoid; it has happened in the past but we should not allow it to happen today or tomorrow.
 
I can assure you that recently, the Members of Parliament from Acholi wanted to demonstrate on the issue of funds for rehabilitation of Northern Uganda. What happened? The Police followed them to the venue where they were supposed to hold a meeting. They were told that there were other activities like football - I am just making an appeal-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on guidance. I am respecting you based on age and seniority -

MRS OGWAL: I am giving you information so that you know where I am going. You can see how much I am at pain to appeal to my relatives; my brothers and sisters and my grand children so that they know how we can move together. We want to move together and build consensus on this matter. This is a fundamental human right and these people from that side know this. It will not take them long -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Dokolo, please. Hon. Members, let me tell you something very personal now. I lost my brother yesterday and I am going to take the body tomorrow but I have sacrificed this time that we should resolve these matters. So when you are saying all these things, know that I am in grief right now. I am not here to just sit and see people saying what they want to say and not helping me come to the conclusion of a matter to enable me deal with my personal issues. If that is the spirit in terms of proceeding then it is not helpful. 

Let me now put it clearly. A motion was moved that the question be put. I deferred – Please. I said please, which is not barking. Let me finish what I am saying, please. This is what I am trying to say. There was a motion, which I deferred. I used my discretion to defer that motion so that we could see how far we can go with reconciling this matter but we have not been able to achieve that. All I was trying to see was whether we could get consensus, and we move together but we have not been able to achieve that. There is a motion that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, order. Can we resume our seats and we process one by one? Honourable members, can you resume your seats? Can we do it in an orderly way? Can I listen to hon. Aol who has a procedural point? I have given the Member for Gulu an opportunity to raise an issue. Can we listen to her?

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, the fact that the Attorney-General’s position could not address the major issue raised on this side is clear indication that we were discussing something, which was very important and it is human rights. We talked about numbers but this issue is not about numbers only. Time will -

THE DEPUTY SPEKAER: Honourable member for Kampala Central, please come to my office after this session and we see what we can do about your temper.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, when we cannot agree on an issue, which concerns human rights, it was really important that we do not consider numbers to be most important. The Attorney-General and the honourable Member of Butambala never agreed. That means that you needed to consider the issues being raised. We have been on this issue for many weeks and that means it is a human rights issue -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, there is an hon. Member holding the Floor and she has given her right to the hon. Member there. 

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, just like my colleague hon. Kivumbi put it in his elaborate submission - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I have seen the Government Whip, hon. Lumumba taking photos. I have seen hon. Dr Omona taking photos. I have also seen hon. Col Mugume taking photos. Is it in order for these hon. Members to engage in an act, which is dishonourable? What are they taking these photos for? Do you want to kill us on the way home? We know there is a minister with a gun in this House. Hon. Aronda has a gun. So are they in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I can see five video cameras from where I am sitting. Therefore, there is nothing secretive about what we are doing here. But hon. Members the decorum of this House requires that we behave in those manners as the rules prescribe. If there is any honourable member who has turned him/herself into a photojournalist in this House, that would not be proper. 

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, the information I am giving to hon. Betty and which is my very last submission to this subject matter is that the plea that we made on this Floor was that we don’t want to be conscripted into legislating unconstitutionally simply because our colleagues across have numbers. We are only appealing to the appreciation of what makes Parliament, the only body constituted to make laws.

Mr Speaker, the prayers you have seen rising beyond the top of this House, are coming in because Members realised that our participation in this debate only serves a cosmetic purpose and, therefore, we are only a part of a conscription to legislate to serve the purpose of the day and not for posterity.

Mr Speaker, our demand for time to make our points noted, taken and respected is because, when we fail here - this country has a rich history of inflicting each other and the repercussions have been very bad. Only this House has a duty of ensuring that we don’t get compelled into believing that whoever has numbers has actually the power not to even listen but to run through legislation and conscript others as though they were a part of what they don’t agree with. Therefore, the information – (Interruption)

MR LOKII: Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. I have listened to the pleas that the Members in the Opposition are making. But I still think that the best way of knowing whether the Members on this side have been convinced is through a vote?

Secondly, even in terms of the request that they are making for more time, I have not heard of any proposals that are coming forth to enable us proceed. 

The point of procedure, therefore, is isn’t it worthwhile to get onto the motion so that we can have the third reading of the Bill because we are not helping ourselves and for those who gain no satisfaction can go to courts of law?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the decision that we would be taking at this stage would be whether to recommit or not, Clause 8. That is what is pending. We haven’t gone to the point of discussing the third reading of the motion. No, we are not yet there. And the motion for recommital cannot substantially propose, in details, what the amendments should be.
 
So, if you are desirous of listening to the amendment, the best thing to do is to recommit and you listen to the amendments because we cannot listen to the amendments at this stage. This is just speaking to the motion for recommital generally. So, if it is the desire of the House that we recommit, then we recommit. Isn’t that what we should do? We should recommit before you can examine the details of the amendments, if you want to. Won’t that be the proper way to go?

MS AOL: Yes, Mr Speaker, that would be the proper way to go. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for recommital. Can I put the question to the motion for recommital?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we decide on that?  Please, honorable members, first sit. Honourable member for Jinja, I have respect for you. Yes, honourable member for Bukooli Central.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, the House was heated and when we mentioned that since our colleagues had numbers, they would have their way, you very ably and wisely guided that it was not about the question of numbers; it was a question of give and take. We are pushing this because we feel we are pushing it for majority of Ugandans. That is how we think.

Mr Speaker, you have asked us to get onto a middle road. The middle road is for negotiations. It is a give and take. We are not crazy to be pushing this thing for almost three to four months; we are not. We know the life we have lived in the past five or ten years. We know what is happening to us now. But we just want our colleagues to listen to us and appreciate so that we can have a middle road. 

We have a proposal – all these attempts have been made outside this House to reach a middle road. But like typical of our colleagues, they renege at the last minute. It is despicable to renege when you have been discussing something outside there. Please always – because we are going to stop respecting our colleagues. It is important that if you have given your word, please live by that word. 

Mr Speaker, we are asking you to accept and we go for the middle road so that we can engage our colleagues either from within here or by allowing us to present what we think is the middle road or we postpone and go to engage from outside so that we can come back with an agreed position. Mr Speaker, thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the only way we can move to assess whether there is need to reach that middle position is by accepting a recommital. If the House accepts recommital, I will not be sitting here; I will be sitting there to finalise with this. That is what I would be doing. You see we have been in this thing for long enough.

Honourable members, you have heard the submissions for recommital. You have listened to the passion that carries those submissions for recommital. We have now heard. We cannot choose to look the other side and say we didn’t hear; we have heard those pleas for recommital very loud and clear. The moment is now for us to take a decision on it. Okay, because whichever way we go, we have to come back here.

What I want us to agree on is how to take the vote on recommital? Roll call and tally? So, I am going to order – Please, I think I have heard enough of this. Please, let us take this vote by roll call and tally so that we know. Can I now ask- this is the motion for recommital of Clause 8 and by implication clauses 7, 9 and 10. So - yes, hon. Member for Kampala Central.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have tried to strike a balance in order to achieve the best for our nation. Inviting myself and others to look at the Bill and the memorandum, I will read the first object in verbatim -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the purpose of that?

MR NSEREKO: There is something I want to strike; hear me out. Mr Speaker, the object, in verbatim says that this Bill is out to “provide for the regulation of public meetings, the duties and responsibilities of the Police, the organisers and the participants in relation to public meetings.” This is clear and this is the Public Order Management Bill. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to re-echo the point that was raised by the hon. Cecilia Ogwal that consultations may not end with the people seated in this august House today. True, we have people that elected us to represent them and the issue of human rights touches them in person. And therefore I would like to invite honourable colleagues that the best middle road that we must move towards is to go back, take some more time and consult with our people - (Interjections) - the rationale of legislation is not for us. It is for the people; it is for the country whose rights you are going to trample on or to uphold. Therefore, it would be prudent for us not only to educate them about these clauses and this law just like we did on the Marriage and Divorce Bill - it would be prudent that we educate them because we are not the only organisers of public meetings. We are not the only people that are going to suffer or to gain from this law; the entire public will.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I know that there is a motion on the Floor but I would not deter myself from moving a motion for further consultation from our constituents in this country, as we are here to legislate for the good of this nation and for posterity and not only today. 

Whereas there is urgency for this Bill, it is true that it has remained on the shelves for two years. My simple question is: what is the utter urgency that we cannot give another one or two months for the betterment of our country and for the good of the people of this nation? And I know even the hon. Magyezi who moved the previous motion, or the motion that is here, may agree with me and concede that this would be the best position, that after consulting with the populace in this country, it would be in good faith that we go back and consult then come and present. That is the guidance I would like to seek. There is information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, hon. Member that was guidance. Honourable members, the point here is this: if you say you want to go and consult- okay let us say you say you want to go and consult, are you going to consult on the motion for recommital? (Laughter) That is what is on the Floor now. 

So, how do we deal with the motion for recommital? There is a motion for recommital that has been moved and the recommital is in relation to Clause 8 and by implication clauses 7, 9 and 10. Do you go to consult on whether we should recommit or not? That would not be substantial enough a basis for consultation. That one I do not know. Are you going to consult on recommital? 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I would think recommital or no recommital, basing on what hon. Kivumbi has stated, I am moving away from there a little. Just let us give ourselves Clause 8 and look at it in totality. You are a lawyer, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is a lawyer and the learned Attorney-General is a lawyer. There is one maxim of equity that says that where there are two equal and competing equities, the first in time prevails. Along that legal reasoning, look at the two notices: the first in time is it by the state of receipt of the notice by the Police or by the date of sending or writing the notice? That leaves a lot to be desired even in the proposal by the committee in clause 8(1)(a). 

Now, if you are saying, notice of another public meeting on the date, at the time, and at the venue proposed has already been received - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Padyere that would be a matter if we went to that stage. I want to ask the minister – please. That would be a matter if we agreed to recommit. I want to ask the minister. You have observed the proceedings of this House and one principle of legislation is that laws are made to pass like razors are made to sell. A law that cannot pass therefore has problems. Hon. Minister, please address the House on these issues.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, the hon. Members are asking for more time to consult on this matter. The hon. Members are asking for recommital on Clause 8. But Sir, you remember when we started this whole debate almost one year ago a lot of debate has gone into these discussions. 

The Rt Hon. Speaker even set up a special committee and they came up with an addendum to areas where we needed to consult; and the key factor in this was the issue of regulation. We spent a lot of time, there is a report, an addendum on the issue of regulation and we thought that matter had been concluded. 

Clause 8 deals substantially with the issue of regulation. I firmly believe that no matter how much more time you give, the issue of regulation will still remain as to where we started. So, Sir, this Bill is not a James Baba Bill. It is a Bill from the Executive. I consulted and the position is that we are to put it to vote and we move ahead. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, hon. Baba, the Ambassador, for whom I have a lot of respect, has clearly stated that Clause 8 - among our objectives, any law which is against our rights is not a right law and when we are signatories to all these laws, we have to respect them. So, I am seeking this guidance from you on whether we are not going against the other laws we have signed where people have permitted these rights. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whether or not this law is against rights, whether or not this particular provision will exceed the terms provided or pronounced by the Constitutional Court or the provisions of the Constitution can no longer be determinable by this House at this stage, I will put the question to the motion for recommittal.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, resume your seat. Hon. Members, this is not a shouting contest. This is supposed to be a debate and a debate which has gone so far and where we have to move one way or the other. Nobody can say the presiding officer has not tried to see if there is any possibility of coming together on this issue at the stage we have reached. Hon. Members, let us honour the process we have been through. 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that we find ourselves in this circumstance. My motion is under Rule 50, Mr Prime Minister, just in case you want to educate yourself, I am moving a motion under Rule 50 that this House resolves to establish a technical committee that will guide us in further consultation over this Bill. 

Mr Speaker, there is one thing I want to mention here. In 2012, 63.8 percent of Egyptians passed a Constitution and a President was elected. Today, the same Constitution that was passed by the majority of the people in that country and the same President are no more –(Laughter)– I want to appeal to members on the other side; I want to implore you that it is so critical to make laws for the entire country and not for one side. Let us not make a mob law – mob justice is what they call it. Therefore, I pray that we go and further consult the constituents who sent us here so that we have a resolved harmonised position as Parliament. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the hon. Member for Kilak County, the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality, the hon. Member for Bukoto East and many other Members. Those are enough secondments. Hon. Members, this principle has been debated already on whether we should defer this matter for consultation and now it is coming in form of a motion. 

Hon. Members, the motion before the House is that this House refers this matter to an appropriate committee to handle. In other words, we should not tackle any further decision on this matter but we resolve that the House pass this responsibility to a committee that should go and see if they can be harmonised and they bring these matters back to Parliament. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and negatived.)

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Order Management Bill, 2011” be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said at the beginning, we will take this decision by roll call and tally so that people can sign up and stand up for whatever decisions they are going to make. So, I am going to put the question to that motion. Those in favour will say “aye” and those against will say “No” through roll call. Can we proceed for the roll call please.

Hon. Members, I am proceeding under Rule 80 of our Rules of Procedure, “If the Speaker or the chairperson of any committee considers that the conduct of a member cannot be adequately dealt with under sub-rule (2) of Rule 79, he or she may name the member.”

Rule 79(2) says, “The Speaker or chairperson, shall order any member whose conduct is grossly disorderly to withdraw immediately from the House or committee for the remainder of the day’s sitting; and the Clerk or the Sergeant-at-Arms shall act on such orders as he or she may receive from the Speaker or chairperson to ensure compliance with the rule. 

80(2) Where a member has been named, then– 
(a) in the case of the House, the Speaker shall suspend the member named from the service of the House.”

And Rule 80(3), “Where a member has been named by the chairperson -” This is not applicable. 

80(4) “If a member is suspended, his or her suspension on the first occasion in a session shall be for the next three sittings, excluding the sitting in which he or she was suspended; on the second occasion in a session, for the next seven sittings excluding the sitting in which he or she was suspended, and on the third and any subsequent occasion during the same session, for the next twenty eight sittings of the House, excluding the sitting in which the member was suspended.”

Honourable members, in compliance with these rules, and by the authority conferred upon me by these rules, I accordingly name the following members: Hon. Ssemujju Ibrahim Nganda, hon. Odonga Otto for Aruu County and hon. Ssekikubo for Lwemiyaga, and they are accordingly suspended from the sitting of this House, and they will remain suspended for the next three sittings of this House. It is so ordered. And accordingly, they are requested to clear the Chambers. (Interjection)

Honourable member for Lwemiyaga, you are suspended; I cannot hear you because you have been suspended with effect from now. Honourable members, can we clear the House. The Sergeant-at-Arms is, therefore, directed to use the necessary means at his disposal to remove the Members from the Chambers; and in the process of doing so, he can obtain support from any other authorised agencies of this House. It is so ordered. Can we start roll call. Let us start roll call and tally.

    1. Hon. Alex Onzima
    2. Hon. Ababiku Jesca 
    3. Hon. Acayo Christine Cwinya-ai

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, we cannot hear the names. (Interjections) 

Honourable members, let the records show the following that we had started voting on third reading of this Bill by roll call and tally and the list from which the names of Members were being read was confiscated by the hon. Member for Aruu County, hon. Odonga Otto, who has then torn it, in total disregard of the procedure of this House. 

We will be making appropriate communication to this effect and at an appropriate time, these matters should be handled. Under the circumstances, we are not able to proceed with the vote because the list from which the vote is to be taken has been torn by the Member who has been suspended. So, this House stands adjourned to Tuesday 2.00 0’Clock.

(The House rose at 5.48p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 6 August 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)

