
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 9 August 2022

Parliament met at 2.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this afternoon sitting. Yesterday, the media was awash with news of a Member of this House allegedly seeking to return Shs 40 million; I do not know what intention he had. The Member in question is Hon. Twaha Kagabo, the MP for Bukoto South. 

He was reportedly carrying the Shs 40 million and saying he wanted to deliver it back to me; he claimed I am the one who had given it to him.

This is an abuse of the institution of Parliament. I did not give him any money. I do not even know him. For your information, while he is a Member of Parliament of this House, I do not know him physically. This is a breach of the conduct of this House. It is an abuse to this House. (Applause)

Honourable members, we cannot allow that kind of behaviour in this 11th Parliament. I, therefore, refer the Member to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, and it must report back to the House in one month. This House is not for playing politics. He has to tell us who gave him the money, from where and what was the money meant for.

I have always said that when we are in this House, there are no political parties; we are one; and so, it is our responsibility to protect the image of this House. So, he may have to face the law and being a Member of Parliament, you know what it means.

Honourable members, in a bid to strengthen evidence-based legislation, the Parliamentary Commission has established three resource centres, fully equipped with computers and printing services. These are in the library, Development House and Kingdom Kampala. The Clerk to Parliament has already shared the details of their location on your emails. Please make the best use of these resource centres for us to do better legislation.

Honourable members, on 6 August 2022, our own Kiplimo won yet another Gold Medal –(Applause)- at the 2022 Commonwealth Games; we really want to congratulate him for that. Now, we have three gold and two bronze medals. I once again congratulate the team and reiterate that we will have a motion in this House paying tribute to those gallant sons of Uganda.

Finally, I want to thank you, honourable members again, for taking time off to be in the House.  Matters of national importance - okay, procedure first.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, we thank you for your communication that was very elaborate and clear to this House.

The Leadership Code Act, which this Parliament passed, states that a leader who receives a bribe or declares to have received a bribe or a gift or anything of monetary value, must declare that bribe to the Office of the Inspector General of Government within 24 hours. 

Madam Speaker, I also watched television footage in which the Member was parading himself and moving around the streets of Kampala and the corridors of Parliament. I saw him going to the Office of the Leader of the Opposition, first with the money - returning it there, then he went to every place claiming that he had received a bribe of Shs 40 million, but he could not specify where exactly he got this money from. 

Wouldn't it be procedurally right for Parliament to ask the Inspector General of Government to pick interest in this matter and she investigates this Member, because these are issues of morality in society?

If Members of Parliament cannot have integrity and moral standing in society, and we cannot stand by our words, then who will or which Ugandan will?  As leaders, we must act as examples. 

Therefore, the procedural matter I am raising is: Wouldn't it be procedurally right for Parliament to refer this Member to the Office of the Inspector General of Government with instructions to handle him on matters of corruption and receiving a bribe? I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a clarification from Hon. Maurice Kibalya.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The practice in this Parliament is that the moment information that concerns a Member goes into the Hansard record, the name(s) must be mentioned. I am seeking clarification from the honourable whether it is okay for him to mention the name of the said Member.

THE SPEAKER: I had already said the name of the Member. Yes, Chairperson of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Mental Health. 

2.10
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I want to agree –(Interjections)- I am the Chairman of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Mental Health. I am proud to say that I have 210 members from this House in that forum. When I saw this on social media, I thought it was a joke. The House of integrity in every country is the temple of legislation, and people who sit in it are called honourable members. 

As Hon. Silwany has reiterated, this brings a lot of questions to the integrity of the said Member - Dr Twaha - I do not know whether he is a real doctor or a traditional doctor or a researcher. I believe that what he is alleging raises many questions.

First of all, Madam Speaker, he is not a cashier or a business person. I know all questions will be answered in the committee you have referred him to, but as the Chairperson of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Mental Health - the other day it was mentioned in the papers that we have almost 14 million people who have mental health issues. 

I suspect this honourable member might have issues and I, therefore, propose, in addition to the reference given by hon. Silwany, that the honourable member be referred for mental examination. Even if he picked money on the road in Lwengo, where he comes from, in a constituency where cows are dying for lack of water, people are dying because they have no food, Lwengo hospitals have no medicine - The other day I was seeing in the media that children in Lwengo go to school without shoes, and you say you picked money on the road, and you had nowhere to put it until you dumped it with the Leader of the Opposition. This brings shame on us. 

Madam Speaker, for better maturity in the leadership and governance of this country, political parties should begin vetting and having mental tests for their leaders before they are recommended to contest as Members of Parliament. I, therefore, pray that this Member will be taken for medical evaluation to see whether he is okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Code of Conduct of Members of Parliament is well enumerated in Appendix F of the Rules of Procedure, which among others, deals with personal conduct, corruption, public trust and improper use of payments. 

As I have already guided, I accordingly invoke rule 175(1)(b) of the Rules of Procedure and refer the Member to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. This committee should investigate within one month. Members, I do not think we should continue to debate this. 

Matters of national importance.  Hon. Nambeshe?

2.14
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As it is already common knowledge of how the flash floods in Mbale have claimed so many lives and property, the baton of catastrophic disasters was passed on to Bududa. As we talk, Bududa and particularly my constituency of Manjiya, have had multiple landslides. We are only lucky that we have not lost lives. 

However, crops and gardens as well as livestock have been ravaged in a number of subcounties like Nakatsi, Bushika and Bunabutiti. Parishes have been completely washed away or covered under the rubble. As we talk, the massive displacement has left many people homeless and helpless. 

I visited the town council headquarters hall and it was full to capacity. What was shocking is that the majority of these people, who are staying in places of worship, in schools and in these town council halls, have no blankets. 

Madam Speaker, last week you directed the Prime Minister to go to the subregion - not only Bugisu subregion, but also to Sebei - and conduct a detailed assessment of the impact of the disasters. Up to now, none of the officials from the line ministry are on ground. People are helpless, hopeless and homeless. 

We have had so many of these visits and even needs assessments, including impact assessment of the disasters, but no lasting solution has been found. What is needed now are blankets and food. Relocation and eventual settlement has become a song, which has never seen any implementation at all. If they talk of constructing 22 houses per year, Madam Speaker, I calculated and it will take this administration 57 years to resettle the targeted 100,000 households from Bududa at that snail’s pace of resettlement. [HON. MACHO: “Madam Speaker, order.”] This is a matter of disaster and you are my neighbour. 

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, my last prayer – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, what hon. Nambeshe is speaking about is a matter of life and death. The area has lost people, including our own area. So, hon. Macho, let him finish his submission and then you will speak. I know you just want to smuggle something into his speech. (Laughter)

MR NAMBESHE: Hon. Macho knows that most of the people have taken refuge in his constituency in Busia. The other day I was sharing with him; I do not know why he is raising order. 

Madam Speaker, what we need as a matter of urgent attention in this emergency, is if the people could be accorded some food and non-food items like blankets and tents. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Before the Prime Minister gets up, in the public gallery this afternoon we have a delegation of staff from the National Assembly of Zambia. They are here to do benchmarking on best practices of Parliament of Uganda. They have come to observe the proceedings this afternoon. 

Kindly join me in welcoming them. Please stand up. Thank you very much for coming to Uganda. Uganda is the Pearl of Africa and this is the best Parliament around. Thank you; please enjoy your day. (Applause)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, whereas we respect the sitting rules being one of – 

THE SPEAKER: He was appointed last night.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether hon. Mbwatekamwa is in order to make it a habit to sit on the front bench when he is a habitual backbencher. (Laughter) I do not know whether hon. Mbwatekamwa is in order, moreover to sit akimbo as if he is in the sitting room?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, at the beginning of this sitting and session, I announced free sitting. It does not harm you to come and sit in front here. (Laughter) 

2.21
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I stand with my brother, hon. Nambeshe, regarding what our people are going through in the Elgon subregion. We know it is not so easy; people are suffering, the soils are still coming down and the rains are still going on. 

It is not an easy situation, but I just want to inform this Parliament that as we speak, our team is on the ground. Many food and non-food items are being collected in different centres so that they are given out to those people. 

We know there are many people who do not have where to sleep; they have nothing to cover themselves with. So, we are trying our best to see that they get where to sleep, something to cover themselves with and what to eat. I am just from a meeting, but our team is on the ground to rectify the situation. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I raised an issue about my own constituency, where even my personal cows died, yet I was promised that the team was going there the next day. To date, nobody has reached there. Now, if you can go against what I have said, what about what hon. Nambeshe said? 

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, about the cows in that constituency, I think when the problem for the Elgon subregion came in - they came back to this region, but then, they did not proceed to your place. However, I know they are working hand-in-hand to see that they visit your area and work on the problems in Elgon subregion. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me first tell you something Rt Hon. Prime Minister. All the water that comes from Elgon goes to my place because it is a flat area. So, whatever comes from there goes to my place. Yes, hon. Patrick?

2.24
MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for her response, but I am very much disappointed. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, these are serious matters. These are matters of life. The world over is watching how we are handling Mbale and Bududa and those problems going on. 

Madam Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister would have done better to come to this House with an explanation that, “This is the situation on the ground” and in specific terms, tell us what she is doing in the Elgon area, and those other areas that are affected, and what she is doing exactly to save the lives of the people. This behaviour of our ministers taking these things casually is so unbecoming. I think it is proper that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister tells us that tomorrow, she will come back with clear details about what Government and the team on the ground are actually doing for the people, other than just coming to say, “The team is on the ground.” Oh my God, what does it mean for the team to be on ground! They might be on the ground in their hotels, enjoying their beers when people are not being assisted. 

Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister comes back here tomorrow with the details of what the team on ground is doing to help the people. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you know the whole of Bugisu subregion, Sebei and Teso subregions. Can we have the status report on what is happening on the ground? Which team is on which ground, and what you have done so far? 

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, this has come as a matter of national importance. That is why I answered it that way. 

Last week, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister gave a statement on the same issue, but tomorrow, we shall come up with a detailed statement on who is where, and what they are doing - 

THE SPEAKER: And, how many blankets, the amount of food you have sent to the affected places; and what you are doing to stop that kind of thing.

MS NAKADAMA: Much obliged. 

THE SPEAKER: I have always emphasised the issue of the disaster preparedness commission. I do not know what is hard with you establishing this commission, because it will be able to assess what is happening in every region, so that when this kind of occurrence comes, you are able to handle it. But you are now doing everything in an adhoc manner. We will wait for the report tomorrow - Not on Bugisu, I have already made a ruling. 

2.27
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think I need to appreciate what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has said, that something is going on, on the ground. Whether it is small or big, something is going on, on the ground because we have been told that some supplies have been given. However -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Miss Uganda -(Laughter)

MS OGWAL: Hon. Ogwal Cecilia Barbara Atat.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal Barbara Atat, it is just because you are not there. You do not know what is happening. I want to tell you, Atat, yesterday alone, I lost 102 cows because of those floods. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the point I want to make is that in 2011, people were buried alive in health centres and schools. I would have expected Government to say, “Over these 10 years, this is what has been put in place to make sure that we are prepared for this kind of disaster”. And, we know that Bugisu is prone to this kind of flood. That is what we want to know. Otherwise, you are going to fire-fight this one, and another one will come and so forth. 

So, can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, send a team to help the cows which are dying in the Rt Hon. Speaker’s home - human beings are already dying of hunger and floods. In fact, the most affected area, Madam Speaker, is my grandson’s, hon. Masaba’s area. The area is seriously affected and I know it because my relatives are there; they have been calling me.

Madam Speaker, you know me. Even if I am away, I know what is going on. (Laughter) I have been very concerned, and I feel it is unfair if Hon. Masaba is not allowed to say something because he is the one actually facing the brutality of the floods. 

Also, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister should get serious and come to the House with a long-term plan. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ephraim Biraaro?

2.30
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju West County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. As we speak, Buhweju has been invaded and infested by locust-like insects, which the local agricultural extension staff have named “variegated” grasshoppers.

These insects come, attack and eat coffee, tea, cassava, bananas, farm pastures and anything that is green. When the leaves of these plants are finished, these insects attack the green stems and eventually, the whole crop or plant dries up. 

Human beings in Buhweju and probably other areas – because these are flying insects – will all be infected and threatened; and livestock is also threatened with famine.

My prayers: Since these insects eat indiscriminately, I appeal to the state to come up urgently to intervene and establish the nature of this disaster that is affecting Buhweju, especially in the subcounties of Burere, Engaju, Kyahenda, Rubengye, and Nyakahita, so that they look for mechanisms of exterminating these insects.

Secondly, there is a looming famine because of the destruction they have caused. I am appealing for immediate intervention by Government to help the people on the ground to survive until the insects have been exterminated. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Ephraim, do they look like nsenene?

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, they are far from nsenene. These are greenish and spotted, while the grasshoppers are not spotted. They are like locusts. That is why I said they are locust-like insects. The local agriculturalists have called them variegated grasshoppers. I wonder why they are grasshoppers. They look like locusts. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

2.32
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Sorry for that disaster in Buhweju. I am going to call the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for an intervention so that they see how our people can get rid of those insects or locusts. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: When do we get the feedback?

MS NAKADAMA: We can report back tomorrow. I am going to inform them so that tomorrow they give us a solution.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.33
MR SOLOMON CHELANGAT (NRM, Too County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

For the last three years, we have had insecurity in Too County and Bukwo in general. This form of insecurity began with thieves who stole cows across the national park and they drove all the way to Sironko. 

Madam Speaker, by the 17th of last month, we had lost almost 313 animals. What disturbs us is that when these animals are followed, they are found with some people in Sironko, in an area called Bunaseke in Budadiri East. Some of these animals are found in people’s houses – others are recovered, while others are lost. However, nothing is done to those people who have been found with them. Those people are very hostile. 

I have been in touch with the police station of Bunaseke, and they told me that: “Those people are very hostile. Just go away with the few cows you have recovered.”

Madam Speaker, if this thing is not checked as soon as possible, it is more likely to escalate and become a serious problem in the Elgon subregion. 

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that security agencies are beefed up along the Mount Elgon subregion. 

Two, when the Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) were there during the ASTU time – the ASTU has been withdrawn from Bukwo. When ASTU was there, these thieves were not there. So, it would be better for the Government to see how best they can bring back ASTU. Those are the local people who know the terrain of the area. 

Secondly, I pray that the Government brings to book these people who are found with our animals. They just move away with their pangas and threaten that: “Go away. You have got your animals; you just move.” I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: There is information from your sister.

MR CHELANGAT: Yes, information granted.

MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add that in the same subregion of Sebei, there is something that is peculiar, especially in Kapchorwa District. There is a big crack which has developed over a very long time. However, because of the heavy rains which are on now, part of the cliff is almost falling on the other side where there are schools, residences and hospitals. This is causing a lot of fear among the people of that area. This area is, especially, the village of Kisitya in the east division of Kapchorwa Municipality. It is not on the upper side of the mountain, but this time on the lower side, below Kapchorwa town.

My prayers are that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development sends a geologist to go and see the extent to which this crack has gone. In fact, it may not even take a week before the whole mountain goes down on the people. I call upon the ministry of energy – and the ministry of disaster should also come in. The villages surrounding this mountain have about 100 homesteads. If all these have to be destroyed, it will be a big disaster for us. We need to take action immediately so that these people may be moved away and maybe the mountain is blasted and the people may return after the mountain has been blasted. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister.

MS RUKIA NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, on the issue of security, those places have been beefed up with security – our security people are there. I think they need to be briefed on how they should beef up security so that they work on these people, bring the culprits to book, and of course, end that problem of stealing the animals. 

I am going to call the security ministry to talk to his people so that they can beef up and give him reports, and maybe, bring a report to Parliament on how they are handling the issues of Bukwo.

About the crack on the cliff, we have a comprehensive programme with the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees on how to handle those issues. I am going to call the minister for disaster to intervene immediately. She is saying the crack is already there. Just for purposes of informing the House, the ministry of disaster has a comprehensive plan for all those areas, which was passed in Cabinet. They will have to come here to Parliament and give a report to this august House. I thank you.
  
THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Hon. Opio Acuti?

2.39
MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Two weeks ago, I raised a matter of national importance in regard to the non-release of funds for road maintenance in subcounties and town councils – across more than 2,000 subcounties and town councils in this country. The presiding officer guided that the Prime Minister engages the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and comes back to the House to make a response to that. It is now more than two weeks. We have seen the heavy rains are increasing and several places are getting cut off, but there are no funds for road maintenance.

My prayer is that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development make a statement in that regard. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.40
MS SUSAN MUGABI (NUP, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on two matters of national importance. Madam Speaker, I request you to give me some extra time because these are urgent matters - 

THE SPEAKER: Susan, I will not give you extra time because we are already entering into time for other reports.

MS SUSAN MUGABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, officials from the district executive and the National Forestry Authority carried out a survey in two sub-counties, that is, Nairambi and Buwooya, in my constituency. It was discovered that 14 local councils were on forest land, and hence, were to be evicted. 

However, in Buvuma, there is no existing land because most of the land was given to the national oil project. So, these 14 low councils have been in existence for over 10 years, with known leadership and also do exist in the local government structure. 

My prayers are: 

    1. Government should come up with a proper resettlement plan for these people going to face eviction. 

    2. Secondly, Government should stipulate proper timelines within which the resettlement will be done and bring it to the attention of the leadership of these communities. 

    3. Lastly, Government should respond urgently to the issue at hand to avoid anarchy. 

Thank you and I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS RUKIA NAKADAMA: Thank you Madam Speaker. About finance, I have the finance minister here; he will come and talk about that. Then on the eviction issue, our people cannot be evicted without being resettled. 

So, it is in plan that they have to be put somewhere before they use the area that has been identified for palm growing. Thank you. 

MS SUSAN MUGABI: Thank you, honourable minister. The second urgent matter of national importance is regarding the harassment of fishermen in my constituency.

THE SPEAKER: Hon Susan, you will bring that up tomorrow -
Is it a maiden speech?

MS SUSAN MUGABI: It is.

THE SPEAKER: Let the girl talk; it is her maiden speech.

MS SUSAN MUGABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The second matter is regarding the harassment of fishermen in my constituency by the Fisheries Protection Unit officers, who are demanding for fishing licence fees at an inappropriate time. 

At the beginning of the financial year, sensitisation of these fees payment is what should have been carried out now, and not enforcement as is currently being done. The Fisheries Protection Unit has gone ahead to confiscate fishing boats, yet it is these same boats that are being used during fishing to get money to pay the fees. 

That notwithstanding, the mandate of the Fisheries Protection Unit is not to collect fishing licence fees; that is the role of the fisheries officers. 

My prayers are: 

    1. Let the Fisheries Protection Unit stop harassing the fishermen and allow them go about their business in order to be able to pay the required fees. 

    2. The Fisheries Protection Unit should restrain themselves from carrying out a mandate that is not theirs. 

Thank you. 

MR MOSES OKOT: The information I would like to supply from the fishing communities is that we passed the Fish and Aquatic Act, which we thought would give a permanent remedy to the questions that are lingering around; the maltreatment of fishermen on the lake. This Bill is awaiting to be assented to.

We are requesting the Minister for the Presidency to probably cajole, engender or persuade the President so that this Bill is assented to, and it curtails all that is arising from the same. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill is still before the President for assent and we are following it up. It should be out soon. 

MS RUKIA NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I am going to call the minister in charge of fisheries to intervene so that we know who is supposed to collect the money. Thank you. 

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi) Thank you, Madam Speaker. A matter was raised about the releases, especially to local governments on road maintenance - I do not have a statement about that right now, but I would like to clarify that releases are guided by matters of fiscal policy and fiscal policy is informed by issues relating to cash flows within Government, and according to the prevailing economic conditions in the country. 

So, based on the policy adopted in the first quarter, a decision was made to cut back on expenditure in terms of releases, and delaying expenditure on certain items, so that we are within – (Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have discussed the issue of funding for our roads several times. I brought here a motion - Why we are having challenges with funding is because of failure to operationalise the Road Fund; and if that had been done, these problems we keep raising here would not arise because finance releases funds as it wishes to the Road Fund; ;yet we have the Road Fund Act in place.

Instead of releasing 100 per cent as collected by the Uganda Revenue Authority, they release 10 or 20 per cent as they wish. And, Madam Speaker, you guided, last week while discussing this matter, that the Clerk extracts the decision by the then presiding officer when I presented this motion. 

The decision then was - guided by the Attorney-General - that the finance ministry must respect the laws of the land - which is the Constitution. And it says that monies collected for that purpose cannot be sent to the Road Fund. 

So, the guidance then was that the finance minister brings here the regulations to operationalise the Road Fund so that we get out of this circle of every time Bududa, Tororo, Kasese, Busia on maintenance of roads. Now that the rains are here, everybody is going to raise this matter. 

Madam Speaker, is it not procedurally right that you direct the finance minister to come here and table the regulations that will operationalise the Road Fund, so that we can move on. (Applause)

Else, we shall continue in circles; the directive was given, guided by the Attorney-General's letter which was also tabled here by Hon. Matia Kasaija, and he said he was going to comply. So, why are we moving in circles? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you first give us a schedule, like you used to, on how much each of our districts is getting as road funds. I remember when I was in the 10th Parliament, you would put a schedule in our pigeonholes. 

Secondly, we also want regulations in regard to operationalisation of the Road Fund. We would not be asking you for this money if there was money for the Road Fund, especially in regard to these disaster areas. How can you give a disaster area Shs 10 million as road funds, yet we budgeted Shs 560 billion for that entity? So, we want to know how much goes to the different districts; give us that schedule.
 
MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, the way we do it is that some amount of money is allocated to the Uganda Road Fund through this Parliament. What the ministry does is to release, on a quarterly basis, a certain amount of money to the Uganda Road Fund, which they then distribute to the various local governments and to the Uganda National Roads Authority, because this money is largely for the maintenance of roads.

And, the money meant for the rehabilitation of old roads and the construction of new roads, largely goes to the works ministry and UNRA. So, the Road Fund money is largely for maintenance. 

Madam Speaker, the report you are referring to is the one that comes from the Road Fund itself, after distributing this money to the various local governments. So –(Interruptions) 

MR MUZAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You guided very well that the honourable minister should bring us a schedule regarding the allocation of these funds. However, I see the minister lamenting and making a lot of explanations. Is the honourable minister, therefore, in order to continue meandering around? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Of course, the honourable minister is not right. I made a ruling to that effect and the ruling of the Speaker is final. (Applause) So, give us a schedule and the regulations that operationalise that Fund; that is what we want. You have powers to get it no matter whether it is in URA, UNRA or finance; you have powers to get it.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we have that tomorrow?

MR LUGOLOOBI: The regulations, Madam Speaker, cannot come tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can we have a schedule of how much has gone to Kayunga, Tororo, and so on, tomorrow?  Can we have that schedule tomorrow? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, we shall work with the Uganda Road Fund to generate that list. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Tomorrow, we shall have that schedule. Yes, procedure? The honourable members whose names I have not read to present on matters of national importance will be considered tomorrow. 

2.54
MR JOSEPH GONZAGA SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising on a procedural matter and fortunately, the Minister of State for Primary Education is here. 

Madam Speaker, as we talk, the teacher training colleges in Uganda, both core PTCs and non-core PTCs, are not recruiting students to train as teachers. However, some time back, the ministry - through the Uganda Media Centre, announced that they were closing these colleges. 

In Kabukunge PTC, a college in my constituency, previously had 400 students training as teachers, but as we speak, the college has only 42 training students. Ndegeya Core PTC has less than 80 students. However, still from them – and they can attest to that - they are saying that under the Education Service Commission, all Government schools put together, are lacking 30,000 teachers. 

Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is: Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for the Ministry of Education and Sports to tell us how they are going to recruit students to train as teachers when others are leaving. 

I am saying this because as we speak, if one visited schools or went to teacher training colleagues - actually, the matter is that there are no teachers. Some of those that have been teaching have run away from schools. Others are retiring, and once they retire, that definitely means there will be a staffing gap. 

While the ministry is saying that primary school teachers should be degree holders, they are not recruiting them for degree courses.

Madam Speaker, what I last heard from them is that primary school teachers will be specialists, but primary school teachers are not supposed to be specialists because they are meant to teach all subjects. 

So, the procedural matter I am raising is: Would it be procedurally okay for Ministry of Education and Sports to explain to this House how they are going to recruit teachers, manage the staffing gaps and what is going to happen to the property of Government? For example, Kabukunge PTC is an Islamic-founded institution, which has over 150 acres of land with property, but nobody knows how this property is going to be taken over by Government. Where are you going to put the tutors who have been lecturing in those institutions? What is going to happen to the money that is being sent by finance ministry to the 44 students, at the cost of those who were 400 and above?

What we are seeing, Madam Speaker, is that we are going to hit a snag in this country. In the next three years this country might not have teachers in schools. Those who are teaching are losing morale, and some are running away to ride boda-bodas or going to Dubai for better jobs. 

So, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for this ministry to bring to Parliament a comprehensive statement on the state of teacher training colleges and what is going to happen to the property of those colleges, and whether we really have teachers in those schools? 

This is not a matter to hide. We come from different constituencies and you know what is happening in those schools. You know what is lacking yet the ministry is quiet and is not making any official communication on what they are doing. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Minister for Education and Sports?

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleague, the professional teacher, and a very good friend, for raising this very important matter regarding professional teaching. 

As he requested, Madam Speaker, we will bring a comprehensive statement regarding the policy shift on the national teacher training colleges in this country. I want to pledge that we will bring that statement on this Floor of Parliament, with your permission, Madam Speaker.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of State for Education and Sports, my good friend, the Hon. Dr Moriku, was on the Floor of this House, about a month ago, when I raised the issue of musicians going to schools, dressed inappropriately and performing. She pledged to bring a statement, which she has not. Today, she is pledging to bring another statement on the issue by hon. Ssewungu.

Madam Speaker, is it not procedurally right for hon. Moriku to first present the statement regarding these musicians, dressed inappropriately and going to our schools to corrupt the morals of our children, before she actually presents another statement? 

THE SPEAKER: Wait! What is wrong with presenting two statements? Is there any problem with that? So, what you do, honourable minister, bring the two statements. (Applause) Let us have the two statements together.

MR SSEWUNGU: A small clarification as you return, honourable minister - my good friend. Madam Speaker, it would be prudent for the minister to inform this House whether primary teachers’ colleges, both core and non-core, are functional or not. If they are functional –

THE SPEAKER: That will be included in the statement. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Okay, thank you and most obliged, Madam Speaker.

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, concerning the issue that my good friend, hon. Opendi raised, I want to say that indeed, my ministry acted appropriately and timely. We issued a circular on the 1st of August this month. Last week, Madam Speaker, I came with a statement and I gave a copy to the Committee on Human Rights because they requested for it, yet the House too, needed the same statement. 

Anyhow, I want to pledge that tomorrow, I will come with the same statement that I shared with the Committee on Human Rights. Otherwise, my ministry has barred all musicians from going to all our schools in this country, and it has defined what co-curriculum activity is all about. I will bring it tomorrow, I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Was it also true that those schools belong to some of you? I am asking you, honourable minister, because I also have a school. 

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, I cannot authoritatively say whether those schools belong to me or you. However, what is important, as of now, is that the information is given to all schools in Uganda, whether private or Government, and they must adhere -

THE SPEAKER: And, whether they belong to a minister, Member of Parliament or anybody. 

DR MORIKU: Absolutely, whether minister, myself or any Member of Parliament, they must abide by those circulars. I thank you. 

MS BEGUMISA: Thank you very much. Thank you, our good minister and the whole education department. The clarification I am seeking is about our under age children. Will that report, which you are bringing tomorrow, have information about why all Ugandan children freely go to bikesa -discos at night - and mix with men? No police officer handles that, yet they are defiled and raped from school and even in our communities. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: At least not all of them, Pastor.

MS BEGUMISA: At least in my village where I was born, grew up and now married, discos are held past midnight and include children.

THE SPEAKER: Do these children come from their homes?

MS BEGUMISA: From schools during the day. There is a discotheque in one playground where they dance nudely in a day school. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: If the children come from their homes, that is the parental bit where I said we have failed. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that statement. Indeed, when the children are in school, we are the custodians of the children and we are responsible to uphold the morals and integrity of these children while at school. However, while at home, you are very right that we have a shared responsibility as parents to educate our children and to ensure they grow up as responsible citizens. I will bring the statement tomorrow. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Rwimi Parents School in Bunyangabu District. They are represented by Hon. Davis Kamukama. Children, you are welcome. This is the Parliament of Uganda and what you hear about children here we would like you to be responsible children. I want to thank you, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we also have a delegation composed of the youth leaders from Youth Coalition for Electoral Democracy, Reach a Hand Uganda and National Youth Advocacy. They are here to listen to the motion on the status of the youth in Uganda. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are most welcome.

Yes, next - Do you have something? Where is “burning” found in the rules?

3.05
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The matter that is on fire and burning is a matter of national importance, about the plight of security agencies and mainly police officers as far as salary enhancement is concerned. 

Recently, salaries of science teachers were enhanced, including some officers who are scientists in the police. Previously, in 2016, they increased the salaries of some lawyers, and even ICT specialists in the police, leaving out the lower cadres. 

Madam Speaker, most of the work in the forces is done by junior cadres; they are doing donkey work. It is unfortunate that here in Parliament, much as we have people who are representing the UPDF, the Generals, we do not have a body that is representing Uganda Police,  and Uganda Prisons, and they are keeping quiet. 

I remember last year we visited the police manyattas and saw what was happening. For example, a low cadre gets Shs 700,000 that is subjected to taxation. On top of that, here comes the so-called Exodus SACCO of the police that is fond of cheating them by deducting Shs 100,000 per month as savings yet they cannot access it. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, my prayers are:

    1. We need to investigate the Exodus SACCO that is extorting money. Actually, it is cheating, stealing and extorting money from these police officers because I have never seen any SACCO where you are forced to save. We have SACCOs here. Imagine someone coming from Karamoja or Bududa and you are supposed to come all the way to withdraw money which you cannot even access. I pray for immediate intervention from this Parliament. 

    2. Lastly, Government should think about increasing salaries of security agencies and police officers, considering the economic situation in our country. 

I thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and we shall keep fighting for them since they do not have representatives here. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. That is why we asked for a salary review commission. It is not only the police, but even the army’s lower cadres. The salary review commission should be able to harmonise the salaries of all the workers in the country. 

We  have looked at Exodus SACCO several times. I will ask the Public Accounts Committees (Local Governments, Central) to make sure they investigate the  Exodus SACCO and report when they are reporting about the police. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL YOUTH DAY

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister for gender. We will not debate this statement; we will debate it together with a motion after Hon. Boniface Okot has presented.

3.09
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The purpose of this statement is to provide information to Parliament regarding this year's International Youth Day, which was scheduled to take place on Friday. However, in the Cabinet meeting of yesterday, we deferred it for two weeks, and it is expected to be celebrated on 26 August 2022 in Gulu City, Kaunda Grounds.

Madam Speaker, you may recall that every year on 12th August, we join the rest of the UN fraternity to mark the day in conformity with the UN General Assembly Resolution 54/120 of the 54th Session adopted on 17 December 1999. 

The designation of the day was in recognition of the numerical strength of the youth and their potential to contribute towards the meaningful transformation of society.

The International Youth Day provides an excellent opportunity for all the UN state parties to evaluate the various policies, programmes and strategic interventions aimed at empowering young people. Specifically, on this day, we take stock of what has been done, what remains to be done and how we can position the youth to play critical roles in the social, economic and political transformation of their societies and communities.

The celebration of the International Youth Day is also in line with the World Programme of Action for Youth (WPAY), which is the UN framework for youth development, empowerment and mindset change. 

At the African Continent, the International Youth Day is consistent with the African Youth Charter of 2018, and under the Commonwealth, it is in tandem with the Commonwealth plan of action for youth empowerment.

The theme for this year's commemoration is: “Inter-generational solidarity: The role of the youth in the implementation of the Parish Development Model”. It is a reminder to all young people that the exercise and enjoyment of rights and freedoms, is inseparable from the performance of duties and obligations. 

The youth must, therefore, strive to create a world in which all persons are equal before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic and social-cultural life, and in every other aspect. We need to build a cadre of youth that is cognisant of the need for solidarity among people in various age cohorts, and ensure success of the Parish Development Model. 

Colleagues, the theme also points to the importance of working in a collaborative manner and the need for building networks in order to build a solid base, which is a pre-requisite for surmounting any obstacles to development and progress under the Parish Development Model. 

It is always the case that the International Youth Day will take place at the sub-national level, but also the national level, where the venue is rotational. This year, it will be at Kaunda Grounds in Gulu City. His Excellency the President is expected to preside over the function. 

During the week prior to the Youth Day, various activities take place including  anational dialogue, tree planting, games and sports, community work, blood donation, voluntary counselling, testing, cancer screening, exhibitions and many other activities. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank Parliament for hosting the youth debate. I would, therefore, like to take this opportunity to invite you to join the country at the celebrations at Kaunda Grounds in Gulu City on 26 August 2022 from 10.00 a.m. 

In conclusion, I request Parliament to note that this year's International Youth Day will take place under the theme: “Inter-generational solidarity: The role of the youth in the implementation of the Parish Development Model.”  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. As I said, we shall debate this statement together with the motion, which will be moved after. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL (PDM)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on 3 August 2022, Hon. Opio Samuel Acuti of Kole North raised an urgent question on the disbursement of PDM funds. I guided that the minister presents a status report on PDM implementation. Now, we are going to hear from the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a draft report, but I am here to beg for more time to present the final one, to this House. As it is now, we are not ready. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: How much time do you require?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, we can present this report on Thursday.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, that is a day.

3.17
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, Government needs to style up. If the Parish Development Model is to impact on agriculture - and we are still depending on nature and seasons, yet, any delay, especially in the month of August and September, makes a whole year literally gone. The season that normally impacts on agricultural production is November-December when this country receives heavy rains.

Therefore, our appeal is that for whatever you want to do - not just a status report - you need to come to this Parliament and give us a detailed action plan. I have gone through your paper, which you have said is not ready. Indeed, you are not. 

Going forward, give us what you are going to do in the next two months, in clinical details, under the Parish Development Model. If we lose this season, we would have lost a year. If we lose another, the other two years will be for elections and the Parish Development Model will be like any other programme. 

MR ISINGOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising under rule 189(e) and (f) of our Rules of Procedure. Under this rule, committees of Parliament are supposed to interact with ministers, especially when Parliament has instructed them to do so, to discuss matters of policy and operational issues. 

In this perspective, the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments) was supposed to interact with the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development to discuss matters to do with the Parish Development Model and report back to this House. 

Madam Speaker, we have summoned the finance minister three times, but he has refused to appear before our committee. Yet, we were supposed to come back to this House and report on this matter, he purports to be planning to bring a report on PDM to this House. 

Are we really proceeding well, when a whole finance minister can denigrate a whole committee of Parliament? Okay, he is a member of my committee -(Interruption)

MR MUZAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). Just as my colleague has said, I think there is a problem with most of the ministers. You find that ministers will move very fast to the sectoral committees that they are aligned to. For instance, you will find that if the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development invited the finance minister, he will move in very fast. If the committee on local governments invites the finance minister, there will be a lot of - I do not know what to call it, but they normally ignore our invitations. 

Madam Speaker, I think it is a serious problem. It is not only the committee on local governments that is complaining. I think a number of committees have this kind of challenge.

The time is now, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I want to refer you to Article 90(3)(a) of the Constitution. I also want to refer you to rule 208(a) of the Rules of Procedure on the powers of a committee.

Therefore, I do not see why you should say that the ministers refuse to come. You have the powers. Invoke the powers and summon them. You have powers of the High Court, using the Constitution – leave alone the Rules of Procedure - No, that arrogance is not for Parliament. 

Invoke the rule or the Article and then you come and let us know that “we invoked the Article, but this person failed to respect it”. Stop lamenting here as if you do not have the laws. These are the laws you swore to uphold.

I do not want to hear anybody saying that the minister failed to come because you have the powers. 

MR ISINGOMA: Madam Speaker, even today, the finance minister, Hon. Lugoloobi, was supposed to come, but he failed to come. I am really surprised to see him here, masquerading that he is bringing a report to the House. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want noise. Why don't you get a warrant for him to appear?

MR ISINGOMA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Today, we are going to arrest him. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lugoloobi is going to bring a report on Thursday and you debate it.

MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. To correct the record, today, we called the Committee on Public Service (Local Governments) to say that we had a conflicting meeting with the finance committee. Indeed, I spent the whole of this morning with the finance committee. However, we called them and they accepted our apology not to appear before them.

About the earlier invitation, I am not aware – but I was ready for you, Mr Chairman.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lugoloobi, did they write inviting you to the committee or did they call you on the phone?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, they invited us in writing. In fact, I was meant to be there this morning. Hon. Kasaija got a commitment elsewhere and said that he was not going to be able to go to the finance committee and asked me to represent him because there was a lot of business pending in that committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Why didn't you have the courtesy to also write back to them? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, the time was not there because I was meant to be here at 10.00 a.m. with the Committee on Public Service (Local Governments). However, suddenly, I was asked to go to the other committee, and we called them. 

THE SPEAKER: You need to treat others the way you would want to be treated. In addition, in finance, there are almost five ministers; why wouldn’t you send another minister?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, hon. Anite is on leave. Hon. Kasolo was busy on Emyooga upcountry. Hon. Kasaija was committed in something else. So, I was -

THE SPEAKER: Musasizi? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Hon. Musasizi is not available on station; he has been committed somewhere. We all appreciate that Hon. Musasizi has always been here.

THE SPEAKER: Next time.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL'S REPORT ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF NURTURE: RESEARCH TRAINING AND MENTORING PROGRAMME FOR CAREER DEVELOPMENT OF FACULTY IN MEDICAL EDUCATION PARTNERSHIP INITIATIVE (MEPI) INSTITUTIONS AT MAKERERE UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF HEALTH SCIENCES FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31st JULY 2017 AND 31st JULY 2018

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I earlier on made reference to Article 163(5), which requires Parliament to consider and pronounce itself on the report of Auditor-General that has duly been presented to the House within six months of its submission, my guidance on the COSASE report applies to all the Public Accounts Committees (PACs) as well. Therefore, I urge the leadership and membership of PACs to take note of that accordingly.

Pursuant to Rule 174(6) of the Rules of Procedure, I invite the Chairperson of PAC (Central Government) to present the report.

3.27
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

Article 163(4) of the Constitution mandates the Auditor-General to submit to Parliament an annual report of the accounts audited by him or her for the financial year immediately preceding.

The Constitution further, under Article 163(5), requires Parliament to debate and consider the report, and take appropriate action within six months after the submission by the Auditor-General.

In accordance with rule 174, the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) considered the Auditor-General's reports for Financial Year 2020/2021.

Madam Speaker, I have the honour to present the Auditor-General's special audit report on the Namanve Thermal Power Plant.

THE SPEAKER: Which report are you reading? 

MR ANGURA: I have three reports. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you have three reports. There is one of MEPI.

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have the honour to present the financial statements of Nurture: Research Training and Mentoring Programme for Career Development of Faculty in Medical Education Partnership Initiative (MEPI) Institutions implemented by Makerere University College of Health Sciences for the year ended 31 July 2017 and 31 July 2018. 

Allow me to lay original copies of the report, and copies of the minutes, and proceed to present the report.

THE SPEAKER: Please, do.

MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, I hereby lay the copies of the minutes of the proceedings and also a copy of the original report.

Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the Auditor-General’s report of the Financial Statement of Nurture: Research Training and Mentoring Programme for Career Development of Faculty in Medical Education Partnership Initiative (MEPI) Institutions at Makerere University College of Health Sciences for the year ended 31 July 2017 and 31 July 2018. 

This report is signed by the members and it is duly uploaded.

Introduction

On the 1st of September 2021, Parliament referred the Auditor-General’s report on the Financial Statement of Nurture: Research Training and Mentoring Programme for Career Development of Faculty in Medical Education Partnership Initiative Institutions (MEPI) at Makerere University College of Health Sciences for the year ended 31 Ju1y 2017 and 31 Ju1y 2018. 

The report that attracted an unqualified opinion by the Auditor-General covered the accounting statements comprising income and expenditure statements as at 31 July 2018, the statement of financial position, statement of receipts, funds accountability statement and budget status summary sheet. He noted no key audit matters to communicate in his report for both financial years. 

Methodology 

Pursuant to Rule 174, the committee scrutinised the report of the Auditor-General by meeting the accounting officer of Makerere University; the Principal, College of Health Sciences; the Project Investigator, Nurture project; and the accountant, College of Health Sciences.

Key findings and recommendations in the special audit report for financial year ending 31 July 2017

Under-absorption of funds totalling to an amount of $51,795.72

The Auditor-General notes in his report that a review of the budget and cashbook indicated that the project management budgeted for $799,000 for the period under review. However, only $309,032.61 - indicating 39 per cent - was released, reflecting a shortfall of $489,967.39. The under-release of funds was attributed to inability by the project management to absorb the prior year release balance of $51,795.72.

An analysis of performance by the Auditor-General indicated that the under-absorption was occasioned by the closure of the university between October 2016 and early January 2017 due to a strike, which affected the progress of fellows’ research activities. It should be noted that under-absorption of funds poses a risk of failure to attract future donor funding.

While meeting with the University Secretary, who is the accounting officer, and in charge of management of the College of Health Sciences, the committee was informed that the under releases of the funds was caused by the inability by the project management to absorb the prior release while the low absorption of funds was due to the delay by fellows, to obtain the required ethical approvals with any of the Makerere University College of Health Sciences, Institutional Review Board and the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology. 

Further, management blamed the strike that stalled activities at the college for over three months, affecting utilisation/absorption of the funds. 

The committee, however, noted that the under-absorption of funds was recurrent at the college. Even in financial years where there were no strikes, the management informed the committee that they have preferred to carry forward the money not spent over the years, as opposed to spending for the sake of finishing it. They further noted the challenges posed by procurement processes, especially for biological research reagents that take longer than normal. They decried the strict procedures prescribed under the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) Act, which does not take into account the challenges in procuring items such as biological research reagents.

The management of the College of Health Sciences further informed the committee that the numerous strikes at the college were occasioned, sometimes, by factors beyond their control. The strike by members of staff is most times in agitation for increment in their salaries; and those by the students are mainly caused by welfare issues that are triggered by increase in prices of commodities and/or may be tuition fees. 

The committee notes that under-absorption of released funds affects the implementation of planned activities, which defeats the purpose for which the funds were disbursed. It also poses a risk of failure to attract future funding. 

Committee recommendations

Madam Speaker, the committee recommended that the college devises means of enhancing funds absorption, including starting the procurement processes in time to cater for challenges in procuring biological reagents.

The college should engage with the President’s Office, the Institutional Review Board and the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology to devise faster means of obtaining the necessary ethical approvals by fellows. 

Government also needs to undertake a study on how to amend the PPDA Act to facilitate specialised programmes which may be hampered by lengthy procurement processes. 

Financial year ending 31 July 2018

Absence of clear policies on recruitment of staff/unauthorised recruitment of staff

The Auditor-General notes, in his report, that a number of staff were recruited by the project management without following the available recruitment procedures as prescribed in the human resources manual. Sections 2.4 and 2.5 of the manual provides that all persons seeking employment with the university, shall do so through a transparent process, including applying for the job and going through interviews through the Director, Human Resources or as may be advised depending on the type of employment sought.

A review of the detailed budget and staff list revealed inconsistencies between the budget and the actual number of staff, with eight staff recruited instead of the five co-principal investigators planned for.

While meeting the committee, the management of the College of Health Sciences acknowledged the concern in the report of the Auditor-General and informed the committee that the challenge, sometimes, lies in the restricted timelines relating to the implementation activities. This has forced them to hire experts outside the stipulations of the human resource manual. 

Madam Speaker, the committee made the following notes:

a) 	The committee notes that hiring staff outside the set regulations is tantamount to abuse of office. Management should always negotiate ample project timelines to cater for all processes, including recruitment. The university should be involved in the process of recruiting staff to avoid backdoor recruitment. However, the investigators should be hired based on suitability of candidates.

b) 	Unclear criterion on staff contract renewals 

From a review of sampled renewed contracts, the Auditor-General indicates, in his report, that there was no basis for determining satisfactory performance for the staff whose contracts were renewed because there was no evidence of an appraisal process. This poses a risk of having non-performers as part of the staff. 

Madam Speaker, the committee in this case recommends that the project investigator should put in place a robust mechanism of assessing the performance of staff, results of which should be used to determine the renewal of contracts.  Performance appraisals should always precede contract renewals, for, it is the corporate way of running institutional projects. 

In conclusion, the committee states that we should always encourage and institutionalise good management practices in all our institutions and set them out as centres for excellence. This will not only ensure that we deal away with blatant abuse of office through flouting procedures, but also create a repository of management solutions to enhance productivity and ensure high-level consistency. This is what we should desire for all our institutions. 

As I earlier on said, this report, Madam Speaker, is signed by three-quarters of the members. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Chairperson, for a brief and concise report. Honourable members, you have heard, and we will send this report to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for a Treasury Memorandum. Anybody who wants to say anything about the report?

3.43
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson for the report presented. There is one key issue I would like the minister to address, which is the issue concerning strikes in institutions, universities and schools. 

Madam Speaker, mostly our education system -

THE SPEAKER: Is that issue in the report?

MR OLANYA: Yes, and it is one of the serious issues raised by the Chairperson. 

Madam Speaker, I need the minister to brief the House on the modalities they are putting in place to address strikes in higher institutions of learning. Wherever a strikes occurs, the school is closed and activities are put on hold. That interferes a lot with the management and development of the education system. This is a very serious matter. That is the matter I want the minister to clarify on. 

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the Committee on Public Accounts for coming up with this very important report. 

This is a research training and mentorship programme that is aimed at improving careers in the School of Medicine of Makerere University. Indeed, as we have heard, there was an interruption in terms of the implementation due to the strike that occurred in this institution of higher learning. 

Madam Speaker, it is true that we had strikes as opposed to embracing problem-solving in our institutions of learning, and my ministry has put in place a committee to investigate this matter.

I want to appeal to you, Madam Speaker, that on this matter of strikes, I may not be able to give the causes right now. However, allow me - after the committee’s report - that my minister will investigate and come up with mitigating factors and measures to be put in place to reduce the strikes in higher institutions of learning - to come up with that report specifically on the issue of strikes.

Otherwise, we are grateful for this report and we have taken note, specifically the recommendations that the committee has made. 

THE SPEAKER: Remember a treasury memorandum is coming on this report, especially on the actions being taken. (Member rose_) Yes?

MR PAUL NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give to the minister, as she brings the report from the committee investigating the strikes in Makerere University, is that they should also include the conduct of the Vice Chancellor of Makerere University, Prof. Barnabas Nawangwe. This is because often times, when you hear the students’ voices, it is always connected to the acts and the way the principal or the professor is trying to run the university like a village primary school, because they run on the rules they want; and right now, the information -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Paul Nsubuga, the rules of this House are such that you do not talk about a person who cannot respond to what you are saying. This should have been aired out in the committee and you would be able to speak about it. So, for now, we cannot speak about him because he is not in this House to defend himself. 

MR PAUL NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Jesca Ababiku?

3.48
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, District Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a very good report presented. However, I am concerned about the information in the report, which says that the under-absorption of money under this project has been consistent for some years; even when there was no strike or COVID-19.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I pray that a deeper investigation be done, because there might be a likelihood of poor planning and the lack of capacity to absorb this money. 

Madam Speaker, it has become a trend with many projects in the country, especially in the areas of recruitment where people decide to pick their own relatives and friends. So, some of the staffing challenges, probably if they can be better investigated - that will reduce the corruption embedded in the recruitment under the projects in the country. Thank you so much.  

3.49
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Chairperson, for the report presented. One of the challenges has been the matter of hiring staff. This has affected or is one of the reasons responsible for the under-absorption of funds. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at public universities in this country, including Makerere University, you find so many highly qualified lecturers with PhDs and all the prerequisite qualifications, but instead of using the internal staff whose capacity sometimes is built by the universities, the universities tend to hire from other sources. I think this is one of the reasons our universities are not performing very well.

Madam Speaker, I pray that the ministry looks into the staffing position of all these universities and promote or encourage promotion of those who have qualified. We have so many lecturers in acting positions; they cannot be promoted, yet they have the qualifications. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.51
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I am a member of this committee, but since hon. Namugga has risen and there is no controversy, I request that she moves that this report be adopted, if that is permissible.

3.51
MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogoola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I move for the report to be adopted, my interest is about the challenges that are caused by procurement. This has not appeared in this report alone. The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) has been accused of delaying procurement processes; the PDA units in different entities.

Madam Speaker, it is not that the processes are not clear, but it is the individuals in these offices. Government has lost a lot of money caused by delays in procurement. Can the PPDA come up with a special report to explain to this country why procurement has become a problem? This is one of the areas where Government is losing a lot of money in delayed processes and failure to absorb money. I think it is a matter of capacity on the side of procurement officials and the PPDA. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should interest itself in the conduct of the procurement cadres and the PPDA itself.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I move that the report be adopted.  

THE SPEAKER: The PPDA is under COSASE. Can we ask COSASE - among the reports that they are looking at, can they look at the PPDA to understand what is happening in the PPDA, what mischief is there - and see how we can resolve that mischief? Is the motion of hon. Namugga seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Alum Santa, hon. Akello Lucy, hon. Obama, hon. Malende. Hon. Malende, welcome back. There is hon. Aber, hon. Anifa, hon. Dorcas, hon. Nathan, hon. Ituka, hon. Adome, hon. Phyllis - It is seconded by the whole House. 

Honourable members, I put the question that the Report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the Auditor-General’s Report on the Financial Statement of Nurture: Research Training and Mentoring Programme for Career Development of Faculty in Medical Education Partnership Initiative (MEPI) Institutions at Makerere University College of Health Sciences for the year ended 31st July 2017 and 31st July 2018, be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT ON THE NAMANVE THERMAL POWER PLANT (NTPP) FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2021

3.55
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As earlier highlighted, I will just give a brief. Article 163(4) of the Constitution mandates that we handle these reports.

Madam Speaker, the minutes and proceedings of the committee for Namanve Thermal Power Plant are duly signed and attached. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Please lay.

MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, the original report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the Auditor-General’s Special Audit Report on the Namanve Thermal Power Plant (NTPP) for the year ended 30 June 2021. The report is duly signed by the requisite number of Members. I also beg to lay the original report.

Madam Speaker, I will move straight to the introduction. On 5 October 2021, this House referred to the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government), a special audit report on the technical, legal and financial evaluation of Namanve Thermal Power Plant by the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2021.

The Methodology 

Pursuant to rule 174, the committee scrutinised the report of the Auditor-General by meeting the following stakeholders:

    1. The Accounting Officer, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development

    2. The Management of Jacobsen Uganda Power Plant Co. Ltd

    3. The Management of Uganda Electricity Generation Co. Ltd

    4. The Management of Uganda Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd

    5. The Management of Electricity Regulatory Authority

In examining the report, the committee reviewed and made reference to the following documents:

    a) The special audit report by the Auditor-General on the Namanve Thermal Power Plant.

    b) The Implementation Agreement between Government of Uganda and Jacobsen Elektro AS Norway.

    c) The opinion of the Attorney-General on the implications of the expiry of the Implementation Agreement.

    d) The Draft Power Purchase Agreement to be executed between Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited and Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited for Namanve Thermal Power Plant.

    e) Implementation Plan for Namanve Thermal Power Plant showing readiness for takeover.

    f) Concession and Assignment Agreement between Eskom Uganda Limited and UEGCL relating to Kira and Nalubaale hydroelectricity facilities.

    g) Copies of certificates of title of land on which the facility sits. 

The committee further undertook a field visit to the thermal power plant in Namanve.

The background 

On 13 April 2007, Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, entered into a build, operate and transfer Implementation Agreement (IA) with Jacobsen Elektro AS Norway for the building, operation and maintenance of a 50MW heavy fuel thermal plant at Namanve for a period of 13 years and thereafter, transfer it to the Government of Uganda in accordance with the provisions of the Implementation Agreement (IA).

The Implementation Agreement was set to expire in September 2020, and Government commenced preparations for takeover, pursuant to Section 2.1 of the Implementation Agreement by instituting a multi-institutional committee to plan for a seamless transfer of the plant to Government of Uganda, while guaranteeing continued supply of thermal electricity as and when required.

The multi-sectoral committee recommended that technical, financial and legal due diligence of the plant be carried out before handover pursuant to sections 6.1.2, 6.1.4 and 6.1.6 of the Implementation Agreement, to establish the status quo of the plant, assets and liabilities among others. 

However, this recommendation did not take place in time due to COVID-19 restrictions and lack of funds for due diligence, prompting the multi-sectoral committee to recommend an extension of the Implementation Agreement for a period of one year ending 15 September 2021, to allow Government of Uganda finalise arrangements for the due diligence study. The study was eventually done and the report presented to the ministry in August 2021. 

The study determined among others, that there were existing obligations by Government of Uganda, which had to be settled, estimated at Shs 14,427,232,228 before the handover.

The committee was informed that Government has since met all its obligations to Jacobsen Uganda Power Plant Company Limited (JUPPCL) and the handover of the plant had been scheduled for 15 February 2022. This followed a series of back-and-forth engagements -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sorry to interrupt the chairperson. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Kingsway Primary School, Agago District, represented by Minister Beatrice Akello Akori and Hon. Amos Okot. (Applause) They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Thank you, for coming. I had to interrupt you because they want to travel back to the village. You are welcome and safe journey back. (Applause)

MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the interlude.  - that the same provisions had been misinterpreted as it did not apply where Government or any defaulting party would wish to use them to avoid meeting its contractual obligations.

4.0 	Key observations and recommendations in the special audit report 

a) 	Overall plant condition and performance

The Auditor-General notes in his report that overall, the power plant was found to be in good condition based on a site visit conducted and other information reviewed. 

The Auditor-General noted some minor incidents, however, affecting performance that included the generator differential protection, nuisance tripping, which was noted to be a recurring problem, lack of formal maintenance philosophy, lack of an oil spill contingency plan, and a non-functional computerised maintenance system - Maximo. 

The committee established while interacting with the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development that Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL), a Government agency appointed by Government to operate and maintain the plant after the transfer, is already in a discussion with the original manufacturers, the Wartsila, to carry out a detailed technical analysis of the power plant. It is hoped that their report will help draw up a list of maintenance requirements. 

The energy ministry, further informed the committee that other works such as earthing, Maximo, and non-functionality of the original black start system have been reinstated by the then plant operator as a precondition before the takeover. Government hopes to net it off from outstanding money to be paid to the outgoing plant operator. 

On this, the committee notes that the plant has since been taken over by Government. Going forward, however, Government should endeavour to regularly determine the cost of repair and maintenance of such enterprises through detailed studies. This will give a clear estimation of the costs of the obligation.

b) Valuation of the plant

The Auditor-General notes in his report that the value of the Namanve thermal plant was estimated at £27.6 million after taking into account the depreciated costs at £39.15 million, on the original plant cost of £66.551 million. 

The report further notes that the land was valued at Shs 4.4 billion - the total value of the land, with additional land acquired by Jacobsen Plant Company Limited being valued at Shs shillings 800 million. This plant was initially seated on the land that was acquired by Government, but for its operations, Jacobsen did an expansion of the plant and acquired land for the expansion. 

The Auditor-General recommended that Government enters into negotiations with Jacobsen to buy off the said land and compensate the company for the improvements made.

The committee found out that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has since engaged the Chief Government Valuer to determine the actual value of the land and the developments on it before compensating the company. 

The committee recommends that in future, Government should be more exhaustive in their negotiations and undertakings to avoid ambiguity when settling obligations.

c) Land ownership 

The committee notes that one of the contentious obligations, which Jacobsen had asked for before the transfer of the plant, is compensation for the additional land acquired by the company and the lack of a clear plan by Government on how it intends to settle all the other obligations. 

While meeting Jacobsen, the committee was informed that the land initially availed to them by UETCL for use at Mutundwe was found to be inappropriate for use after a study. The next one offered at Namanve was equally found to be unsuitable for the establishment of the plant after geotechnical investigations revealed that the land was not firm enough to withstand vibrations from the machines.

The company stated that because they had already signed an Implementation Power Purchase Agreement with UETCL, and given the load shedding and the intermittency in the power supply in the country then, they found it imperative, as a matter of urgency and necessity, to acquire additional land and construct the plant to help ease the power needs of the day. 

The committee notes that although the company says they held discussions with UETCL before acquiring the additional land and were given a go-ahead, a letter seen by the committee, dated 15 June 2007 by UETCL in reply, suggests that they were not authorised to purchase any additional land. UETCL was categorical in the letter that the 3.77 acres land it had made available was adequate and that any other purchase would be too expensive. 

At this point, however, Madam Speaker, the company had already procured additional land without approval and with no corresponding provisions in the implementation agreement.

On investigating the matter further, Madam Speaker, the committee found that the additional land bought by Jacobsen for the plant is owned by a one Mr Lawrence Omulen, the current chairman, board of directors of the company, and is held by the company on lease granted by him. Apparently, because the company was foreign-owned, it could not acquire mailo land. As it is now, the plant stands on land partly owned by Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited and Jacobsen, for which they sought compensation.

The committee recommends that Government should acquire mailo interest for the said land. 

In future, Madam Speaker, Government should be more exhaustive in negotiations and thrash out every detail, for example, whether this land was a recoverable cost or part of the investment of the investor.

d) Additional investments by the Jacobsen group

The Auditor-General notes, in his report, that the management of Jacobsen submitted claims, totaling to $3,634,383, in respect to additional investments made. However, supporting documents reviewed during the audit revealed that only $2,943,810 was satisfactorily verifiable. 

The Auditor-General recommended that Government should enter negotiations with Jacobsen on how the company can be compensated. An opinion by the Attorney-General, seen by the committee on settlement of financial obligations, as determined by the Auditor-General, reads: “Settlement of financial obligations, as determined by the report of the Auditor-General, is not part of the obligation of the parties under the Implementation Agreement, and therefore, cannot be a precondition to effect the transfer of the plant, as suggested by Jacobsen. Settlement of the financial obligation is subject to a separate agreement by the parties, outside the Implementation Agreement.” 

Jacobsen, however, faulted the opinion of the Attorney-General on grounds that he is conflicted in the matter, as his law firm had represented the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited, a company that was fronted by Government to take over the plant before. 

The committee, however, did not find merit in the claims by Jacobsen since the law firm in question represented the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited long before the Attorney-General was appointed. The agreement was also for a fixed period of time and was silent on any precondition for a handover, therefore, making it untenable.

Madam Speaker, the committee, therefore, recommends that:

    1. Government should, in future, be more meticulous in drafting such agreements to leave no room for ambiguity; and

    2. Government should also endeavour to honour its obligations in time, to avoid such avoidable conflicts.

Tax obligation

The Auditor-General noted, in his report, that Jacobsen owed Government a total of Shs 4,427,136,909 in taxes, which remained outstanding at closure of the due diligence exercise. It was, however, noted that Jacobsen was also demanding Shs 299,292,530 in tax credit. 

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development informed the committee that they would ensure that any outstanding tax obligations owed are settled by the company. They have since written, in a letter seen by the committee, to Uganda Revenue Authority to ascertain any other tax obligations owed, before settling Government’s obligations to Jacobsen, in order to facilitate the transfer of the plant to Government of Uganda. 

Jacobsen, on its part, clarified that it was fully compliant, in terms of tax credit and NSSF obligations. The committee tasked the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to follow up on these two essential statutory obligations. 

The committee then went ahead to recommend that in future, Government should ensure that all obligations are met, as stipulated in the agreements from both parties, before negotiations for takeover. 

Legal due diligence 

The report of the Auditor-General noted significant compliance with the legal requirements in the Implementation Agreement and other provisions, save for issues such as absence of maintenance records and a non-functional maintenance system, ownership of land on which the plant is located, as well as the actual asset list and inventory list, as required by the Generation and Sale Licence of 2020. 

The committee recommends that:

    1. Government should take interest and close all non-compliance loopholes, as they are prone to abuse; and

    2. With regard to land and buildings, which were valued during the due diligence exercise, the Government should seek the approval of the Chief Government Valuer and the true value before entering such negotiations for compensation in future. 

Takeover

From the due diligence report that covered the technical, financial and legal aspects of the plant, there were existing liabilities by Government of Uganda to a tune of Shs 14,427,232,228, which had to be settled. In that regard, Jacobsen had insisted that Government of Uganda had to, first, settle all its obligations before the transfer of the plant, despite a transfer agreement being in place. 

The company contends that expiry of the Implementation Agreement without full payment by Government of Uganda would constitute a dispute. Government, on its part, had committed, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, that it would redeem its obligations in the second quarter of the financial year, and advised that Government proceeds to conclude the transfer of the plant to Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited.

From the foregoing, therefore, the committee advises Government to always settle its obligations in a timely manner. 

Madam Speaker, the committee also made general observations as follows:

    1. Jacobsen was originally foreign-owned and has since been transferred into a local company through sales of shares to Ugandans. It is, therefore, a fully Ugandan-owned company which has built capacity on the continent in this sector. Such companies ought to be supported to realise the value in building such expertise and capability, which could, in future, be exported to generate the much needed foreign exchange and foreign specialised wealth. 

The committee also observed that whereas the Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited is a Government enterprise, it is a company, which is subject to the provisions of the PPDA and regulations. These were omitted in granting it concession by Government, without giving other companies, including Jacobsen, a chance to compete for the job. 

Owing to the monopoly given to Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited, it is apparent that Government could obtain a lower bid, as indeed agreed by Jacobsen in its submission.

Madam Speaker, the committee then made the following recommendations in respect to those observations:

    1. Government should always undertake efforts to promote local companies, which have demonstrated expertise and capability in the specialised and technical areas like in this sector. Companies like Uganda Electricity Generation Company and Jacobsen, should be supported and encouraged to compete favourably. 

    2. It is in the considered opinion of the committee that Jacobsen, which had quoted a comparatively lower cost to run the plant, be allowed to continue with the job. For example, Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited quoted a startup cost of $30.03/MWh, a charge that Jacobsen did not need to incur. Similarly, Jacobsen quoted a declared capacity charge of $6.60/MWh against the $7.08/MWh of UEGCL over and above the market price. 

    3. Government and indeed all parties should respect and follow the PPDA and Regulations, for they were not made in vain. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the global energy needs are continuing to diversify and evolve as the market for renewable energy production has become more competitive and cost-efficient in comparison to traditional fossil fuels. As a country, we should work to reduce greenhouse gas emissions; we should have a significant investment in the development of renewable energy, infrastructure, and also technologies. 

Thermal power plants are expensive in terms of fuel and maintenance. And as a result, the emphasis for Uganda should be investment on more environmentally-efficient energy solutions, including wind, solar and natural gas, which are comparatively cheaper in the long-run. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

As I earlier on said, this report is equally signed by almost three quarters of the Members. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. You have heard the report. (Interjection) Hon. Christine, would you like to say something? (Interjection) Yes?

4.23
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Thank you very much for the report and we recognise that Uganda is moving now towards the appreciation of renewable and clean energy. 

However, based on what we have been presented with, it is evident that in most cases, we allocate areas where these investors can establish their investments without thorough environmental and social impact assessments. From the report, you can see that as Uganda, we allocated Mutundwe and Namanve. However, based on the investors’ geologists, they found that the land we had allocated them was not adequate, and could not accommodate the vibrations form the investment. 

It came to our mind that this is the right time that we should fast-track the training of geologists that we have in Uganda because when you look at the challenge of flooding in Mbale Industrial Area, the same applies. The investors come thinking that we have done a thorough job to allocate them the best places, yet these are places that are prone to flooding and cannot accommodate the geology of the area. 

Additionally, we have not understood the worth of the company. Was it making profits, so that when we take it on we shall make profit? When we carried out a benchmark in Tanzania, when such companies are handing over to government, there is a group of locals who are readily trained to carry on the implementation and the activities of the investment. 

However, here we are, our youth are looking for employment and we have not seen how the locals are going to benefit. It may not be feasible for us to know the shareholders of the company, but it may be of use at the moment to see and know who the shareholders are, and the rate at which our youth are joining the employment, especially now that we are promoting the green jobs concept.

There has been a comparison on clean energy and renewable energy. And, the report is recommending that maintenance of the machinery leading us to this energy is very expensive. However, even wind, solar and the rest are also very expensive. 

We would like to know, and as well, prepare ourselves as we transition, which exact energy we should promote because we thought these are cheaper and sustainable; and we have not got this out of the report clearly. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Christine. There was actually a forceful takeover of this company by UEGCL and they did not consider the two years of COVID-19; they only considered one year, which I think was unfair. Yes, Hon. Akol; do you have a motion?

4.27
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the chairperson of the committee, and the committee members, for the report. However, before I move, I see a contradiction on page 4. The committee is telling us that Shs 14.4 billion was realised, to be paid to the company. 

In the entire statement, they say that the committee was informed that Government has since met all its obligations. At the same time, at the end, the committee is saying the money is not yet paid; I see some contradiction there, that I want the chairperson of the committee to clarify. 

Madam Speaker, in future, we need to safeguard investments that we want to transfer to Government, so that somebody does not come from outside pretending to be an investor in our country, and at the end of the day, transfers it back to our people or to the Government of Uganda; then in the middle of it, the person changes to become a national company of Uganda, and demands that the same project should be handed over to them. 

However, in this case, we have to look properly; if we have not, within the period, trained the people who are able to run the project, then we are left with no option, but to make sure that we can take the recommendation of the committee. But going forward, we should look into that. In the middle of it, is this company training our local people in the country, who can run a similar project when they leave the country? In this case, we cannot do much because we have not been monitoring the project. So, we do not know whether we have the local people who can run the project, and we should, therefore, not risk now. 

In future, however, I think it is important that we safeguard people who come as investors to the country, and are going to build, operate and then hand over to our Government, but in the end they say, “We are a local company; we want to take over ourselves.” I think we have to be serious about this and monitor investments before they  end. Thank you. 

4.30
Ms santa alum (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Allow me to also thank the committee for coming up with this good report. 

First, Government always enters into agreements, which require counterpart funding. However, sometimes at the end of it all, you find that Government is not meeting its obligation. This is very serious. By the time Government invests in a project of this nature, I want to believe that it has a planning unit and will have planned. 

Madam Speaker, we always find ourselves incurring a lot of costs. For example, you see money changing and it keeps increasing. 

Secondly, the Attorney-General, for the first time, really impressed me by stating it categorically clearly on page 8, that this business of entering into agreements and then later you do your own things, should not be tolerated. I want to thank him for that. However, I want clarification as to why the committee has not followed suit. 

Finally, on the issue of local content, I am somehow impressed that this company was given to the local people. This is what we have been crying for. However, I do not know whether we have some Ugandans who are trained. 

At one time, as a committee we visited - I think Ghana – and for any foreign company, which comes in, the key issue that they must clearly present, is training the local people; so that when they leave, we have the local people trained to technically manage such a good and big programme. I beg to submit. Thank you. 

4.32
Mr henry kibalya (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to join colleagues to thank the chairperson and the committee for the good work done. 

The committee has given us good recommendations. And, with that background, unless somebody has a serious amendment, I wish to move a motion that the House adopts the report of the committee as it has been –(Interjections)

4.33
Mr Isaac Otimgiw (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I think the committee has presented a very important report with issues, which affect most areas of our country. For that reason, I do not second the motion, which was brought on the Floor by our honourable colleague. I still feel that we have some input to make to this report.

The Speaker: What is your input?

Mr otimgiw: My input, Madam Speaker, is majorly that the Energy Amendment Bill, which was passed in this House, and is due to be brought back, cannot be brought back any sooner. This is because the issue of monopoly is what is affecting our energy industry in this matter. 

The Uganda Electricity Distribution Company and the generation company are taking advantage of their monopoly in this industry. As we can see in this report, in the recommendations of the committee, their names have again come up.

The Speaker: So, are you suggesting we merge them?

Mr otimgiw: I am suggesting that we merge the companies because they all almost do the same thing. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you. The issue of monopoly denied small companies the chance to get capacity building. 

4.34
Ms lucy akello (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to say something little about this report. Also, allow me to add my voice to thank the committee for doing a good job. 

Madam Speaker, I associate myself with the recommendations that were made by the committee, especially those appearing on page 11 of the report. I also observe that JUPPCL, which was formerly foreign, is now a local company. 

As a country, we need to put a lot of effort in local content and develop our capacity as a country because when many of these foreign companies come, they take away the knowledge and money, which they came with. Therefore, I am in total agreement and support of the recommendations of the committee.

However, most importantly, under recommendation three on page 11, where Government and indeed all parties should respect and follow the ppda and regulations, Madam Speaker, following your directive to COSASE, I take this as something very urgent and we need to work on it. As the vice chairperson, this is something we are going to follow up. Thank you. 

4.36
Dr charles ayume (NRM, Koboko Municipality, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the excellent report presented. 

Mine is just to resound the fact that 2003, 2007 and 2011 were quite black spots in the history of the energy sector. Load shedding was at its peak and so, I think Government took that bold step to come in with thermal energy as an emergency measure. These emergency measures bow down to the fact that we do not plan or forecast; thermal electricity is the most expensive. 

I think going forward, instead of these knee-jerk reactions, how can we forecast 30, 40 or 50 years from now? Build infrastructure that will not be able to be outstripped by demand. We are at the equator. Solar harvesting - solar energy, which is being done in Europe - for them, the panels actually turn where the sun is. Here, we are at the equator and have the solar. Why don't we go into solar farms? I saw one on about 50 acres in Busia. I think that is the way to go. We can get the same 10 megawatts from solar farms. Thank you.

4.38
Dr jane pacuto (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to thank the committee for the report presented. 

Madam Speaker, I want to agree with honourable members here who have posed concern about the delay of the thermal solar project in Namanve. 

As a Committee on Finance in the last Parliament, we took a visit to the Namanve plant in Kampala Industrial Area. One of our findings was that many investors are not taking up the plots that have been given to them because of the delay in this thermal solar project. 

The other finding was that Government does not seem to be “speaking to each other”. NEMA had put sort of an embargo on this because they were saying that this was in a wetland and the project could not continue. 

It is paramount that Government coordinates its interventions because these are the same entities in the same Government. However, you will find that when a project has been approved and the other side of Government says no, you cannot continue. I think this is delaying services to our people, and delaying the growth and development of this country; it needs to be urgently addressed. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Government, you need to speak to each other.

4.40
MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Namanve Thermal Power Plant is in Mukono District. I want to first of all appreciate the report from PAC, but also add this information about the acquisition of land in Namanve Industrial Park.

The Uganda Investment Authority normally has locations depending on the kind of work you are going to do or ability of the machines. I wonder why, before allocating the thermal plant activity or transaction, it did not first do a search before allocating the land leading to vibrations. 

Secondly, I also want to ask whether this thermal plant attracts employment for my local people around Namanve. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Honourable from Dokolo, Miss Uganda -(Laughter)

4.41
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for declaring me a permanent Miss Uganda. (Laughter) 

I would like to make a comment on paragraph C. I think there are so many issues here which we need to clear out. First of all, we are talking about a Government company vis-a-vis a privately owned company although shares have been bought in. 

However, for some of us who fought with the economy when it was almost 80 per cent in the hands of foreigners, in order to transfer it to the hands of the locals, it was not easy. Sometimes, it appears as if the locals have bought shares in a previously owned foreign company. However, when you look deeper - what the lawyers would call opening the veil - you will find that deep inside, there has not been much local component in the new face of the company. 

Therefore, Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to caution colleagues and this institution of Parliament that we must encourage our own companies. That would help us to develop something, which is ours. Power is so important that if we are to let it go into the hands of foreigners, they can cause darkness in the country; it is a big security risk. 

We should make sure that we strengthen our own, which will help us recruit our own people in those companies that we are actually trying to bring down. 

Madam Speaker, in that paragraph, which I am citing; paragraph C, here is the Chairman of the Board of Directors selling his own private land to the company where he is the chairperson and the leader of the policy formulation in the company. He sells his own land to the company and this matter has not been cleared here, and there are so many other issues which are hanging. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, we can quickly approve this report. However, we must be mindful that there are so many errors, which have been cited. We must clean it; we cannot run away from it. It is obvious and we cannot hide it. I think we need to dig deeper and maybe we need to be guided by the legal team, because here you are, we are talking about a letter dated 15 June barring the company from further acquisition of land. 

How did they manage to get more land when this particular section did not allow them? I think we have to be straight because nobody else can help us if we cannot help ourselves.

In addition, why is West Nile in darkness in this era? We have already signed a contract with this company - they are called elektro something. Even yesterday, I tried to call here and there, I was told that there is general load shedding. Arising from where? Can we do something about Karuma Dam if it can possibly save us from the crisis at the moment? 

Madam Speaker, we have spent a lot of money, we have invested so much in power, but we are not seeing the results of that investment. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Chairperson, can you respond to some of the questions? Before you respond, I had a meeting today with the Members of Parliament of West Nile headed by the chairman of West Nile, together with the energy minister and Electromaxx, which is the company that provides power to West Nile.

We agreed that there should be a motion in this House tomorrow in regard to electricity in West Nile because lack of electricity has caused a lot of insecurity. It has affected the health centres, education and everything. When you look at the providers of power in that area, it is like they are coached on what to say.

They say, for the last one week, we have been okay and yet the Members are saying there is no power. Therefore, we will have a motion here tomorrow so that we have that issue resolved.

It is only this House that can pronounce whether a company can continue or not. I want to tell you, ministers; it is this House that can only make a decision, good or bad. Chair -

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank colleagues for the observations and compliments that have been raised. Hon. Akol raised a concern on page 4 of Shs 14.427 billion, which he said looked inconsistent on the other page. 

This was an estimate of the outstanding obligation. At the end of it all, when you go to page 10 after assessment by Jacobsen, Jacobsen insisted that the implementation agreement had expired. Therefore, in that case, they cannot transfer the project to Government of Uganda before their obligations are met.

You will recall that the 14 which was raised on page 4 was what was formally agreed on as the outstanding obligations. Other than that, they were prepared to institute a legal dispute resolution on that note. That 14 is what was agreed upon, and I think it was harmonised and resolved for payment. 

Hon. Lucy raised the concern of local content. Madam Speaker, as you will read in our general observations, Jacobsen is one of the private companies that has moved forward in this sector. They trained personnel and our own UEGCL took over some of those personnel who had been trained. They have also moved ahead in other various energy-related directions. I think they are one of the leading local consultancy agencies as far as the power sector is concerned. 

We are also reliably informed that they have even moved into the oil sector, and continue to provide expertise within the oil sector. It is actually one of the local companies that have continued to build the capacity of our local industries. 

The honourable Member of Parliament for Mukono raised a concern as to why there was a shift from Namanve to where the company finally settled. We were told and as per the report, that geotechnical surveys were done on the areas that had been allocated to them in Namanve and found unsuitable. That is what informed their movement to an area that met the minimum requirement as far as the environmental impact assessment was concerned, but also in terms of suitability. 

As far as employing the local people around there is concerned, I want to believe that those with the technical expertise like I have already highlighted - maybe some of those people are absorbed and taken over by UEGCL - might be the Mukono people. I am not very sure, but as per the technicalities and requirements of this project, in particular, I know that they have continued to grow the Ugandan local content as experts. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister?

4.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to appreciate the report of the committee. What they highlighted in their report and the inadequacies at the time, were truly inadequacies that we had. 

We have to look back - when was this thermal plant put in place? It was at the time when this country was literally running dark and Government had to make a decision to actually have a thermal plant put in place at that time, to meet our energy needs. 

Over time, we have built the capacity to generate power through sustainable means. In fact, the generation of hydroelectric power has gone up since then. The renewal of the concession for the generation of thermal electricity power was actually occasioned by the need to have the plant running. It reached a time when the concession came to its logical end, and in the power purchase agreement, it was very clear at a certain time, that that thermal plant would revert to Government. That is how it got to Government. 

The transfer was guided within the provisions of our laws of Uganda made by this Parliament. At the time of the transfer, Jacobsen was registered as a foreign company, but in the provisions of the concession, the plant was supposed to be handed over to Uganda. That is how this came about. 

This thermal plant, as we talk, has a sustainable generation of electricity through renewable sources, where we are projecting to have more power than we are consuming. We are now producing up to 1,370 plus megawatts against a peak demand of about 800 megawatts. That is why in Parliament last time, we were asking to be allowed some resources for dimmed energy. 

Madam Speaker, this thermal plant is still necessary as a standby source of energy, should anything happen. It is a backup and it is not operating 100 per cent. It is operating at a minimum, just to keep the engines running. There is no much business on that thermal plant now. Even if we gave it to the private sector, they may not be able to adequately generate the profits that they expect because it is a standby. We are bringing in 600 Megawatts come March next year, on top of the 1,300 Megawatts. It means we will have more dimmed energy unless we perfect the distribution and the utilisation of electricity in this country. (Interruption) 

MR BALIMWEZO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Planning is very critical and this is a priority project of Government that required planning.

I have seen Government constructing expensive installations on land it does not own and eventually, compensation becomes so high. So, why did you fail to plan so that we spend monies that are basically unfair?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, I had a chance to go to West Nile in the Ninth and Tenth Parliaments. Indeed, West Nile is generating power using thermal power and at 8 o’clock, they switch off power because they do not want to consume fuel. 

Madam Speaker, there is a Catholic Church, which runs a radio station called Pacis. There are white priests at the parish and they are generating power using solar energy. They were saying they could serve West Nile with power if these people could procure power from them. Maybe those from West Nile will correct me where I go wrong, but by the time we left West Nile, they were willing to sell power at a cheaper cost to West Nile.

Now, we would like to find out from the honourable minister what is making him fail to get an agreement with the Catholic Church, which is community-based, to give power that can last throughout the time, and it is a bit cheaper than spending on fuel? 

Lastly, honourable minister, a dam was constructed at Karuma and we see power running up to Kisoro. We know the distance between Kampala and Kisoro or Jinja. Why aren’t you planting lines from Karuma going up to West Nile? Where is the problem? Is it crossing the bridge? Can you explain all that? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you said there is too much power being produced. So, why do we still have load shedding even in Kampala? (Applause)

MR SSEWUNGU: They are producing more than we need. 

THE SPEAKER: Why do we have load shedding?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, hon. Ssewungu, for giving me the opportunity to give more information. 

THE SPEAKER: Is he the one who gave you the opportunity? Sit!

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I am giving very critical information, Madam Speaker, which will help all of us. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to give the information to this House. (Applause)

I heard the minister talking about that thermal plant; that it is a standby just in case of anything. This House passed money for the solar project in Kololo, which they have said is working effectively and supplies a lot of energy that complements hydro-electric power.

In addition, we recently passed the budget that is going to produce solar power in Nakasongola, which is a huge project. Why don’t we use that solar power that is free since it uses sunlight such that we do not spend more money on thermal power that is extremely expensive? We should support solar power. Let me tell you, countries that are using solar power save a lot than the electricity that we are talking about. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nyakikongoro, when did we pass the money?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: In this recent budget. 

THE SPEAKER: First, ask the minister: Do you have the money? You ask him the question. Honourable minister, there is a question from Hon. Nyaki. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Actually, Madam Speaker, it is an issue of planning because – I am saying so because – Madam Speaker, give me the opportunity –

THE SPEAKER: Now, let me tell you. The money that you passed here – the one that was supposed to go to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, to where - has been cut by eight per cent. So, the issue is - he even does not have the money. He is only trying to cover the face of Government. (Laughter) 

Leader of the Opposition?

5.01
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, as you have alluded to having redeemed energy through these thermal power plants, I am really shocked because that energy is very expensive to produce in terms of fuel. Talk about Jacobsen Uganda Power Plant; that is a guzzler. Even before it was locally-owned and transferred into a local company, we had been grappling with the expenses that would go into fuel. 

In terms of fuel and maintenance, these thermal power plants are very expensive. Government, I would implore you to advise that we shift and invest in, say, wind energy. We have lots of wasted wind. You go to Mt Elgon or Kapchorwa – lots of wind. We should turn to solar energy or even natural gas as it is actually mentioned in the report. 

However, for the minister to shower praises on the excess energy when it is very expensive to produce, I think, we had better take counsel and guidance from the committee’s report. Couldn’t we go for cleaner energy? We could have environmentally-friendly and efficient solutions like that of wind. You know this climate change is now a global challenge and as we grapple with it, we should minimise greenhouse gas emissions through such cleaner energy. 

Lastly, honourable minister, why would Government flout its own laws – Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) and regulations – that you could give monopoly to the Uganda Electricity Generation Company against a local company, Jacobsen. I think, is a vice that you ought to equally condemn. 

Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you Leader of the Opposition. Honourable minister, do you still have anything to say?

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Madam Speaker, we are actually talking the same. (Laughter) Hold on. When you were talking, I was not arguing. 

THE SPEAKER: We are talking the same in terms of? 

MR OKAASAI: We are talking the same in terms of going clean energy. Most of the power that we are producing and using is hydro, which is clean. We are promoting the use of solar and that is clean energy.

We are promoting cheaper sources of electricity as Leader of the Opposition has rightly said because thermal is extremely expensive and it pollutes the environment, unlike the other sources. We are exploiting energy mix mainly using sustainable and clean energy sources. That is why I am saying that we are actually talking the same. 

THE SPEAKER: Are we talking the same in terms of Buy Uganda, Build Uganda (BUBU)?

MR OKAASAI: I need to come to that. 

5.05
MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, District Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and honourable minister for giving way. 

Whereas we are promoting clean energy, you know that we have spent money on dams to construct hydro energy. The energy that is being produced at Achwa is not actually being taken to the people and we continuously pay a lot of money over that energy. 

Madam Speaker, the energy is not being transmitted to people because some private person was given land, which was previously owned by Government, and the person has stopped Government from extending power to the people. 

The clarification I seek from you is: What is going to happen to the dams for which we have paid so much money and have failed to transmit power to the people, yet we are promoting clean energy? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister?  

MR OKAASAI: She is right. The ministry desires to get that power transmitted and many times we have come to this House to ask for money to do that. We have not got that money. So, how do you construct a transmission line without money? It is planned and you have not given me the money.

Now, coming to procurement, we can discuss how to streamline it, if there was a mistake made in procurement. On the reversal of the thermal power plant to Government, if there was a mistake made, let us discuss it. On procurement, as concluded by the committee, that is where we need to discuss.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all of you have given your contributions and this report will go to the relevant ministry for a treasury memorandum. I want you to take, seriously, the recommendations of the committee, plus the amendments by the Members. 

I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the Auditor-General’s special audit report on the Namanve Thermal Power Plant for the year ending June 2021, be adopted with amendments. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON THE UNITED NATIONS POPULATION FUND PROJECT (UNFP), IMPLEMENTED BY THE NATIONAL POPULATION COUNCIL (NPC) FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2020

THE SPEAKER: Can you summarise? There is only one amendment. 

5.09
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker -(Ms Kabanda_)

THE SPEAKER: Yes?

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As far as I recall, Hon. Ssegona was the chairman of that committee, deputised by hon. Basalirwa. May he report on the fate of his chairperson and deputy as he proceeds? Is it procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Hajjat, you are a member of my committee, that is, the Appointments Committee. Once I delegate to you, you become the chairperson at that particular time. He is delegated and it was formally communicated to me..

MS AISHA KABANDA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.09
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for that wise guidance. I am here to execute the mandate of Parliament, and on behalf of the Public Accounts Committee. I also want to remind you that I am also the whip of that committee. When my bosses are not around, I take charge to present in the interest of the House.
Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Chairman, for today, take charge.

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minutes of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) for this last presentation, have also been attached, and I beg to lay the minutes and proceedings of this report on the Table.

This is a report of the Committee on the Public Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report on the United Nations Population Fund Project implemented by the National Population Council for the year ended 31 December 2020. The original report signed by majority members, is also hereby presented and laid on the Table.

Madam Speaker, as part of the introduction - this is a very brief report. It will take me a very short time to conclude.  

On 5 October 2021, Parliament referred the Auditor-General's Report of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFP), implemented by the National Population Council (NPC) for the year ended 31 December 2020.

The report that attracted an unqualified opinion by the Auditor-General covered the accounting statements comprising the Combined Delivery Report (CDR) presented, funding authorisation and certificate of expenditure, and a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory information by UNFPA.

Methodology

Pursuant to rule 174, the committee scrutinised the report of the Auditor-General and met with the accounting officer. The committee further reviewed and made reference to the Audit Report on the UNFPA Programme, Completion Report of the 8th Government of Uganda/UNFPA Country Programme Evaluation Report, proof of accountability of uncredited funds and details of the unstamped vouchers.

Observations and recommendations 

Payment of ineligible VAT

The Audit Report noted that management made VAT payments of Shs 17,308,575 in respect of supply of hotel services, media broadcasting, and supply of assorted items contrary to section 24(7) of the VAT Act, which requires taxable supplies made to a Government institution by a contractor executing an aid-funded project, to be deemed paid by the Government institution. The gross amount paid, inclusive of VAT from all the supplies, was done without considering the provisions of both the IP agreement and the VAT Act.

While meeting with the committee, management acknowledged the anomaly in VAT payments and informed the meeting that it was a mistake on their part to have charged a wrong budget line and instead paid VAT to service providers and not to Uganda Revenue Authority. They further informed the committee that Shs 17,308,575 being the VAT paid in error in respect of the various supplies, was refunded to UNFPA.

Although the money was refunded, the committee notes that this act is in violation of the VAT Act and in breach of the IP agreement. 

Management should ensure that internal financial controls are put in place to avoid such occurrences in the future.

The committee notes that although the Auditor-General classifies his report on the entity as “unqualified”, the report raised a number of issues that were not complied with, some re-occurring from the previous audits. They included:

    1. Failure to stamp vouchers, "Stamp Paid";

2. 	Delay to release money by the partner, leading to delayed implementation of activities;

3. 	Inadequate financial control procedures concerning accountability statements; and

4. 	Uncredited transfers/unaccounted-for funds, in the reconciliation.
 
Although management informed the committee that measures have been put in place to address the reoccurring audit queries, the committee notes that failure to stamp vouchers as “paid” presents a high risk of presenting such documents to support future fictitious payments.

The committee made a recommendation that a forensic audit be done to determine how many vouchers were not stamped, and the corresponding amount of money, to avoid re-occurrence of the same in future.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

This report is also duly signed by majority of the members. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson.

5.17
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very straightforward opinion on the agency we are trying to investigate. The issue which has come out very clearly is the issue of corporate governance. 

We had talked about bringing up a law or framework in the last Parliament, that would regulate the behaviour, of those who manage the different agencies - whether private or Government-owned. We have all these problems because these regulations are lacking. It does not matter how many audits you will do. As long as the practice is not controlled, we are likely to have many agencies abused. I beg to request that maybe the commission and the relevant committees should come up with a law to regulate the management of the various institutions we have in the country. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. These are direct issues. I will put the question to that effect because it is only one issue that concerns Government. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on the Public Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report on the United Nations Population Fund Project implemented by the National Population Council for the year ended 31 December 2020, be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MR BONIFACE OKOT: Madam Speaker, allow me take this opportunity to thank you and colleagues who have supported us in these reports, but also as per your earlier communication, when we were starting, and your citing of Article 163(iv), I would like to inform you, that if it pleases you, by next week, we shall be ready to load the House with our health committee reports. Thank you, very much. 

THE SPEAKER: We will be glad to receive your reports. We want the Public Accounts Committee (Central), the Public Accounts Committee (Local Governments) and COSASE, and all the other committees that have work, to bring reports to the House.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT 
TO PRIORITISE THE STATE OF THE YOUTH IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Friday, 5 August 2022, I officiated at the opening of the Youth Parliament, which was hosted in this Chamber. I undertook to allow Hon. Boniface Henry Okot, a Youth Representative for the North an opportunity to move a motion in this House. He is here. So, kindly move your motion, which will be debated together with a statement presented by Hon. Betty Amongi, the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development.

MR BONIFACE OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker pursuant to rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure – (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, you had guided the House that the motion by the youth representative would have to come first and then we discuss it together with the information from the gender ministry, but looking at the House, I notice that the issue of the youth is so important.

I am sure the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development will not feel comfortable seeing this motion being read when the House is not very well represented. And, some people do not seem to have had lunch like me; the sugar levels are getting low.  

I would like to be guided, whether it is procedurally right that a very important motion that concerns the youth of this country, is presented to the House, when it is scantily represented this afternoon and -

THE SPEAKER: One important thing is that “Mama” is not a youth; she is a senior youth; the rest of the youth are here and ready to receive the motion. So, go ahead and read your motion. Hon. Maurice Kibalya, you will debate the motion. I know you are still a youth.

MR BONIFACE OKOT: Thank you for the guidance. Pursuant to rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure, I rise to move a motion for a Resolution of Parliament urging Government to prioritise the state of the youth in Uganda. 

The motion reads thus:

“WHEREAS Article 79(i) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, bestows upon Parliament the power to legislate on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS the National Development Plan (III) recognises the need to harness the youthful population as a pre-condition for attaining the country's development aspirations, including reducing youth unemployment, exploiting the potential demographic dividend from the abundant labour force and future demand, by streamlining and reforming youth and women employment programmes, to help young Ugandans find employment, it further puts a priority on skills and vocational development in all sectors; 

AWARE the Government has invested significant resources to facilitate employment, livelihood and entrepreneurship through the various strategic policies and development initiatives like “Emyooga,” for supporting non-agricultural enterprises and the Parish Development Model, agricultural enterprises and the Uganda Development Bank, a special program for the youth as a post COVID-19 youth enterprise support;

FURTHER AWARE THAT the youth who are between the age of 18 to 30 years constitute 19 per cent of the population and are a very large group of the productive workforce of the population yet youth labour underutilisation is still high at 43.5 per cent; 

RECALLING THAT this House has previously debated, documented and passed some resolutions to address the various challenges affecting the youth and also cognisant of the positive strides by Government to address challenges affecting the youth through initiating employment and skilling reforms, promoting youth health and education reforms, instituting youth participation in decision making, while paying attention to gender equality and encouraging climate governance to mitigate the effects of climate change;

CONCERNED THAT the quality of education remains generally low and mostly expensive, characterised by free education programmes of Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education; that are not necessarily free, coupled with a high rate of school dropouts especially in the post COVID-19 owing to high rates of teenage mothers and a mismatch between skills required for labour markets and knowledge produced by training institutions;

NOTING THAT there was an increase in the proportion of working persons purely in subsistence agriculture, due to COVID-19; 

FURTHER NOTING THAT while Government has invested a lot of resources to facilitate agricultural financing across the value chain, the structure and the nature of such schemes, and limited access to information has made it difficult for the youth to access;

RECOGNISING THAT access to health services continues to be a burden to the youthful citizens, with an increasing cost of healthcare, and a rise in out-of-pocket expenses, with only 3.9 per cent of the population having access to health insurance;

FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT there is limited structured Government support and policies for start-ups, science and technology-based innovations and initiatives that have the potential of transforming lives, providing local solutions and creating employment;

NOTING THAT sustainable development is the target of Government’s development programme, and climate financing remains dismally low in Uganda. In the Financial Year 2022/2023 national budget, only Shs 628 billion has been apportioned for actions to mitigate and adapt to climate change;

AND FURTHER NOTING THAT, 37.2 per cent of climate change and disaster victims are aged between 5 to 18 years while an additional 37.4 are aged between 18 to 49;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that; 

    (i) Government scales up interventions for youth in skilling, employment and livelihoods by among others, ensuring that all forms of financing are significant, accessible and affordable with a dedicated and ring-fenced quota for the youth. 

    (ii) Government ensures that all social services in health and education are youth responsive. 

    (iii) Government deliberately, meaningfully and adequately involves the youth in decision-making at various hierarchies of Government.

    (iv) Government runs up climate change governance initiatives, while involving the youth.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Imat Cecilia Ogwal, hon. Amos, hon. Phyllis - It is seconded by the whole House. hon. Okot, can you speak to your motion very briefly?

MR BONIFACE OKOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. August is a very special month for the youth internationally since it is a time that we celebrate the International Youth Day; every 12 August. I want to beseech you, Madam Speaker and Members of this House, to consider reserving time every August to debate a motion on the annual state of the youth in Uganda, and also receive reports of actions taken by the responsible Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) on the resolutions concerning the youth in this House. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to comment on the statement by our able minister regarding the International Youth Day by stating that we appreciate the work of the gender ministry to the young people. 

However, I want to express my utter disappointment, particularly in the shift of the International Youth Day from its internationally gazetted date of 12 August to 26 August 2022. It must be remembered that this celebration is an annual calendar event that Government knows exists. We are here talking about an international event, not necessarily a national event, and the rationale for the shift of the date is purely on account of unavailable funding. 

In my opinion, it shows a lack of prioritisation of youth issues, yet we have celebrated these events under very restrictive conditions of COVID-19 in 2020 and 2021. Therefore, I want to demand, on behalf of the young people, that this date be celebrated on its internationally gazetted date of 12 August and the gender ministry and the finance minister here should also make commitments to the young people of this country, that they are not forgotten. 

Back to my motion, Madam Speaker, on the development of this particular motion, I want to salute members of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Youth Affairs, and our very progressive partners who are in the Gallery. The spirit of this motion is tied to our commitment to ensure that the aspirations of everyday youth are solicited, aggregated and presented at the highest levels of decision-making.

In acknowledgement of our constitutional mandate of legislation, appropriation, oversight and representation, we held various consultations with sections of young people, including the National Youth Council, youth councillors, Uganda National Students’ Association, University guild leaders, youth in political parties, youth in civil society organisations, youth in formal and informal employment, the youth in rural and urban spaces, among many other groups. 

We developed the National State of the Youth Report, 2022 and the Youth Legislative Agenda, which is for five years - 2020 to 2026 - to guide and provide youth legislative direction over the next five years. 

Last Friday also, chaired by you on 5 August 2022, the Parliament of Uganda, under the correct stewardship of the Rt Hon. Speaker, also hosted the annual National Youth Parliament 2022. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the resolutions of the National Youth Parliament, 2022, which was conducted here. The title here is, “Resolutions of the Fifth National Youth Parliament”. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Please lay and Clerk, that should be captured. 

MR BONIFACE OKOT: Madam Speaker, I also have the National State of The Youth Report, 2022. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Please lay.

MR BONIFACE OKOT: Madam Speaker, these documents are linked to the overall strategic framework of Parliament of Uganda whose overall goal is to legislate for the people for sustainable development and democracy in Uganda. 

Following these multiple stakeholder consultations with the youth, we noted and summarised the youth challenges into four core themes, and made recommendations for interventions of Government. They include:

    1. The question of the effectiveness of Government interventions for youth employment and better livelihoods;

    2. The question of the responsiveness of social services in health and education in meeting the needs of the youth;

    3. The question of the meaningfulness of youth participation in decision-making and governance, while cognisant of gender equality; and 

    4. The question of deliberate youth involvement in climate change governance.

I will go to question one. 

Madam Speaker, on how effective the interventions of Government for youth employment and better livelihoods are. The UN defines a youth as a person between the ages of 15 and 24. The African Youth Charter, which is a continental framework, defines a youth as an individual between 15 to 35 years, while the Uganda National Youth Policy defines a youth as a person aged between 15 to 30 years, and recognises the youth as a heterogeneous group.

Constitutionally, a youth in Uganda is a person between the ages of 18 to 30 years. “Youth”, however, is best understood as a period of transition from the dependence of childhood to the independence of adulthood. Going by these definitions, we can resolve that all Members in this House are either youth or Old Boys (OBs) and Old Girls (OBs) of the youth or better still, senior youth, including Atat Cecilia Ogwal, hence, the need to support these pro-youth interventions without reservations. 

It should also be noted that Uganda has one of the youngest populations in the world, with 78 per cent of our population below the age of 30 years, representing a significant development potential, and if left untapped, could turn into a major development challenge. Uganda’s national unemployment rate is currently 9.2 per cent. The unemployment rate for youth aged 18 to 30 years is 13.3 per cent.

Following the interruptions of COVID-19, the unemployment rates have increased. A majority of those who are employed are underemployed, working in risky, non-rewarding jobs that cannot afford a decent living. The greatest generational need for the contemporary young person is to tackle poverty through employment and livelihood enhancement interventions, be it a rural, urban or even a ghetto youth. 

The youth demand that Government reconsiders its focus to meet the 21st century needs of the youth in the following five strategic sectors that are best placed to accelerate employment of the youth in Uganda. 

Sector one: Commercial agriculture 

While they acknowledge and appreciate the existence of agricultural financing, the young people demand that Government addresses the limitedness in accessibility and unaffordability of financing for agriculture. Government must include aspects of support for mechanisation or agro-technology to ensure agriculture is not only rain-fed, but integrate irrigation and fertiliser use. Of concern is also access to markets and technical support to youth agribusiness and agro-startups.

Our recommendations are that Government should ensure that:

    a) There is clarity on whether the youth quota in the Parish Development Model of 30 per cent is on the funds available or on the youth membership of the enterprise groups;

    b) The Parish Development Model, being an agricultural financing, must be cognisant of the planting seasons so that support is timely. We have learned, as young people from previous Government agricultural interventions, that offering agricultural inputs off season is a wastage of efforts and taxpayers’ money in efforts to increase household incomes or even improve food security; and

    c) Government develops a comprehensive phase-out strategy of the Youth Livelihood Programme, without which, the Youth Livelihood Programme must be retained and recapitalised. (Applause) 

What is the future of these orphaned youth livelihood groups? What happens to the recovered and unrecovered funds? Otherwise, we risk undoing the gains of the programme. The Youth Livelihood Programme is a revolving fund. Therefore, the unplanned collapse of the programme will lead to the death of many youth groups that benefitted from the programme. (Applause)

For sustainability, the youth demand that going forward, we build on programmes rather than totally collapsing one programme for another. 

    d) That Government increases its investment in agribusiness incubation centres to enable the youth to access modern agribusiness equipment and technical advisory services.

    e) That the Government popularises the existing agribusiness innovation hubs, like Uganda Industrial Research Institute to enable more youth to access hands-on entrepreneurship training.

    f) That the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives promotes youth-led cooperatives to increase access to credit and technical advisory service.

    g) That Government provides free land to verified youth groups. The Uganda Investment Authority should undertake a deliberate policy of allocating free land to organised youth groups for commercial agriculture. This shall increase the number of young people involved in agriculture for employment and also respond to the question of land ownership for the youth. 

    h) That Government fast-tracks the extension of electricity and reduces tariffs for small industries doing value-addition. For example, it is unfortunate that a subregion like Lango, with many young entrepreneurs, only 8.4 per cent of the population is connected to the national grid as per the Uganda Bureau of Statistics Household Survey 2019/2020. 

Sector two: Trade, industry and manufacturing

The skilling gap and the mismatch between the labour market demands that education is an existing challenge in the employment sector. 

We recommend that:

    a) Government expedites the establishment of the zonal youth skilling centres in the zonal industrial hubs. It is important for Government to inform Parliament about the policies guiding the operations of these skilling hubs, recruitment, management and stakeholder involvement. For example, the youth leaders and MPs are not being consulted. These skilling centres should be equipped with common user facilities and linked to Government agencies responsible for business facilitation like the Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI) to spur more innovation and entrepreneurship among young people. 

    b) The Uganda National Bureau of Standards should also support free certification for innovative products of less than two years old.

    c) The Uganda Revenue Authority should also play a central role in supporting innovations that have a high potential for growth and replication for future widening of the tax base.

    d) That there are deliberate job reservations for the youth in foreign firms operating in Uganda and also job reservations in public works projects, for example, road works and public procurement contracts. This will also enhance technology transfer.

    e) That the special programme for youth enterprise under the Uganda Development Bank is made more accessible to young people throughout Uganda, and adequate publicity of the program is prioritised. 

    f) That Government prioritises increasing the number of visa-free African countries for Ugandan citizens so that our young traders meaningfully benefit from the Africa Continental Free Trade Area, which is one of the largest free trade areas comprising a market size of 1.3 billion people and a combined GDP of $3.4 trillion.
Sector three: Service industries, entrepreneurship and externalisation of labour

In 2015, Uganda was named the most entrepreneurial country in the world, in a report by B2B Marketplace Approved Index. According to the Economic Policy Research Centre, the Micro-, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (MSMEs) employ 8.5 million Ugandans.  Ninety per cent of the Small and Mid-size Enterprises (SMEs) contribute to the private sector, and 80 per cent are in the manufacturing. Yet, the sad fact is that 70 per cent of these MSMEs closed before celebrating the second birthday. 

It is hard to find a purely Ugandan founded business that is more than 30 years old. Entrepreneurship in Uganda today reflects necessity--driven approaches rather than opportunity-driven. The limitedness of these incentives will drive businesses to close even when there is a high farm entry. 

Of concern also, is the unfavourable taxation regime for the enterprising youth, characterised by absence –

THE SPEAKER: Are you about to finish? 

MR BONIFACE OKOT: Yes. The issues of the youth are quite many, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: So, are you not allowing other people to debate because you have exhausted?  

MR BONIFACE OKOT: We are almost done. Of concern is also the unfavourable taxation regime for the enterprising youth characterised by the absence of clear policies to guide the tax exemptions, Government bailouts and other investor incentives. This, coupled with private and public sector corruption business, locks out young people from competing favourably in the market. 

We recommend as follows:

    a) Government introduced a start-up Act, which is intended to be a comprehensive legislation and regulatory framework aimed at fostering entrepreneurship and enabling the development of new funds with a high growth potential through the granting of targeted incentives. 

    b) Government develops clear policy guidelines for issuance, management and monitoring of different tax benefits and incentives, issued to protect businesses owned by youth.

    c) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development expedites the development, publishing and gazetting of the national local content plan, which contains mechanisms for achieving local content obligations prescribed by the Act. More specifically, youth are demanding participation in Government procurement through ring-fencing of at least 30% of local contracts for youth-owned companies. 

    d) Government supports small businesses through recapitalisation. 

    e) Government explains to the youth the performance of the youth venture capital fund and consults on the fundamental reforms to the programme. For example, who monitors and evaluates the programme when the youth leaders are delinked.  We are also informed that some of these banks have started marketing their expensive loan packages to the youth instead of offering them this fund.

The youth are concerned about the level of commitment to protect Ugandan migrant workers from exploitation, hazardous work, the environment and trafficking. 

Our recommendations are:

    a) Government champions policy and legislative reforms on labour externalisation; and

    b) Government explores bilateral protocols for more professional and higher paying external jobs.

Sector four: Information and Communications Technology (ICT) 

There is limited and structured Government support for science and technology based on innovations and initiatives that have the potential of transforming lives and providing local solutions and creating employment. To make matters worse, the cost of internet data is too high and has led to the death of most young businesses that survive on the internet.

Our recommendations are:

    a) Government considers further reducing the cost of the internet. Currently, there is a direct 12 per cent tax levy on internet data, in addition to the Value Added Tax of 18%, which is considered double taxation and worse than the failed Over-The-Top (OTT) tax; and

    b) Government creates and populates a significant special fund for scaling-up innovation and equitably develops new innovation hubs throughout the country.

Sector five: Creative arts and sports

While the pandemic took a toll on the arts and sports industries, the creative industry is one of the greatest employers and yet less invested in sectors. 

According to a UBOS survey, it is estimated that the creative industry employs approximately 12,460 SMEs, with an estimated generation of approximately Shs 3.18 trillion to the economy.

While the pandemic caused the closure of many social events and affected direct and indirect jobs in the sector, there is no clear Government policy and framework for identification, sustainable support and management of young people with extraordinary talent. 

We recommend that Government fast-tracks the –

THE SPEAKER: If your document is still big, kindly, lay it on the Table. We shall capture everything; it will be on the Hansard record. (Applause)

MR BONIFACE OKOT: Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: You cannot come and read to us a Bible.

MR BONIFACE OKOT: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this document on the motion for the resolution of Parliament urging Government to prioritise the state of the youth in Uganda. I beg to lay. (Applause)

5.47
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank Hon. Okot for moving this motion. I rise to second the motion. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to expand or make a supplement on the elaborate justification that hon. Boniface gave. In the 10th Parliament, we visited Kenya, and one of the programmes that they have, as an affirmative action, is ring-fencing of about 30 per cent of all contracts to youth-led companies. I have heard Hon. Boniface also talked about this. I think, as a country, if we tow this line, this will help a lot. 
Secondly, in regard to skilling the youth just like it is talked about in the motion, we have a programme of promotion of green jobs and fair labour markets in Uganda, which was established in 2016. It is under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

It would be very good for this House to know about the components of these jobs. I am almost sure that a half of the Members of Parliament are not aware of what this entails. If we had implemented the four components of these green jobs and fair labour, I am sure our youth would be well-skilled.

The first component talks about support to the informal sector – the jua kali. How many of these jua kalis, apart from those that are in Kampala, are being supported in our constituencies? It would be good to get such reports. 

Then, there are things like establishment of industrial shelters and promoting green incubation centres using the Songhai Model. These are things that we need more emphasis and information on as we celebrate the International Youth Day. 

It would be very good for the minister to come, - and not to just read the statement, but also update this House about the progress of these very beautiful programmes started by Government of Uganda.

Finally, on the Youth Livelihood Programme, at one point we were told it was moved from gender to the President's office. Right now, we are not even sure where it is exactly. Information about it is very scanty. Just like the mover stated, we do not want this beautiful programme that started - much as it had challenges - to just die. Even if we are to phase it out, can we do so from an informed point of view? Have we done evaluation to see how much loss has been caused as a result of this programme, without saying that this has to move to another place? Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you, Hon. Lucy. One would also ask: How much do MPs know about jua kali? Completely nothing. Honourable minister, maybe you need to give us information about it so that we get to understand what it is. About the green jobs, are they called green jobs? 

5.51
Mr basil bataringaya (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance to second and react to the motion on the youth. I am a very strong supporter of youth activities. These youth MPs refer to me as “a senior youth”.

I want to thank Hon. Boniface Okot for the motion and I rise to support him. I will also make a comment on the honourable minister's statement. 

However, I want to say that the youth are still paid lip service in the country. For example, the youth day is on the 12th and known as an international day. Women’s Day is on the 8th of March. I have never heard it postponed to another date. Labour Day is on the 1st of May. I have never heard it postponed to be celebrated on another day. Independence Day has never been postponed. Christmas Day has never been postponed. (Laughter)

Therefore, it disturbs me that we still pay lip service to the youth and can afford to postpone their day when –(Inaudible)- and budgeted for.

Secondly, this year’s theme is very good. That is what attracts me to rise and support: “Inter-generational solidarity: Creating a world for all ages.” That is the international theme. In Uganda here, the theme is, “Inter-generational solidarity: The role of the youth in implementation of the Parish Development Model.” This means that if we support and prioritise the youth agenda in this country, we shall be supporting development. 

I do not want to take a lot of time here. Somebody has already lamented about electricity in West Nile. It is not only West Nile that is crying. The youth in Kashari North are crying about electricity, which has taken three years. It is generated – it is present – but they prepared themselves, bought some equipment for welding, and for three years, the transformers are making noise without electricity flowing to the people. It means these youth are frustrated. Once - then we shall not have – (Member timed out.)

5.55
Ms dorcAs acEn (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank Hon. Boniface Okot for a very comprehensive motion, and for clearly articulating the issues that are affecting the youth in this country. I support the motion.

I would like to implore Hon. Boniface and the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development that we have the prayers from this team - and I think they are very great. One of the things they have put here is for Government to ensure that social services such as education and health are youth-responsive. I strongly support that.

I also want to implore the ministry and the team to include the gender perspective – to have the gender lens weaved into this, specifically because we know that COVID-19 lockdown had disproportionate effects, especially on the female youth in this country. 

Even right now as we talk about commemorating the International Youth Day – and as we talk about the youth who were here – we know that the female youth whose lives form the tapestry of this reality because they are characterised by high rates of school dropouts, majority are child mothers from the teenage pregnancies. 

I would like to implore the minister that as part of your activities for that week, if possible, add there the component of psychosocial support for these child mothers or the female youth. Also, help to link them to the different multi-sectoral services in the country. Thank you.

5.57
Ms flavia kabahenda (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for gender for the statement she made, and a very elaborate motion, which I thought became a report from the Member of Parliament representing youth, Hon. Okot. 

Madam Speaker, the young people in Uganda require a strategy that is not business as usual.

First of all, the population of this country now has 54 per cent under-18 - those are dependents. When you add older persons and you add PWDS, then the dependence rate goes to almost 70 per cent. 

Madam Speaker, these young people need to be planned for from their childhood. If we are still getting young people dropping out of school – His Excellency was recently lamenting that how can we have 100 pupils in a school and then only 32 per cent are completing? For us, we lamented a long time ago, and now, His Excellency is realising that the completion rate is very low. 

And, the gender ministry, has continued to encourage these young people who do not complete school to be externalised as labour. 

Are we going to externalise beggars? Are we going to externalise mediocre people; who cannot cope with the languages, culture and the appliances in a modern household? As if that is not enough, recently here, we got -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Margaret?

5.59
MS MARGARET RWEBYAMBU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank Hon. Okot for giving us the state of the youth in Uganda.

I want to say something about the Youth Livelihood Fund, and how it is getting phased out, in relation to the Parish Development Model. We all know that most of the youth in this country do not own land, yet the Parish Development Model is looking at agriculture, specifically growing of crops and rearing of animals. 

Therefore, we are looking at how this youth is going to work with the Parrish Development Model, even when we are allocating them 30 per cent of the money in the Parish Development Model. 

I am of the view that we maintain the Youth Livelihood Fund, whereby any youth can use it with any enterprise - not necessarily, where land is required. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Namisindwa.

6.01
MS SARAH NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with my sister, the chairperson of the Committee on Gender in saying that the country is highly populated with dependents - and these are our youth that we are talking about today. We need a lot to be done to ensure that they are taken care of. I thank Hon. Okot when he comes up with zonal youth skilling centres. These skilling centres are very important and I think they are going to help our youth. 

Right now, we, who come from rural areas, see every youth busy selling a piece of land in the village to buy a boda boda motorcycle and come to town. They ride it for only two to three days, get in accidents; the motorcycle is destroyed, they are fractured and they are hospitalised.

Therefore, skilling and making these skilling centres available will help and motivate our youth to come and engage in some other activities that will be money-making other than looking at boda boda riding as the only source of income. 

Madam Speaker, as a country, I think we also need to change our curriculum and not focus on only bringing up our children, and teaching them how to look for only greener pastures and office jobs, but as parents, we should start to model -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter. 

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened very well to my honourable colleague’s report as he presented. In addition, I have listened to other honourable colleagues that have submitted. He presented an elaborate report, and I have heard all the colleagues amplifying what he presented; we have not heard anything new. 

In light of Hon. Cecilia’s earlier submission, I want to procedurally suggest that we call the debate to an end, you put the question and we move on. I beg to move. [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”]

THE SPEAKER: Why are you saying “No”? Members, what is left that you have not finished? Minister?

6.04
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me thank hon. Okot for moving the motion. 

I want to note that all the issues raised are issues that are already being handled. It is good he articulates the various programmes - either within Government or in the ministry; the Youth Livelihood Programme; the Youth Venture Capital Fund; the Externalisation of Labour; the Skilling; Productivity Enhancement Programmes; all the programmes within Government are clearly articulated with key recommendations. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is only one Chairperson in the House. If you want to speak, just get out a bit and have your talk.

MS BETTY AMONGI: I will only answer a few issues, which were raised by Members. I will start with your issue, Madam Speaker, on the green jobs. These jobs which are called jua kali. Support is a programme under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development which provides A business toolkit, equipment to jua kali businesses and groups and selected microfinance and small enterprises.

It also undertakes skill-training, especially business development services, skilling, technical, trade and learning in respect to – (Hon. Olanya rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Continue.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Provision of technical and trade training for jua kali businesses; in this circumstance, if you would want to be trained, for example, in any trade-related skills like welding, it can support you and place you in that trade and you are able to acquire that skill.

We want to scale-up this particular programme, which is called green jobs, under the ministry. However, this financial year, we have been given only Shs 4 billion. We want to make it a constituency-based and focused intervention, but the Shs 4 billion is inadequate. 

However, many Members of Parliament have made applications and we will try as much as possible to support. Where we fail to support all the Members, for all the groups you have asked for, we shall come back and give a report. 

We have another programme, which is an apprenticeship and graduate volunteer scheme. It is also a programme that develops employability skills, self-employment, labour productivity and opportunities for youth aged 16 to 35 years. It is work-based learning for unemployed youth. For example, youth who have degrees or diplomas are recruited and placed in various companies and MDAs of Government. We give them a small stipend for majorly facilitating them with transport. 

The purpose of this is to develop their skills; they volunteer while they gain the experience because for most jobs, when they are applying, they are asked for experience. So, we felt for graduates who have not yet got jobs, if we placed them with that small little pay, it would support them as they gain experience. 

The Distance Country Programme 

We have this programme, which is supported by the International Labour Organisation. It also handles youth in respect to ensuring that those who are in the labour force are supported in all other aspects. 

On the Youth Livelihood Programme, which was articulated here, we have money which we have recovered and that money recovered has been ploughed back to the ministry - about Shs 18 billion; we are going to lend it back to the youth in the districts –(Interjections)- can I finish and then I get your clarification?

THE SPEAKER: Finish first and then you can clarify. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: The other programme under the Youth Livelihood Programme - the finances were moved to State House - has constructed 16 youth skilling centres in all the original subregions of Acholi, Lango, Ankole and Bunyoro; each of those subregions has16 youth skilling centres. 

We are working with State House - and Cabinet has already adopted a framework on how the youth skilling centre will be functioning. I hope the Minister for the Presidency will come to give an elaborate explanation to the House. 

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, on the issue of start-ups, issues of access to social services, access to financing, being responsive in social services by the youth, and youth involvement in decision-making, we have elaborate programmes for all these. At an appropriate time, I will come and give an extensive statement on the Floor on each of these. Otherwise, we recognise, but regret the postponement of Youth Day, but I pledge that it will not happen again. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to bring a comprehensive report together with a status report on the green jobs and fair labour markets in Uganda. We want to know which districts have benefited, with evidence, because you may be saying, “We have Shs 4 billion” and you imagine that maybe Bukedea has benefited, yet not. 

Therefore, we want to know which districts have benefited, which is the reason I instruct that you bring here a comprehensive report next week before you use the Shs 4 billion, which has been advanced to you. 

I put the question that this House adopts the motion for a Resolution of Parliament urging Government to prioritise the state of the youth in Uganda. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, rule 157(3) of the Rules Procedure requires that a Member shall belong to not more than two committees except in respect to the Business Committee, the Appointments Committee and the Budget Committee. I, therefore, invite the Leader of Government Business to designate a new Member who has just been voted in.

6.13
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms RUKIA NAKADAMA): Madam Speaker, I want to designate Hon. Herbert Ariko, NRM, to the Standing Committee on Budget. I also designate him to the Sectoral Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: In addition, pursuant to rule 164 of the Rules of Procedure, as the Leader of Independents, I designate hon. Itungo to the Sectoral Committee on Education and Sports, and the Standing Committee on COSASE. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.14 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 August 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)






