

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 17 August 2021

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting, which is the first sitting in the Chamber, in the 11th Parliament. Welcome to the House.

I am happy to inform you that the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah is back in the country and is going to resume his duties soon. (Applause) Together with him, we thank you for your prayers and the support that you have given to him while he was away. We do appreciate. 

We welcome you from the short recess to conduct an oversight role on Emyooga, as mandated by the Constitution. I hope you had good interactions and a fruitful oversight role. 

I expect all the teams to prepare and present their reports as communicated in the terms of reference that I gave to the teams. After doing the oversight role, it will help us in the subsequent government programmes. It will help us to make guidelines and enabling laws on any other programme that will come forth because we are seeing what is happening with Emyooga. It is not only in one district; it is all over the country. I expect a report from the different groups. 

Uganda sent a team of athletes to participate in the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. The team flew the Ugandan flag high by winning two gold medals, one silver medal and one bronze medal (Applause). 

We congratulate the team for the hard work and determination. Let us all celebrate their achievement and encourage the athletes to emulate this example. 

In the same vein, I would like to thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for honouring the athletes who won the various medals. 

Under Article 91(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the President is legally permitted to return a Bill that has been passed in Parliament into a law with a request that the Bill or a particular provision of it is reconsidered by Parliament. 

The President has done so in respect to the sexual offences Bill and the Succession (Amendment) Bill. Rule 143(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda requires me, the presiding officer, to read the Bill to the House as it is for reconsideration and forward it to the relevant committee. 

Concerning the Sexual Offences Bill, the letter is dated 03 August 2021, addressed to the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. 

“The above subject matter refers. I have received the Sexual Offences Bill Act, 2021 for assent. However, the Bill needs to be reviewed because;

    1. There are several provisions of the Act that are already provided for in the legislations i.e. Sections 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13,14, 15,16,17, 18, 19, 20, and 22. All the above offences are already provided for in the Penal Code Act Cap 8 on offences against morality.

    2. I have been informed that the Uganda Law Reform Commission had earlier carried out a comprehensive review of all criminal related laws. That is, the Penal Code Act, the Emergency Court Act, the Trial and Indictment Act, the Evidence Act. Their proposed amendments were presented by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to the Legal and Parliamentary Committee of the Parliament of Uganda but were never considered. 

Instead of carrying out piecemeal amendments, the commission should be given an opportunity to review all the criminal laws and propose a comprehensive amendment of the relevant laws for Parliament’s consideration. 

In view of the above, I am returning the Bill for reconsideration as per Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution. 

Signed by the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. 

Copied to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.”

The Succession (Amendment) Bill; it is dated 22 July 2021 and addressed to the Speaker of Parliament. 

“The above matter refers. I have received the Succession Amendment Bill, 2021 for assent. 

However, there are sanctions listed below that need to be reconsidered and reviewed by Parliament;

    1. Clause 14, which seeks to replace Section 27 of the Principal Act, introduced a new arrangement of sharing property where a spouse has died intestate. Under Clause 14(c) where an intestate is survived by a spouse and a dependant relative but no lineal descendants, the spouse shall receive 80 per cent and the dependent relative shall receive 20 per cent of the whole property of the intestate. This is a complete departure from the earlier provisions of the law. 

With no clear justification, it will interfere with the interest of the beneficiaries. What, for example, justifies the increase in surviving spouse’s share from about 50 to 80 per cent and reducing the dependent relatives’ share from 49 to 20 per cent? The above amendment would not only be unfair to the dependent relatives, but also create disharmony between the surviving spouse and the deceased’s relatives.

Therefore, more research needs to be carried out so that clear justification is given for reducing or increasing the shares clearly stipulated in the current law. 

I propose that the distribution be as follows:

    1. Widow/widower: 50 per cent of the estate;
    2. Dependent relatives: 49 per cent of the estate;
    3. Customary heir: one per cent of the estate.

Secondly, clause 18(1)(b), which seeks to amend section 30 of the Succession Act, provides that the surviving spouse of the intestate shall not take any interest in the estate of an intestate, if at the death of the intestate, the marriage between the surviving spouse and the intestate was suspended, either by agreement or a judicial officer. 

The phrase, “suspended earlier by agreement”, is ambiguous and likely to bring confusion in administration of the estate. What is the accepted form of agreement? Is it verbal or oral? What if there is a claim by the deceased’s surviving relatives that the deceased had made a verbal agreement, separating with the surviving spouse before his or her demise? What evidence will be tendered to confirm the existence of such an agreement? I propose that the clause be deleted.

Regarding the separation by the judicial order, where marriage is suspended by the judicial order, court would have to make a provision for sharing the property between the parties. Such an order would still obtain in the event of death of one of the parties.

There is, therefore, no need for Parliament to provide for sharing of property, where a judicial order has already been issued. I am, therefore, returning the Bill to Parliament for reconsideration of the above clauses.”

Signed by Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of Uganda and copied to the Prime Minister and the Attorney-General

I, therefore, forward the two Bills to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for reconsideration. I am still in my communication.

In line with Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 143(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, I refer the stated Bills to the respective sectoral committee, which is the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

I wish to remind the ministers responsible that in compliance with Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, in two weeks, they will be required to table back the motion for reconsideration in the House. So, we are giving you two weeks.

His Excellency the President, when constituting Cabinet, abolished the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and transferred the mandate to State House. This had an impact on the sector and the structure of committees of Parliament, where the sectoral committee responsible for the sector - now by presidential action - is not, in this case, clear.

In line with this development, I want to refer the matter of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to study the report and report to this House as to whether we should adopt this committee as a standing committee or completely do away with it.

In line with rule 235 (1), a Bill, petitions or motions or other business before the House or committee during a term of Parliament, which elapsed, are dissolved. However, under sub-rule (2), such business can be reinstated in the next Parliament by a resolution of Parliament. 

I, therefore, wish to remind all the stakeholders who are interested in saving any business from the 10th Parliament to inform the Clerk so that a motion can be prepared to move it in the House to reinstate what was pending in the previous Parliament. 

Lastly, considering that out of the 10 UPDF representatives to Parliament, two were appointed to ministerial positions yet it is crucial that the UPDF be represented on the Committee on Human rights, I, present hon. Col. Charity Bainababo to the Committee on Human Rights. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much for listening to a long Communication from the Chair but it was necessary. I also want to apologise for any inconvenience that has been caused by us transferring from the tent back to the House. I have got a lot of complaints but at the same time, Members were complaining that the tent was porous; strangers were coming in.

Secondly, you need to have a feel of the House - a feel of Parliament. (Applause) I am really happy that if we can maintain this - if it means rescheduling and apportioning people to be in the House, we should be doing that. We also need to make sure we have all the doses of the vaccines taken but we will continue doing regular tests of Members to avoid the spread of COVID-19. We will follow the SOPs. This House can accommodate 200 people; both up and down. I do not want people to feel as if they are disadvantaged. May I just say that this is a reform. Just like we did not want to go to the tent, it is the same way we are feeling- like we do not want a change. Change is necessary. I thank you.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communication. On 20 October 2020, under the matter of Registration of Persons Act, 2015 and under Statutory Instrument No.67/2015, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda swore under Paragraphs three and four of his deed poll that he shall renounce the use of the name Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and adopt Yoweri Tibuhaburwa Kaguta Museveni.

He went forward to state that for purposes of evidencing the assumption of the proper order of his full name, he swore and declared that he will write and assent to all instruments using the following order of his name: Yoweri Tibuhaburwa Kaguta Museveni.

This comes in good faith. The recent letters and instruments we have seen the President signing do not possess the name in that rightful order. This is by law and when you swear a deed poll, it means you abandon the old name and the persons are different. Therefore, I would like to seek your intervention, Madam Speaker, to address this House on that matter and procedurally guide this House as we may process a Bill returned by a persona non grata and someone denies it. In this case, I do not believe that Gen. Yoweri Tibuhaburwa Kaguta Museveni will do so.

Madam Speaker, since the President is the Fountain of Honour and the guardian of the executive power of this nation, we need that consistency in order to avoid inconsistencies as people may challenge Bills, laws or even instruments that the President ought to sign. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nsereko. [Hon. Ssemujju rose_] Unfortunately, he has finished, hon. Ssemujju. Hon. Muhammad Nsereko, the letters I have contain that other name, which I cannot pronounce. (Laughter) Since I could not pronounce it, I did not read it. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, in your communication, you mentioned that the President returned certain Bills that were presented to him, including the Succession Bill. I want to invite you to read Article 91 of the Constitution on Exercise of Legislative Powers. 

Article 91(2) states, “A Bill passed by Parliament shall, as soon as possible, be presented to the President for assent.” When you proceed to Article 91(3), it states, “The President shall, within thirty days after a Bill is presented to him or her:
    a. Assent to the Bill;
    b. Return the Bill to Parliament with a request that the Bill or a particular provision of it to be reconsidered by Parliament; or 
    c. Notify the Speaker in writing that he or she refuses to assent to the Bill.” 

Further, Article 91(7) provides, “Where the President fails to do any of the acts specified in clause 3 of this Article within the period prescribed in that clause, the President shall be taken to have assented to the Bill and at the expiration of that period, the Speaker shall cause a copy of the Bill to be laid before Parliament and the Bill shall become law without the assent of the President.”

I know that this Bill was presented to the President in the last Parliament; sometime in May or thereabout. We are now in the middle of August and the President is returning the Bill without referring to the provision of the Constitution. When you look at the provision of the Constitution, it says, “...shall return within 30 days”. Right now, it has taken months. [Mr Ssemujju: “Order.”] 

Madam Speaker, I respect my brother. He has been in Parliament for a long time and he knows that procedure takes precedence. You cannot then rise order on procedure. You have to respect the Speaker and our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member is rising on a procedural matter. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, order! 

MR OKOT-OGONG: The Speaker has guided that I am raising a procedural matter. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Yes, you may be proceeding –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, hon. Felix Okot is on a procedural matter. First sit. You will make your point.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on whether we are proceeding rightly. Otherwise, this matter can be taken to court. If we do not proceed properly, we might lose this case in the courts. Therefore, we need to study it very carefully so that we do not make mistakes. I am seeking guidance from you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Felix Okot, the essence of me sending this report to the committee is for them to assess it. I cannot know when it was sent. That is the work of the committee and they will report back to us on whether the Bill is out of time. Then we will take it as law.

MR SSEMUJJU: The procedural issue I am now raising –(Laughter)- is that the President, in an interview with NTV and the Daily Monitor said that at the age of 75 years, you are really tired. We have had two issues raised; one is about his name and another is assenting to a Bill in the stipulated time in the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is whether this Parliament that removed the age limit to allow a tired person to be a President can now complain, hardly a year later, when it is the same Parliament that allowed the same person who confessed in an interview that at 75 years, one is really tired. That is the procedural issue I am raising. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, if the President was tired, he would not have stood for elections. That is a discussion for another day. [Mr Felix Okot rose_] Order on what? The Leader of the Opposition is on the Floor. 

2.40
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues; one, I would like to welcome the Members to the true Chamber. It had taken a while and I felt a bit absurd that the new Members have never had a sense of this place. I thought that if Parliament ended before we had this setting, they would never have had tales to tell their children and grandchildren about the sense of Parliament. So, I welcome you.

Secondly, the arrangement would require that Members sit in intervals or interchangeably depending on how the whips arrange their teams. This will require strict compliance to rules 27 and 29 of our Rules of Procedure that relate to timely availability of the Order Paper.

For instance, while the whips are obliged to ensure attendance of their members, the choice by the whips on who attends may not depend on the order of names in alphabetical arrangement, but also on the interest on the Order Paper.

Therefore, it will be very prudent that the Office of the Clerk strictly adheres to the commands of rules 27 and 29 to allow for Members to prepare in earnest to be able to coherently participate in the affairs. Of course, the Speaker is at liberty to amend the Order Paper but it is on rare occasions and not as occurring as regularly.

Therefore, your indulgence is sought, Madam Speaker, that while we are migrating to the new normal, we strictly observe these two rules.

That said, again in your communication, you made an allusion to the scrapping of the Ministry of ICT; which reverted to the presidency. It came at the backdrop -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What did I say?

MR MPUUGA: I beg your pardon, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Science, Innovation and Technology reverted to the presidency and that came after the budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022 had been passed by the Tenth Parliament.

My appreciation of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 does raise questions as to what happens to the funds so voted under that docket. What happens to those funds? What happens to the officers in that ministry? And whether Public Service had inter-alia made provision to that migration or we are in part dealing with an illegality. 

I seek clarification from the Minister of Public Service as to how this migration was done because the budget was passed under a clear accounting system. Was the accounting officer also migrated under the same arrangement for us to be able to inform this decision and be able to educate ourselves as to the nature of this migration? I hope I am understood, Madam Speaker. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Leader of the Opposition. Maybe regarding the issue of the Order Paper, we will be having it a day before the sitting of the next day. We can have that one.

We needed clarification on the issue of the Ministry of Science, Innovation and Technology.

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad to be back to this Chamber; I have been missing it –(Interjection)- I spoke in the tent the other time.

Madam Speaker, the honourable Leader of the Opposition is concerned about the fate of the money which was approved for the Ministry of Science, Innovation and Technology and also the Rural Electrification Agency.

The Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as amended, provides that Parliament has powers of moving money from one vote to another as and when it is required. It also gives Parliament powers to revote as and when is appropriate.

Therefore, in this regard, Madam Speaker, we will be coming to this House either today or the other day, as we have written to you, to move a motion to allow us move funds from the Ministry of Science, Innovation and Technology vote and the Rural Electrification Agency to the votes where these agencies have gone. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hasn’t the money been moved to State House? Is the money still with the Ministry of Science, Innovation and Technology, which was abolished?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, with your guidance, can I get clarification and answer at once?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the money still with the Ministry of Science, Innovation and Technology?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, Madam Speaker; as it is now, the money is still in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is not in any vote because the votes ceased to exist.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is okay. Members, I have referred this issue to the Committee of Discipline Rules and Privileges on clarification and what should be done.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I do appreciate the assurances of my honourable colleague. However, for the record, he smuggled the Rural Electrification Agency in his submission. It was not part of my submission-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, you needed a solution.

MR MPUUGA: Yes, I am alive to that fact, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, for him to smuggle that prayer, he is right for this House.

MR MPUUGA: He is right but despite the fact that that is the position, I am also aware that they are spending Rural Electrification Agency funds, despite the fact that the status quo has not been moved. For his information, I am aware that funds under the Rural Electrification Agency are being expended despite the fact that the legal framework does not permit them to do so.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, for your information, the Rural Electrification Agency is not formed by an Act of Parliament; it is by a Statutory Instrument.

2.50
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This issue of the Ministry of Science, Innovation and Technology is not a simple matter that we should simply brush off. We shall need a paper from the Ministry of Public Service because when this ministry was established, it was after this House had passed and approved a Bill. Following that, there is even a committee that specifically looks at that. Phasing off this ministry and moving it to the Presidency has implications on the committee. 

Therefore, I would like to suggest that we get a detailed paper on this matter so that we can debate it and then make our recommendations as Parliament, accordingly. 

Innovations, science and technology is now the way to go. The Heads of State at the African Union made a decision to ensure that at least one per cent of our national budgets go into funding research and innovation, where this ministry was playing an oversight role. As such, by merely having it under the Presidency implies that it ceases to be a ministry. We even do not know what is going to happen to the technical staff who were there to guide, promote and support innovation.

Madam Speaker, it would be better if we had a document from the Ministry of Public Service. Thank you.

The deputy speaker: I am surprised that you are debating what I have already referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. 

Secondly, I would like to refer you to Article 99. You cannot continue debating what has been ruled upon.

2.53
Dr patick isingoma-mwesigwa (Independent, Hoima East Division, Hoima City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a new Member of Parliament, I would like to say that I am extremely elated to be able to speak for the first time from this Chamber. I was worried that we the new members of Parliament would never have a chance of debating from here, but thank God that is now history.

I rise under rule 49 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to present a matter of national importance. During the course of the 2019/2020 Financial Year, Parliament approved the creation of several new cities in this country all of which were upgraded from the municipality status. 

The approved city/upgraded were Jinja, Mbale, Lira, Gulu, Arua, Hoima – to which I have the honour to be a representative in this august House –(Interruption)

Mr basalirwa: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on two points of order. The first relates to the honourable colleague and friend, Dr Isingoma, whether he is in order to cross sides. He belongs to the National Resistance Movement (NRM) but he is speaking on the wrong forum. Fundamentally –

The deputy speaker: Honourable member, you are not in order. Dr Isingoma is an Independent and he can sit on either side.

Mr basalirwa: Secondly, Madam Speaker, the honourable member is making a matter of national importance while reading a written text, which has not been availed to the members. Our rules are very clear on written texts. 

Is the Member in order to raise a matter of national importance while reading a written text, which is not circulated to the members, moreover, in his maiden speech?

The deputy speaker: Hon. Asuman, I am happy you have answered your own question that the Member is making a maiden speech. Secondly, at least you have your ears to listen to what he is reading. Dr Isingoma, can you continue?

Dr isingoma-mwesigwa: I am very grateful, Madam Speaker. I was in the middle of my presentation before I was interrupted. I was talking about cities, which were upgraded from municipalities to city status. These total to about eight in number: Jinja, Mbale, Lira, Gulu, Arua, Hoima, Fort Portal, Mbarara and Masaka. All these cities mentioned became operational with effect from July 2020.

Traditionally, it has been a norm that whenever such new entities are created, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in liaison with the line ministry in this instant, the Ministry of Local Government, earmarks funds to start off each of these entities created to enable them address the so many administrative developmental, logistical and other capital related challenges normally associated with new administrations.

In respect of all the above mentioned entities, this has not been done, leaving these cities to operate in very difficult conditions –

The deputy speaker: Honourable member, what are your prayers? We know what is happening to the cities.

Dr isingoma-mwesigwa: Quickly, I am asking the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain to this honourable House why there is no provision for special start-up funds for the above named cities in this Financial Year 2021/2022, budget yet he knows that this is an established practice. Whenever new entities or Local Governments are created, start-up funds are allocated to them to ease their take-off.

The deputy speaker: Dr Isingoma, your question should have been as short as; what law has Government in relation to the new cities? 

2.59
The minister of state for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (General Duties) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate hon. Dr Isingoma for the concern. It is true that Government in the Financial Year 2020/2021 created a number of cities. 

I wish to inform this House that from 01 July 2020, all these created cities became votes and were appropriated funds in accordance to the law. Thank you.
 
3.00
Mr elijah okupa (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I think the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must take this matter seriously. In the Tenth Parliament, we struggled with the Minister of Local Government and the honourable minister was then the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The Minister of Local Government assured the House that they were going to bring a law for the establishment of cities and their operations. The cities have been struggling to operate and recruit personnel, among other activities. The last time I heard from the Minister of Local Government was in July and from newspaper stories. He said that they were about to bring the Bill after hon. Ssemujju asked that question.

The pertinent question now is, honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I think we have been operating ad hoc and so, when is the Minister of Local Government bringing the Bill for the establishment of these cities? Let us stop being ad hoc in handling this.

3.01
MR MWESIGWA RUKAARI (NRM, Mbarara North Division, Mbarara City): Madam Speaker, this matter of funding is very important. I would like to implore hon. Musasizi, the Minister of State for Planning in this House, who has been the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, that in the Tenth Parliament, we struggled when he was convincing Parliament to adopt the Parish Model. He convinced the whole country that Government was not short of funds to finance the burgeoning local government institutions. 

In my constituency, I have two town councils that have not been funded. They have existing LC III chairpersons – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us not talk about people’s constituencies. What we need in place is the law.

MR MWESIGWA RUKAARI: Madam Speaker, this is not about the law. Our request to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is for it to provide money to these local governments to fund these institutions. Do we have that money or not? 

3.02
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that the honourable minister, who is my good friend, is now under collective responsibility. When he was the Chairman of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, all these matters were handled. 

The intention of creating cities was not a mere puff; cities must resemble each other. As we talk, the lord mayors of those cities are almost – They are in the capacity of LC V chairmen. You have heard the statement here that in Uganda, there is only one Lord Mayor yet we have over five cities. 

Our prayer is –(Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am surprised to hear Members, who were in the Tenth Parliament and heard me clearly trying to request that we defer this matter to a certain time when Government has money – All the Members speaking here were Members of the Tenth Parliament and they all voted to create these cities.

When we were moving to create these cities, I clearly stated – because I had had a chat with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and he said there was no money and I had spoken to the Attorney-General and he indicated that we needed to have had a law in place first to guide and operationalise these cities. There was no legislation and no funding. 

Madam Speaker, are the Members therefore in order to sit here and lament about funding when they participated in the creation of these cities?

MR OKUPA: The honourable Member was a minister and a member in Cabinet. They are the ones who approved these cities before they brought the Bill to this House. Is she in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can all of you sit? Even if the matter was brought to the Tenth Parliament, it does not mean we should not have a law and a funding programme for it. Can we have the law and a funding programme for these new cities? The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in consultation with Minister of Local Government, should report back to this House in two weeks’ time. 

Members, matters of national importance should not take so long.

3.05
MS RITA ATUKWASA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbarara City): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. However, as my colleague from Hoima City stated, I have the same cases regarding Mbarara City. Now that you have guided on this matter by saying that he should lead the rest of us, I would like to say that I will be there to back him up. 

On your advice for us to engage the minister, I would like to say that we will have a meeting on 20th which is Friday, to discuss these issues with him. If there are challenges, we shall revert to the House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Atukwasa.

3.06
MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is my pleasure and maiden opportunity to thank you for giving me this opportunity to present a matter of national importance on the Floor of Parliament. However, before I present it, allow me to congratulate you upon attaining that seat. 

The state of the road from Karuma to Arua that connects Uganda to DRC-Congo; from Goli in Nebbi, Vurra in Arua, Liya in Arua City and South Sudan through the Oraba Border Post has become dangerous to motorists, especially from Olwiyo in Nwoya District. It is important to note this because these border posts help Uganda earn a lot of foreign income through imports and exports of our products and essential goods. However, the road all through Pakwach-Nyaravur-Nebbi-Madi-Okollo to Arua leading to the border points I have mentioned above is bad. 

This has led to many accidents, delays and breakdowns of vehicles yet Uganda is trying to promote trade with DRC, which is now a major trading partner in this region. We appreciate the initiative taken to work on the roads in DRC Congo to enhance trade. However, the bad state of roads derails this effort.

Madam Speaker, a case in point is that the bad state of roads almost caused loss of lives to some Members of this House in the recent past. Early this year, one of your Members from this august House, from West Nile to be exact, rolled in his car and he was admitted. We thank God he recovered.

Two months ago, a Member of Parliament from West Nile had his car overturn. We thank God that courtesy of the UPDF, he was airlifted to Kampala for further management. There are several accidents that are happening on that road. What is Government’s immediate plan for that road in trying to rescue the people of West Nile and those traders who travel to DRC to enhance trade in that region? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Works and Transport here. Government Chief Whip, take this information to the minister. 

I want him to call all the West Nile MPs as a region and have a meeting with them and discuss the state of the roads in the whole region and report back to this House. It is not only one road; there are a number of them. Another person will get up and talk about a road in Zombo or Apac. Let him have a meeting at sub-regional level and report to this House in two weeks. 

3.11
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has already done the same for Busoga subregion and what we have decided is – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have asked you to report in two weeks’ time. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, it is difficult to do it in two weeks’ time because we will need to go on the ground. We request that you give us a month because we would like to do a comprehensive report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want the minister to call all the West Nile MPs and report on what they have found out and what action he has for the roads of the area. 

3.12
MR JOHN PAUL LUKWAGO (DP, Kyotera County, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance to bring to your attention the plight of almost 1000 people at Bukala Village, Ndolo, Kabila Sub-County in Kyotera, my constituency. 

In 1933, the Government of Uganda allocated over 150 acres of land to Sango Bay Estates Limited. In the early 2000s the Government made re-entry on this land. However, in the 1940s, people settled on this land, particularly in this village of Bukala. Unfortunately, a business man called Faustin Mulengezi happened to acquire a title - Block 831 - on this public land. 

Too much terror has been meted out on these people. Their houses are being razed, cattle are dying. The gentleman closed off the public access that connects to the nearest town, which is Kakuuto, and he is charging toll fees. 

The situation in Bukala is very appalling. My prayer is to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; how did the purported landlord acquire a title on public land? 

Secondly, to the Minister of Internal Affairs, to make a statement about this criminality that is being meted out on these people. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Lukwago. Honourable Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Minister of Internal Affairs, please give us a response to the question in two weeks’ time. 

I request of you, ministers, when we want a response from you, do not go, sit on your desk and get a response. Somebody should visit the constituency, call the Member of Parliament and be there with that MP and then report to the House. 

Secondly, this business of ministers bringing me responses when I am in the House must stop. I do not have time to read your reports. You bring them when I am in the House - how will I appreciate what you are reporting?

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the directive you have given to the two ministers. From the issue raised by the honourable Member from Kyotera, there is a very clear inclination of criminality that might not need to wait for two weeks. 

Would it be proper, if you instructed the minister to immediately go in and first arrest an outlaw situation where an ordinary person is erecting a road toll and is levying fees from citizens? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the report that I need in two weeks’ time, not the action. The action can be instant. Minister of Internal Affairs, you need to act on that and see what is happening on the ground. 

3.16

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker, I will take up the matter and I will report back in two weeks’ time. 

3.17
MS VICTORIOUS ZAWEDDE (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me thank you for the transfer made to the House, especially for the newly elected leaders. It is very good. I would, however, like to encourage my colleagues to observe the SOPs as we maintain the social distance. 

I rise on a matter of national importance on the issue of the unfunded, newly created town councils and the delays of the return on the local revenue. 
It is well known that Government gazetted some new town councils all over the country. The case in point is in Nakasongola District. In 2017, Nakasongola was allocated two town councils; that is, Rwampanga and Mayirikiti but to date, they have never been funded. 

In 2020, we were given Katubo and Kazwama. Currently, these town councils have not been allocated any budget. These town councils have a lot of things to do. They also went ahead and elected leaders in the recent local council elections. They have poor service delivery, which needs to be addressed. 

I, therefore, stand according to the background given to you and move that a supplementary budget should be approved for these new town councils and at least some crucial positions of about 10 staffs be recruited –(Interjections)- This is my maiden speech, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The information might help you in your maiden speech. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give my colleague the information that they do not move budgets like that. 

You can only make prayers to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that money be appropriated accordingly to the town councils but you cannot move a motion for the movement of the money, in a maiden speech (Laughter). So, just make prayers to the minister of finance to help you avail funds through the Ministry of Local Government. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Victorious Zawedde, your issue is just like that one of the cities that require funding. When they are making a report, they will report on cities, municipalities, those subcounties and the rest. That is taken care of. The finance ministry and that of the local government will report to that effect.

MS ZAWEDDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other issue is about the delayed return of the local revenue to the lower local councils. 

As it is well known, the Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, collects revenue from the lower local governments but it takes a long time to return it to the lower local governments. This has affected their services at the grassroots. These lower local governments have got a lot of activities to do. For example, they collect garbage around their towns, pay casual labourers and even other things –(Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise not to disrupt my honourable colleague from making a maiden speech. However, I remember before we went for recess, there were issues which needed induction of Members.

At the very start of this meeting, I heard phones ringing loud. I believe these are some of the things we shall learn when we have the induction. The procedural question I am raising is, when are we having this induction so that some of these issues we see here can be addressed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alum, it is unfortunate that you have interrupted hon. Victorious Zawedde. It is well known that we are going to have an induction. The honourable member is making her maiden speech –(Applause)– and you are telling us about induction.

MS ZAWEDDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the protection given to me. However, I want to call upon my honourable colleagues that we combine efforts and assist these lower local governments. I know it may be a general problem in our country. Otherwise, our local governments are suffering without local revenue. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is okay. Minister, the issue is on Non-Tax Revenue. 

3.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, thank you for your kind indulgence. The excitement of being in this Chamber could actually make us lose very key issues. 

The honourable member from Nakasongola raised a very pertinent issue, relating to the requirement by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to remit local revenue back to local governments.

First of all, that was an action by circular to local governments and running against the law. Madam Speaker, the Public Finance Management Act, the Local Government Act and the Constitution do not support the actions of the finance ministry.

Madam Speaker, her concern, is a concern of very many local governments. If you go to most local governments, garbage is in heaps. The reason is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is making unholy bargains in the release of these finances. In doing so, we are incubating runaway corruption under this illegal arrangement.

This, therefore, requires the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain the legal basis of that directive under the law. I am aware it was an illegal directive and is curtailing the performance of local governments. The finance ministry needs to come and explain their position on this matter, so that we can allow local governments to perform. It is a very huge matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Musasizi, there was a directive from the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury on NTR. It should not be used at source; it should be transferred to the Consolidated Fund. What hon. Victorious Zawedde is asking is, what happens when it is time for NTR to be returned for the local activities?

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under the Single Treasury Account, all revenues - both from taxes and Non-Tax Revenue - go to the Consolidated Fund. 

What happens when this money goes to the Consolidated Fund? This money is expensed or transferred to the spending agencies, in accordance with the law under –(Interjection)– Thank you very much my brother, hon. Nsereko. Madam Speaker, what happens to revenues collected by local governments? They are sent to the Consolidated Fund as Non-Tax Revenues and this money is supposed to go back in full to respective local governments. This is August and the financial year opened on 1 July. 

I wish to challenge hon. Zawedde but since it is her maiden speech, I am constrained. I will, in future, challenge her to ask her respective local government –(Interruption)

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, I understand clearly what the minister is trying to explain but he is acting against some of the actions in the Constitution. 

When I refer you to Article 192 of the Constitution, which talks about collection of taxes by local Governments, it states: “Parliament shall by law provide –

    (a) for the taxes that may be collected by a local government for or on behalf of the Government for payment into the Consolidated Fund;

    (b) for a local government to retain, for the purposes of its functions and services, a specified proportion of the revenues collected for or on behalf of the Government from the district.”

The law provides that Parliament should provide a law and we provided that law under the Local Government Act; Article 192 –(Interjection)– No, this is the latest. (Laughter) No, it is Article 192 – (Interruption)

MR OCEN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek clarification from the minister how the elected leaders of these new administrative units are going to be facilitated? 

The administrative part of it – the civil servants – are on the payroll but these town councils have not been funded. How are these elected leaders going to be facilitated to do their work?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I have realised that in the new Parliament, there are many questions regarding management of funds in the local Governments and I would like to seek your indulgence to allow me come back in two weeks with a written statement responding to all issues of finance management relating to local government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Musasizi has just gone to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. He is still new there. What we could do is to give him two weeks to report back to this House on what plans he has for Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) remittance back to where it is collected from. Hon. Musasizi, I am talking to you. It is not only local governments; most of the MDAs are complaining. 

The second one is on the funding aspect. Somebody has just asked, how do you pay the workers of those places? We need a response from you in the next two weeks. 

Members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have a delegation of officials and athletes who participated in the 2020 Tokyo Olympics from 23 July 2021 to 8 August 2021. They include:

    1. Dr Patrick Benard Ogwel, the General Secretary of the National Council of Sports;
    2. Ms Beatrice Ayikoru, the Vice President of Olympics Committee;
    3. Dr Donald Rukare, the Chairman of National Council of Sports;
    4. Mr Domenic Otucet, the President of Uganda Athletics Federation;

    5. Mr Peter Omara, the outgoing Commissioner of Physical Education and Sports;
    6. Mr David Katende, the Assistant General Secretary of the National Council of Sports;
    7. Mr Andrew Sorowen, Official of Athletics in Tokyo;
    8. Mr Ganzi Mugula, the representative of athletes;

    9. Ms Catherine Nanziri, an athlete;
    10. Ms Halima Nakayi, an athlete;
    11. Ms Shida Leni, an athlete;
    12. Mr David Ssemujju, an athlete;

    13. Ms Margaret Ijala, a coach;
    14. Mr Rodrick Muhumuza, a coach;
    15. Mr Patrick Lihanda, a coach;
    16. Mr Narisesio Bugingo, a coach.

You are all welcome.

I have also been informed that the gold, silver and bronze medallists had to travel to the U.S. As Parliament, we had promised that when they return, we will have an interaction with them. We will also have dinner with the team at the Parliament of Uganda. I would like to have the team in the public gallery leave early and then we can continue with our business. I am now moving item four to be handled first. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO TEAM UGANDA FOR ITS PERFORMANCE AT THE 2020 TOKYO OLYMPICS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Team Uganda for its performance at the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. The mover is hon. Magogo. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, you have informed Parliament that the people we want to thank are in the US. The team that is available here is mainly comprised of coaches and leaders. The procedural issue I am raising – [Hon. Mpindi rose_]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is on a procedural matter.

MR MPINDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have introduced the members of the team – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mpindi, it was a procedural matter. 

MR MPINDI: Yes, but he is misleading the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am the Chair of the House and that is why I gave a disclaimer that the other members of the team are not here. However, since the Order Paper had come out, there is no way we would do away with moving this motion. 

Hon. Ssemujju, some of the athletes are here but you can continue with your procedural matter. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, you have read me correctly. I was just drawing your attention to the fact – because you said when they return, they will come back to Parliament and even have dinner with us. My prayer, as I raise this procedural issue, was whether this motion cannot be deferred until the medallists are back such that they see the emotions of Parliament –(Interruption)

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, hon. Ssemujju. I have heard your point of procedure and your advice to Parliament. Again, as sportsmen, we compete as a team. We have various roles to play for the team to succeed. The team we are with here might have played a huge part in the success of those who went to the US. Therefore, it would be a bit demoralising to think that only those who succeeded on the field are the ones we should appreciate. 

As Parliament, let us do our role of appreciating the whole team. Then after, as guided by the Speaker, we can again appreciate those who excelled at the games. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, hon. Ssemujju has never even kicked a ball; so, he does not understand. (Laughter)

MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also congratulate you. The information I am giving is in support of hon. Ssemujju’s idea. These members won in individual sports; they did not win in football where you pass the ball and one scores. When you run 10,000 or 5,000 meters, you run as Cheptegei, representing Team Uganda. 

Therefore, when you win gold, why do others celebrate on your behalf? It would be very prudent that we have those athletes who won the gold medals. Winning a gold medal in the most prestigious event in the world - the Olympics - is not a mean achievement.

Therefore, before we speak, Cheptegei and Chemutai should be here. Now, we are going to conduct a wedding without the bride –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, the coaches are here and you should equally appreciate their work. The National Council of Sports is also here; without them, the athletes would not be there. Parliament is also here; we are the ones who appropriated money for them to go. We are thanking everybody out there and not only the individuals.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, as a footballer, I would like to confirm that Semujju plays football. He has actually ever kicked a ball in defence and plays No.2.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Semujju, you play football.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, the debate on the Olympics is now. Any attempt to defer the matter when it is still very hot may not make sense. Secondly, our athletes are now on demand; there are many activities going on. 

You will find that as they come back from the US, there is likely to be another event and they may not be here. Therefore, thinking that we will have all of them here is just being speculative.

I would like to propose that we proceed and have the motion. Whatever will be discussed here will be extracted and forwarded to them. They will be able to appreciate that Parliament was grateful to what they did in as far as their contribution to this country is concerned. They do not have to be here.

Madam Speaker, we have done it before. The other day-

MR SEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the information is on the permission of the one holding the Floor. Therefore, I would like to stop hon. Basalirwa from submitting -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that you had finished.

MR BASALIRWA: At least I defended you when the Speaker thought you had never kicked a ball.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As hon. Basalirwa said, it is either now or never. Thank you.

3.43
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform colleagues that our athletes are in the US for the diamond league. They are going into another very important competition. The moment they know that the Parliament sat and recognised their performance at the Olympics, it will give them much more pleasure and energy to even fight for more recognition.

3.44
MR MOSES MAGOGO (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende): Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament congratulating the Uganda Olympics team for their excellent performance in the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo.

“WHEREAS the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XVII enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda mandates the State to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda;

AWARE that in fulfilment of the above objective and directive principle, Uganda sponsored a team of 26 to participate in the disciplines of athletics, boxing, swimming and rowing of the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo held between 23rd July to 8th August 2021;

NOTING that the Uganda Olympics team, through their exceptional performance of the following individuals, won medals in different athletics categories;

Mr Joshua Cheptegei, who is the current 5,000 meter and 10,000 meter world record holder, won a gold medal in the Men's 5,000 meter and a silver medal in the Men's 10,000 meter;-(Interruption)-

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order in relation to the honourable minister, Sam Mayanja, who is seated behind there and not putting on his mask properly. Is he in order to come and put on a mask as if he is at a wedding? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Mayanja, do not come to the House when you are wearing your mask like that.
 
MR MAGOGO: I will proceed talking about the achievements of the different athletes. 

“…Ms Peruth Chemutai won a gold medal in the Women's 3,000M steeplechase and Mr Jacob Kiplimo won a bronze medal in the Men's 10,000M.

RECOGNIZING that the four medals won by the Uganda Olympics team in Tokyo are the highest number of medals Uganda has won in a single entry since 1956 when Uganda first participated in the
Olympics Games; 

COGNISANT that as a result of this excellent performance, Uganda came second to Kenya in Africa and secured the 35th position in the world; 

CONSIDERING that athletes that represent Uganda in various sports disciplines; 

    (i) do not undergo the organic process of growth as compared to their competitors of the international level, 

    (ii) that the talent of a world class athlete should have gone through the following six stages at the right ages; identification of talent, Nurturing, Preparation, Presentation, Motivation and Reward. Also considering that these athletes do not have access to the necessary infrastructure and equipment for development and preparation for national and international competitions;

ALIVE to the fact that the appropriation for sports is meagre and that for the Financial Year 202l/2022, it was about Shs 18 billion, which is 3.5 per cent of the Ministry of Education and Sports budget but also 0.05 per cent of the national budget. This amount has since been cut by the 40 per cent general budget cut. 

OBSERVANT that the sports advisers of His Excellency the President may have included the Olympics, Commonwealth and All Africa Games as the games to be rewarded for excellence but missed out the most prestigious World Athletics Championship where Ugandan athletes have excelled; 

Madam Speaker, the World Athletics Champions are the equivalent of the World Cup in football. As we speak, Ms Halima Nakaye is the reigning World 800 meter Champion, having won gold in Doha in 2019 and has not been rewarded for her excellent performance despite the fact that she is the reigning world champion.

Another Ugandan athlete, Davis Kamoga, who deputised the greatest world quarter mile ever in Michael Johnson in the 90s and won Uganda’s first Olympic Medal in 1961 after 24 years since John Aki Bua did it in 1972, has never received his promised entitlement from His Excellency, the President. Currently, Mr Kamoga has a life-threatening medical condition that requires only Shs 10 million that he cannot raise;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament:

    1. Congratulates the Uganda Olympics team that represented Uganda at the 2020 Summer Olympics, with particular recognition of Joshua Cheptegei, Peruth Chemutai and Jacob Kiplimo for their excellent and remarkable performance;

    2. Considers increasing the appropriation for sports in the coming financial year;


    3. Requires the Ministry of Education and Sports to present to Parliament for approval, a performance reward policy for athletes that represent Uganda and excel in the various sports disciplines and international competitions;

    4. Urges Government to fast-track –

    i) the completion of the  Teryet High Altitude Training Centre;
    ii) the renovation of the Mandela National Stadium that houses a number of sports disciplines, including the field and track events; and
    iii) the acquisition, renovation, construction and maintenance of regional, national and international standard sports facilities.

    5. Urges Government to fulfil its commitments and pledges made to all sports personalities who won medals prior to 2021, particularly the current World Champion, Ms Halimah Nakaye, and Davis Kamoga.”

I beg to move.

The deputy speaker: Thank you, hon. Moses Magogo. Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by hon. Patrick Isiagi, the hon. Muhammad Nsereko, hon. Asuman Basalirwa, hon. Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi, the Government Chief Whip and the honourable member from Kinkizi plus the whole House. Thank you. Would you love to speak to your motion?

Mr magogo: I said everything.

The deputy speaker: Now that you presented everything and have nothing else to say, the seconder can.

Mr magogo: Madam Speaker, I will leave the seconders of the motion to speak to it.

The deputy speaker: The seconders of the motion also include hon. Chemonges. You have five minutes each. Hon. Chemonges is from Kapchorwa where the athletes come from. Hon. Asuman is the Chairman of Sports in Parliament and hon. Isiagi, the retired – then I will call on all of you. Do not worry.

3.53
Mr William chemonges (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion for paying tribute and thanking our athletes who carried our flag high at the recent Tokyo Olympics, 2021.

Aware that Uganda has been represented in the games for so long, allow me to thank our athletes for getting us two Gold medals, a silver and bronze medals that were won by Ms Chemutai, Mr Kiplimo and Mr Cheptegei.

However, I note that our athletes deserve a lot of support beyond mere praises. Mr Cheptegei is building a training centre using his own money yet this has helped improve sports. In fact, all the gold medals we won recently are out of the support by Mr Cheptegei.

I would like to ask this House that even if Mr Cheptegei, Mr Kiplimo and Ms Chemutai are not around the House today and we seem to be very happy with them, support the fundraising initiative, which has been started by Mr Cheptegei with at least Shs 200,000. If the whole House can do that, we shall be able to raise about Shs 100 million for Mr Cheptegei as Parliament. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, these athletes go through a lot of problems during training. I would also like to ask that this House comes up with a resolution that these sports people get salary per month and that they be pensionable. There are so many sportspersons in our place who are now suffering as if they never won medals. I know that next time, it will be better to have them here. I beg to submit.

The deputy speaker: Thank you. Honourable member, I will give you chance after hon. Asuman Basalirwa and hon. Opolot. I will give all of you chance because I know you all love sports.

By the way, we also have a former national athlete, none other than our own, hon. Acon –(Applause)– who was a team leader when Davis Kamoga won the silver medal.

3.56
Mr asuman basalirwa (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion that this Parliament congratulates the Uganda Olympics team. I am particularly grateful to the mover of the motion, my brother hon. Moses Magogo.

We have paid –(Interruption)

Mr ssewanyana: Madam Speaker, hon. Asuman Basalirwa, a short while ago, made a request for a copy of a document, which was being read by an honourable member. Can we also have a copy of his document because I see he is also reading? Thank you.

The deputy speaker: The document he has is a motion. He is not reading it.

Mr basalirwa: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In any case, it was circulated; he has only not picked it from the network using his iPad.

Before I was diverted by my soccer sports captain, I was making a point that in this Parliament we have been congratulating sportspersons for several times. It is high time we moved beyond mere congratulations. 

We talked about increasing the budget for sports. Every time we talk about sports, the issue of budget increment comes up. I wish, as we congratulate our sportspersons, the Olympians, we moved from speech to action. The next time we come here, we should be talking about an increased budget for the sports fraternity in action and not only in words.

Secondly, we should be doing a lot of service to the sports fraternity if we also considered amending the relevant sports laws in this country. Right now, how sportspersons are appreciated is a matter left to the discretion of the President; actually, the Executive. The President decides who gets a vehicle, a motorcycle, money or a house. There is no clear framework.

Moving forward, that framework can only be provided if we came here in Parliament and made an enabling law. Therefore, we should consider having an enabling framework.

While moving the motion, hon. Moses Magogo made mention of Mr Davis Kamoga who is indisposed and needs just Shs 10 million. I would have requested each of us to contribute the Shs 10 million but I thought I would be undermining the Office of the Speaker. I would rather leave it to the Office of the Speaker to handle for purposes of not undermining the office.

It is unfortunate that somebody is mentioning the plight of a former sports personality lacking Shs 10 million. Madam Speaker, I will leave it to your office. Otherwise, I would have asked for a fundraising here.

Finally, in this motion, the mover mentions facilities that need to be renovated and he mentioned Namboole National Stadium. We also have another facility; Nakivubo Stadium. I am aware that there is already a partnership between Government and a private local investor, Ham. 

The other day, there was a delegation from Parliament that visited Nakivubo Stadium. There is work going on in Nakivubo. I want to urge Government, now that the lockdown has been partially lifted, to urge the local investor to expedite the completion of Nakivubo Stadium because it is also another complex housing different disciplines.

Moving forward, I hope that the Minister of State for Education and Sports (Sports), Mr Hamson Obua, will liaise with the private developer and ensure that this facility is also completed on time for purposes of increasing on the availability of sports facilities in this country. I beg to pray, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Basalirwa. It is good you have not embarrassed the Office of the Speaker. We will request Mr Davis Kamoga to come to the Office of the Speaker for the Shs 10 million. 

4.01
MR PATRICK OPOLOT-ISIAGI (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am making my maiden speech in this Parliament and I would like to beg Members to observe that.

I am speaking as a retired athlete and I agree with the mover of the motion. I thank you, colleagues and you, Madam Speaker, for defeating us who wanted to defer this motion. However, I would like to say that we are celebrating and harvesting where we have not invested much. As far as athletics is concerned, I would like to say that the coaches and managers have been very wonderful to produce gold medals with no investment at all.

The allocation we have in our budget to support athletics is so small that it cannot even run one day’s training. I am an example of low investment in athletics. I was summoned to the national athletics team for training but I refused. I was dragged there by my tutor, Eria Mugisa. I told him, I do not have money for feeding. He told me, we give refreshments. 

When I appeared for the training, it was very tough. At the end of the day, I was given one mango. I ate it and almost ate the seed. (Laughter) It took me three days to wake up from my bed in the hall. I could not attend lectures and I abandoned it completely. 

Therefore, for these people to win gold medals with this low investment is very bad. It is a shame but they have only gone ahead to tell us that there is a lot we can win. We could take athletics and sports just as entertainment. What about tourism where we get a lot of money? It is these sportsmen and sportswomen who advertise this country more than the money we put in these adverts. 

Madam Speaker, Olympic events in the world are watched by about four billion people. Therefore, for you to make any advert for one minute, you need to pay about US$ 2 million. However, when these athletes run and the commentator is saying, “Uganda, Uganda” for about 30 minutes, it saves us about US$ 60 million.

When another one appears, we are saving money we would have spent if we had to advertise our country for us to get tourists here. Suppose we invested money in these athletes, we would be harvesting about 50 gold medals. We would have been the best in the world. 

I, therefore, would like to say, thank you to the Government, for trying to do something in football, although it is not enough. Football is getting about Shs 10 billion a year in our budget. Why don’t we make a standard for these high-rising athletes who are bringing us good results? Our netballers, with a small investment, participate up to world netball championships. They even lift the African gold medal with very little investment. Sometime back, our netballers had a tournament in Zanzibar. The day before, I found them at Nakivubo trying to raise money to buy bus tickets to Zanzibar. They arrived in Zanzibar 20 minutes to the game. They went by bus up to Dar-es-Salaam, crossed the sea and arrived with swollen legs, entered the netball court and still won the game. 

Those are areas where we have very fertile grounds. Why don’t we set a standard for athletics, football and netball? Why don’t they all operate at about Shs 10 billion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The good thing is that you are the Chairman of the Budget Committee.

MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI: Madam Speaker, I would like to make it clear. There is an Article in the Constitution, which says that the budget will be brought by the Executive and referred from Parliament to the Budget Committee, which shall analyse, review and make recommendations to Parliament. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here and I would like to pray to this Parliament to order the minister that before he brings the budget, he should make an allocation to athletics and netball of a minimum of Shs 10 billion.

If they do not do it, we shall do it as a committee. We shall convince our members to make a review and do reallocation to provide for that money and recommend to Parliament. We only pray that Parliament supports our submission. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Two minutes -

4.07
PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Independent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a former national athlete and former President of Uganda Athletics Federation, I am very happy to support this motion. 

I recall very well in 1991, while in the World University Games - I was with Beatrice Allen who has been introduced as Vice-President of Olympics – we run with America and the American had taken five years to win a gold medal. It takes a lot of investment and training to win a gold medal. 

Mr Davis Kamoga, as you have heard, during our time, was actually a footballer. We identified his talent and encouraged him to join athletics. When he won a silver medal in Gothenburg, Sweden in 1997, I was a team leader. Davis Kamoga subsequently won a bronze medal in the Olympics. Therefore, you have to put in a lot of effort and investment to produce a gold medal. That is why I would like to call upon Government to expedite facilitating and building the high-altitude facility in Kapchorwa so that our athletes can have facilities to train from.

Madam Speaker, I am very grateful that your office is going to provide Shs 10 million to help Davis Kamoga, our former national athlete, whom I associated with to solve his problems. When our athletes who are abroad hear that we have done this, they will be encouraged. 

I would like to thank the coaches who are up there. I have heard Naris Bigongi. He was my coach, when we ran a marathon from Kabale Stadium to Katuna Border and back to the stadium. I would also like to applaud hon. Acon, who is here. I was his coach. I am very happy to see him here. 

As a Government, we need to put in money –(Member timed out.)

4.10
MR GEOFFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Madam Speaker, I am the Shadow Minister of Sports. I rise to support the motion to congratulate our brothers and sisters from the athletics world. 

We would have many winners, if we had a system that identifies talent at a young age. We do not have athletes only in Kapchorwa; even in Bukomansimbi, we had a man called Kabiito Kyanakyambaata, who was the best in the 100 metres race. Since we did not have a proper system to tap Kyanakyambaata, that is how we missed him. 

I am asking the Government to put up a proper reward system for medal winners. We see countries like Estonia, where a person who wins a gold medal gets about $700,000. However here, when Mr Museveni is happy, he gives them a goat and maybe a car. When he is not in the mood, he does not give them anything. 

We need a proper reward system to avoid circumstances like that, of my brother Sekitoleko, who disappeared in Japan because he had won many medals but he knew he would get nothing upon his return to Uganda. 

To avoid such an incident and to motivate them, we –(Member timed out.)

4.12
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise up in support of the motion as has been tabled by hon. Hashim Magogo, the President of the Federation of Uganda Football Association. 

There are three issues that we need to tackle in order to get sports excellence. One, proper facilitation of managers and coaches. We have all praised them. I did not hear, among those to be rewarded, that they will also be rewarded by payment of say, Shs 2 million until they pass on or for whatever stipulated period. That calls for proper legislation by this august House. We talked about the athletes. There is no athlete that can perform without a coach or a medical team.

Two, is the issue of construction of facilities. At least every subregion should have a model stadium for field and track events, plus an indoor stadium. These are things we can appropriate and legislate for.

Three, schools used to organise the post-primary competitions, as a way of identifying and nurturing talent. Now schools are being licensed without sports facilities –(Interruption)

MR KAKEMBO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I am standing to give information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kakembo, you have one minute.

MR KAKEMBO: I would like to add that it is high time Parliament considered separation of these ministries. It is high time we had a ministry of sports separated from the ministry of education. (Applause)

It is very unfortunate that we are here encouraging and motivating our athletes in the absence of the line minister. It is high time we considered that. The ministry of education has its own problems and sports is very broad. When you speak of sports, we are not only referring to footballers or athletes; there are many other disciplines in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mbwa, I am not sure whether the Ministry of Education and Sports has problems. If it had problems, we would not be performing. If you want it separated, just say it should be separated; not that it has problems. 

MR KAKEMBO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. My humble prayer is that Parliament should consider separating these ministries. We have a lot of talent and which needs a different ministry to develop as many talents as possible in this country. Thank you. 

4.16
MR MPINDI BUMALI (Independent, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking you for supporting sports. I would also like to thank the Government because for the first time, the Government has moderately facilitated the Olympic Games and the Paralympic games that are going to begin next week. 

Hon. Magogo, in his submission, requested that Parliament considers increasing funding in the next financial year. I, however, would like to request him to consider requesting Parliament to increase funding beginning with this financial year, by making a supplementary budget. Otherwise, in the year 2022, the Commonwealth games shall be held. Right now, the National Council of Sports has only Shs 10 billion. 

For these athletes to go for these games, they need to go through the different competitions like you have heard, where our athletes are. With Shs 10 billion, I am assuring you that nothing much can be done and we cannot front a good team to represent us in the Commonwealth Games. 

I want to say that I was extremely happy when I saw almost everyone here support the motion to increase funding for the sports sector. 

On a lighter note, I have been sitting in the gallery as a sportsman and I have been seeing this kind of support happening in Parliament but when it comes to –(Member timed out.)

4.18
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest to congratulate our colleagues for making Uganda proud. We are very happy as a country. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should strengthen games and sports in schools. Today, we are seeing Cheptegei and his colleagues but tomorrow, they may not be there and the spirit of games and sports shall die in this country. 

Schools nowadays emphasise academic performance. There are very many schools without play grounds and the ministry is busy giving them licenses and allowing them to operate. We need to promote and encourage games and sports, right from a tender age. Let the children be uplifted right from primary school.

During the games in Tokyo, we witnessed and saw that there were very few morale boosters. As a country, many people can pay for their own air tickets. Next time, let us mobilise and we allow people to move in large numbers to morale boost our people. After winning, the stadium was so cold because Ugandans were not there, yet we were performing very well.

Finally, the Government should not forget the families of these great people. We have seen the family of the late John Akii-Bua; Government does not even know where they are. The family of Ayaa is no longer seen anywhere –(Member timed out)

4.20
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for this opportunity. I would like to thank the movers of this motion, asking Parliament to recognise the wonderful job done by our athletes during the Olympics, particularly those who won medals.

There are not many things to be proud about our country. The other day, you all saw the images the President was displaying on TV; of soldiers beating and torturing people; beating women. I contrasted these images with the ones of the Minister of Education and Sports, when she was cheering the athletes in the Olympics.

I, therefore, thank Team Uganda that they have made us proud as a country. The world does not watch soldiers - those who are here can take the message – beating citizens –(Laughter)- and policemen torturing women. There is at least now a very good story to tell about Uganda.

Finally, I want to associate with the submissions of all my colleagues on funding of sports. I know COVID-19 is a serious pandemic but to turn a national facility like Namboole into a COVID-19 centre – Madam Speaker, can I have just one second because I am a neighbour to Namboole.

Namboole is now known for COVID-19. No wonder, the FUFA President can testify. The other day, we were supposed to host games and the Minister of State for Education and Sports, hon. Obua, said that we now do not have a facility that can host international matches. We may host our next international match in Kenya or Rwanda.

I want to tell you, the historicals like hon. Jim Muhwezi, that 35 years later, you cannot construct a facility for Uganda –(Laughter)– and you want us to celebrate history –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, that is a personal attack on hon. Jim Muhwezi. (Laughter) He is not –

GEN. MUHWEZI: Madam Speaker, this is not the first time that hon. Ssemujju Nganda refers to me whenever he has nothing better to say. (Laughter) I know his views about me, and I can tell him that the relationship is mutual. However, is it in order for him to always, when he runs short of ideas, to refer to me? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Jim Muhwezi, I think he did not have what to say; that is why he had to say your name. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am very sorry to hon. Jim Muhwezi. I only used him as a historical figure. I will now stop referring to him as a historical figure. I did not know that it offends him. I was only making a point that 35 years into power and –(Member timed out.)

4.24
MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this chance and stand up in support of the motion, moved by hon. Magogo.

In his motion, he mentioned something to do with the high altitude stadium in Teryet. I just visited there three days ago, and interacted with the contractors, but more so, the contractor building the stadium. It is about 70 per cent complete. 

I thought that maybe it was the part of the contractor where the weakness came from. However, the contractor – that is Complant Engineering – informed me that it is actually Government. For example, in the centre of the running ways, there is a field. Government keeps changing designs every other day and so, it makes the contractor not move the work.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, these luminaries are ours but they have a timeframe between their youth and before they go into womanhood or manhood; it will have ended. I heard a speech from hon. Chemonges, wishing for this country to find a way to remunerate them throughout their life, after they have done such wonders.

I want to refer to you those luminaries who were here; the Inzikurus, Akii-Buas and others. Check on them and see the life they live, by the way. That would inform us on how to remunerate them and laws that will bring them into remuneration.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, without tribe, party or everything, you saw this country coming up in unison, simply because of these sports people; athletes and others. That is how we should move. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

MS NYAKATO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2013/2014, the Shadow Minister of Education and Sports submitted proposals to this Parliament, that the Government pays monthly allowances to all sportsmen and women of this country who win medals; a monthly allowance of at least one million shillings. Parliament also proposed two million shillings to all the coaches who have been training these sportsmen and women.

My prayer is that this Parliament adopts this and the Government implements this proposal, Madam Speaker. I beg to submit.

4.28
MR MAPENDUZI OJARA (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Madam Speaker, I am up in total support of the motion, raised by hon. Moses Magogo. 

This country needs to give a lot of attention to games and sports. In 2017, Uganda hosted the East Africa Secondary School Games. However, before the event, the Ministry of Education and Sports failed to provide the resources to prepare the facilities that were meant for these games. 

For fear that our country would be embarrassed as district chairperson of Gulu at that time, I mobilised the community and we rehabilitated Pece Stadium. Women, children and everyone came and made sacrifices to prepare the facility. Indeed, we are told that was the best game organised by Uganda under the East Africa Secondary School games. Fortunately, hon. Moses Magogo attended. 

Later on, a commitment was made that Pece Stadium and other regional sports facilities would be rehabilitated. Unfortunately, to this day, that commitment has never been implemented. 

Madam Speaker, I think it is important that when commitments are made, especially by Government, they need to be pursued and implemented. Otherwise, sometimes I wonder who has bewitched this country; that we make commitments and do not implement them. (Laughter)

Secondly –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Nobody has bewitched our country. 

MR MARTIN OJARA: That calls for a lot of improvement. Thank you. 

Secondly, a few days ago, together with hon. Anthony Akol, we were in Gulu. We met a team of the Uganda Cranes players who are right now camped in Gulu. We were told they are running around the country looking for who can help them. Today, they are in Gulu trying to persuade the leadership of Operation Wealth Creation to support them. I will tell you what they told us and hon. Akol is here as my witness.

One of them said they are so disappointed that they are trying to find ways of leaving this country so that they can show their talents elsewhere. It is not wrong for anybody to leave the country but it should not be because the country cannot provide what it takes to support these people. I have a lot of hope in this Parliament; we need to begin walking the talk. 

4.31
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion to congratulate Team Uganda for the medals they won at the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. Specifically, I congratulate the first Ugandan woman to win a gold medal at the Olympics. As women and Uganda as a whole, we are proud of her.

I think we have talked enough as Parliament. We have to act. I support the motion, especially the part which is urging us to contribute Shs 200,000 to help Cheptegei build a training centre. However, what is the Government doing? As Parliament, we are willing to support but what about the Government? I would like the minister who is here to come and tell us what the Government is prepared to do. Is it in terms of supplementary?

We got the first medal in this country by the late John Akii-Bua. Government promised that Akii-Bua Stadium would be built but it is sad that John Akii-Bua is dead and we have not yet seen the implementation of Akii-Bua Stadium.

I also would like the Government to tell us clearly, on top of the high altitude centre which we have been demanding for, when Akii-Bua Stadium will be built. It is not only Akii-Bua Stadium – Uganda has enormous talents. All the regions have unique abilities –(Member timed out.) Madam Speaker, allow me to complete this point. 

We have unique abilities in different regions. For example, we need to diversify the different sport disciplines. When I was young, people used to participate in javelin, shot put and high jump. When you look at all the regions, there are people with big arms. Those can play shot put very well. There are those who are slender and tall like hon. Akol here. They can be high jumpers –(Member timed out.)

4.33
MS SHAMIM MALENDE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kampala): I rise to support the motion appreciating our athletes for making Uganda proud. I wish to add, as the shadow Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, that we can talk from morning to sun set but if there is no clear legislation governing sports then each and every Parliament will continue appreciating and just congratulating our sportspersons.

My submission is that clear legislation should be brought on table. This is a law making House. It has to go beyond mere proposals and commitments by the Government; there has to be a law. When the law is finally passed, I ask that the legislation must be respected by all entities and persons. I beg to submit.

4.35
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, let me add my voice to support this motion by hon. Magogo. The day we got the second gold medal, we were waiting for you at the tent and suddenly, there was noise all over Uganda. I did not understand what was happening until when I was told that Uganda had won another gold medal.

The problem we have with sports is that when the sportspersons lose, we say, they have lost. When they win, we say, Uganda has won. That is the problem. We only recognise victory, we do not recognise them when they have struggled and failed yet we do not facilitate them to do the work. 

When the mover of the motion was talking, he mentioned that only three per cent of our budget for education goes to sports. I am wondering – the ministry is called the Ministry of Education and Sports. If only three per cent of the budget of the ministry goes to sports, why do you then call it the Ministry of Education and Sports? 

We have to resolve here and say, in the Ministry of Education and Sports, 10 per cent of the budget should go to sports. That is our position as Parliament. It should be done today. If we keep saying we should increase the budget, when are we going to realise the reality we want in sports?

My position is that if we want to see change in the country, we need to take action. I implore this Parliament to resolve today that 10 per cent of the budget of the Ministry of Education and Sports should go to sports. That is my position.

4.37
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join Parliament in paying tribute to these people. We have done so well and made Uganda proud. I want to recognise the year 1956 when Uganda entered the Olympics. For those who want to learn history - I am not an historian but I love to learn history- you recall that, that was the year a Ugandan led a team of footballers to the United Kingdom. They tried to play football with boots and they could not manage. They played barefoot and defeated all those distinguished teams in the United Kingdom. (Laughter) The captain of that team was called – I think the minister would know his name. He was called Manasi Owiny from Lango Local Government then; there was no Dokolo at that time. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter and the same history has recorded that there are distinguished Ugandans who have done Ugandans proud but after they have invested in their own skills to that level, as a country, we do not recognise these people well enough. That is my concern.

Madam Speaker, you may remember that two weeks ago before you sent us out, I had moved a motion on the Floor of Parliament to include a clause in the motion to ask the Government to come to Parliament with a plan of how the Ugandan Government is going to invest in sports. We have not yet received that.

However, you had given them one week to present that report but up to now, the investment plan in sports has not yet been presented.

Madam Speaker, may we use this motion to demand that the minister responsible for sports must come to Parliament and present a plan; immediate, medium and long-term plans of how this country is going to invest in sports because the young men and women who are struggling at the moment spend money from their own pocket and use their parents’ resources.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Government should take sports seriously to promote the image of this -(Member timed out.)

4.41
MR ALLAN SEWANYANA (NUP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the time you have given us. We also thank you for the Shs 10 million you are giving to Davis Kamoga. Thank you very much.

I would like to congratulate the Olympics team for their tremendous performance in the Olympics. Honourable members, Olympic Games happen every four years; it is like the world cup of every game in this world. Therefore, for someone to become number 1, 2 or 3 is not something we should be taking lightly. 

I would like to call upon the minister of sports to inform the President of this country that giving out a small car and a small house and Shs 5 million is not appreciation enough to someone who has won an Olympic gold medal.

I have even heard of the President giving $1,000,000 to the National football team - the Uganda Cranes - just for reaching the Africa Cup of Nations, which is a quarter of the Olympics. Therefore, why then doesn’t he give $2 million as appreciation to the Olympics team so that each member of the team, whether they performed well or not, gets appreciated for representing for our country.

The President should not be segregative. We had him appreciate, through his brother, all the musicians; these people are moving out with money between Shs 500 million and Shs 800 million per person and the promoters are getting Shs 1 billion each; why not sportsmen? Mr President, you should be very serious with the sports.

I saw Lionel Messi wear a jersey with the words, “Visit Rwanda” after Rwanda investing some much money. Cheptegei won a gold medal for Uganda, for free. Why doesn’t the President appreciate sports – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewanyana, it is bad manners. When your time is over -

MR SSEWANYANA: No, we are very passionate about sports - making sports - it is very cheap. This is how in the camp there was no gas and as a country, we have been mentioned on several television stations -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you sit down. At least the President has given something small; what have you given, as Parliament? Somebody is saying that we contribute Shs 200,000 and everybody has gone cold.

4.43
MR JOEL SSENYONYI (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to join colleagues in congratulating our sportsmen and sportswomen -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, do not bring your personal emotions to the House; this is a House of legislature, not emotions. We are debating issues that will help Uganda and not just individuals.

MR SSENYONYI: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, I rise to join colleagues in congratulating our sportsmen and sportswomen. This is an emotional subject matter.

Growing up, I used to hear that a promise is a debt, but eventually, I learnt that promises are not taken seriously. We have made promises to sports, sportsmen and sportswomen in this country; promises which we have not been deliberate about keeping. 

We keep reaping where we have not sown. We meet here, congratulate them, they will be taken to Entebbe and congratulated. However, how much are we investing and sowing? If we were sowing a lot more, we would be reaping a lot more.
 
Briefly, Madam Speaker, I can take you through one or two promises that have been made and have not been kept. There was a promise of a pension scheme for nationally acclaimed athletes; that was a promise made ahead of the 2016 presidential election. To date, it has not been fulfilled.

There was a promise to provide incentives for private sector investments in sports. That has not been fulfilled. There is no structure to make sure that it gets to happen.

Madam Speaker, there was a promise and a colleague has talked about it, of one million dollars to the Uganda Cranes after the 2019 Africa Cup of Nations in Egypt. Up to now, that money has not been given.

Finally, Madam Speaker, everyone has talked about the Stephen Kiprotich High Altitude Training Centre in Teryet. It was meant to be completed in 2019; to date, the gentlemen are now making fundraisers and all of that. I suppose that we need –(Member timed out.)

4.45
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. On behalf of the people of Gulu City and on my own behalf, I would like to congratulate the medallists. The day the flag of Uganda flew up high, everybody in Uganda was excited. 

I was in Gulu and there was a lot of noise. I was wondering and I was outside - they called me, “Come and see our Ugandan.” That was the first gold medallist. Everybody was excited! The way we get excited means that sport is a real area of investment.

Those days when we were in primary and secondary school, at least you could see that sports was held in high regard. What has changed that right now, you do not hear of pupils going to compete? This competition would make us try to identify those who are talented in that area and then you keep on building their talent.

Right now, those from Sebei and those from the east do the work themselves; it is not the Government. Before we talk about fundraising from individuals, from the Office of the Speaker, why can’t we task the Ministry of Education and Sports to make sure that they budget for Paralympics and for even the disabled persons? Sometimes you see that we have to shoulder - we cannot shoulder –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I join the rest in congratulating our team for having made us proud. I have listened carefully to all the congratulatory messages for the 10 years I have been in this House.

I am tempted to strongly believe that there is a unique skill and knowledge that we can tap from that region of Sebei. I know Government supports all the schools in sports but why is it that it is only that region that often makes us proud? Can the Ministry of Education and Sports get to know why these people perform better than other regions and we exchange knowledge and skills?

Secondly, I propose that we need to have specific budgets for the rewards. We are now leaning on the Fountain of Honour and we cannot press him to the extent that we need. Therefore, I request that for the rewards that should go to specific people, rather than structures that can benefit the entire country, we should put it in the budget so that the sportsmen and women will know that when we win, this is what we are going to get –(Interjections).

The deputy speaker: When you give out your time, I will not give you more.

Ms ababiku: Madam Speaker, I also concur with Members that our ministry should be able to circulate the sports calendar - not all of us are sportswomen and men – so that when we sit in this House, we shall be able to budget and also support the Government initiatives as per the calendar.

4.50
Mr Solomon CHELANGAT (NRM, Too County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the motion. I would like to share an experience that I had with some of our athletes when we went to Kenya. 

From Kenya, the government taps this resource at an early stage. They provide playgrounds in every constituency. My prayer is that we try, as much as possible, to provide the playgrounds in Sebei subregion. You know that talent is tapped at an early stage. Now that the high altitude training centre is in Kapchorwa, the young ones from Bukwo, who could begin training, cannot travel up to Kapchorwa. 

My prayer is that the ministry considers having those training facilities in every constituency in Sebei subregion and we consider also other areas. Thank you.

4.52
Ms patience nkunda (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion by hon. Magogo. I congratulate our athletes for making us proud.

I propose that the Government of Uganda can build an institution purposely for sports, where the sportsmen and women who are talented can be catered for in terms of tuition. We can have a sports camp that is purposely meant to build our gifted young men and women.

I would like to thank the President of Uganda for recognising our athletes who worked very hard. It is a shame when someone stands in the House and undermines the little that has been given. We cannot compare countries. Countries have different economies and what they can give. Thank you.

4.53
Mr Wilson kajwengye (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Nyabushozi, I wish to support this motion and congratulate our golden ladies and men who made us very proud. 

Moments of national unity, moments of absolute exhilaration and moments that enjoy absolute bi-partisan support in the august House are only golden moments. These are the moments that the motherland Uganda should cherish.

I would like to applaud the leadership of the team in Tokyo. They definitely did us proud. It is not only those who were on the field but the leadership was also excellent. This leadership extends to the minister, the President and the team in the gallery.

I now make this proposal: the minister in charge of sports should come to this House and tell us exactly what he wants this House to do once and for all, so that every time we stand here and give tribute to them, everything is being put in practice. They should be paid. 

I listened to the President at Kololo and I wondered why presidential directives are not put in practice. It is ashaming. I would like to see these gold medallists invited at national functions like Independence and others and rubbing shoulders with the guests and presidents of the day. I would like to see them being recognised nationally, having gold medal of Katonga and all the medals that we give. We should also award them medals here.

I would like the national sports – (Member timed out.)

4.55
Ms mary begumisa (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a sports lady myself even back home. I support the motion by hon. Magogo.

Mine is about the Sebei sub-region. Parliament could choose one of the districts and make it a sports district and accord it a status because they have done a great job for us.

Secondly, Parliament could make those medallists pensioners for their families and relatives to enjoy this. Thank you.

4.56
Ms sarah opendi (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice in congratulating our athletes for this wonderful achievement. 

However, for the last 10 years that I have been in Parliament, every time there is an achievement on the pitches, we come here, talk and after that, it is business as usual and we come back and lament. Moving forward after this, I hope that we shall see more funding to sports.

Also, while we allocate the little resources towards sports, there is a problem when it comes to other disciplines. There is focus on more funding being given to football as compared to the other disciplines. This also needs to be looked at. I was with Inzikuru, our gold medallist. She narrated to me the pain they go through. 

We are here celebrating but we need to celebrate the coaches because they are the ones who make these athletes. They are the ones who have been funding these athletes, almost singlehandedly. Government comes in at the tail-end. Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that as we celebrate the gold medallists, let us also celebrate the coaches. 

Also, let us ensure that in the next budget, there is adequate funding for sports because it is not only a source of pride to this country but also a source of employment. There are very many youth in this country who lack the facilities to train from. We cannot only look at Kapchorwa because we have youth in every part of the country.

I would like to propose that Government considers constructing different facilities in different parts of the country so that the ones in Arua can – (Member timed out.)

4.58
Ms rosemary nyakikongoro (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to congratulate our athletes who made Uganda shine. 

I want to find out the role of the National Council for Sports. Its mandate is to develop, promote and control sports activities in Uganda on behalf of the Government. 

People are saying that the athletes come from one side -I am was very excited because when Chemutai won the gold medal, every district was claiming Chemutai and giving her a name in their own language. The question I would like to ask is, how can we identify athletes in Sheema who can bring Uganda gold medals?

In primary schools, there used to be Physical Education (PE). I believe that was one of the things that would identify people’s talents. Does National Council of Sports wait until the athletes show themselves or do they work with the districts to identify the talents of the young people? 

When you look at the current athletes that were in the Tokyo Olympics, the United Kingdom and the USA sponsored very many people. No wonder they won very many gold, silver and bronze medals. We took very few people and we were clinging around the few that represented us.

I did not see many people participate in other sports disciplines that were there like javelin, yet we have people who can bring gold –(Member timed out.)

5.00
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to thank our athletes and the team – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Phyllis, you need to mention your name for the Hansard.

MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from the district where Joshua Cheptegei and Stephen Kiprotich come from. I, therefore, have two gold medals from the Tokyo Olympics. Maybe to inform you, I was also a sports lady. I think this means that the “Chemutais” are very good sports ladies. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that the people of Kapchorwa were very excited when they heard that their children had brought back gold medals to the country. They said, what can this country do for us? They requested for a sports city. 

I want to thank hon. Ababiku for supporting the idea that Sebei region is a unique district and it has a different talent. If given opportunity, we can bring more medals to this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government, are you listening?

MS CHEMUTAI: The other thing they have requested for is a sports science university or institution to support some of these children to go further with their education. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Chemutai.

5.03
MR BASIL BATARINGAYA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the brilliant motion moved by hon. Magogo. When you speak about sports, you speak about the youth. These two are in different ministries. Youth is a different ministry and education, where sports falls, is a different ministry. We should be thinking of bringing them together.

Secondly, Jesus used to speak in parables. In Uganda, we have survived on good rains and fertile soils for a long time. However, these to a certain extent reach a time and dwindle and our people will eventually have no food. Similarly, in sports, we have survived on good will coaches who are paid very poorly hence, natural talent which is not harvested. 

Therefore, I wish to suggest the following:

    1. The Ministry of Education and Sports should bring here a comprehensive plan in line with the National Development Plan and give us what they plan to do to appraise sports, especially setting up –(Member timed out.)

5.05
MR AMOS KANKUNDA (NRM, Rwampara County, Rwampara): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. For the record, this is my maiden speech. Perhaps, I am the only Munyankore with a royal connection to Busoga. 

I stand to associate myself with the rest of the colleagues to support sports. Beyond that, we need to look at sports in terms of enabling new areas like town councils to have facilities like we have said in schools. 

When I was a young man in Kampala, Lugogo had enough sports pitches. As I speak, we only have the indoor stadium and Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) grounds. Therefore, it is important that we note the yearning of our youth in our constituencies, even here in Kampala, and find small pitches where they can play or run.

I would like to applaud those who have made an effort but also ask Parliament to gazette areas where we can have these sports. It is always said that –(Interruption)

MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. As you advocate for sports, I would like to give Members information that this House appropriated Shs 30 billion for the renovation of Namboole Stadium, the only facility we have in this country with all our pride. Our national football team is supposed to play an international match with Kenya. Maybe they will go and play in South Sudan.

After appropriating Shs 30 billion, to date the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not released anything because they think that sports is not a priority. That is the information I want to give you. (Laughter)

MR KANKUNDA: Thank you, Chairperson of the Committee on Budget for the information. I want to conclude by saying that whereas we have been making promises as Government, this time let it be like the idiom where we say, I was rescued at the 11th hour. Let the 11th Parliament rescue sports and athletes. Thank you. (Applause)

5.08 
MR SIRAJI EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I concur with my colleagues that in Uganda, we have games and sports, which we need to promote. 

Without funds, we cannot promote these talents. I would, therefore, like to concur that the budget for games and sports should be increased. 

Each medallist who is able to bring fame to this country should be compensated in various ways. I have seen medallists who have brought us fame but when you go to their villages, their accommodation is appalling. I would like to suggest that each medallist who is able to bring us fame should be built a decent house in the village.

Each medallist should be paid from the time they bring the medal up to the time when he or she dies. 

Thank you very much. I beg to submit.

5.09
MR DONALD KATALIHWA (NRM, Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a very good sportsman, especially when it comes to cheering teams that I love - (Laughter). I do not actively participate. 

I have two important points to make. One of them is that these sports achievers whom we are congratulating today are very important role models in our communities and in our schools. Parents are going to name their children Cheptegei and others Cheprotich - 

It is, however, very unfortunate that about three or four years down the road, after these people have achieved greatly for this country, you look for them and you do not see them. 

What I am raising is that we really need to come up with a strategy, as Parliament, on how to assist these members who achieve for us to maintain the standard they set, at the time of the achievement. We can celebrate more and more people achieving because of learning from other achievers. 

We need to advise the Government on how best we can have sustainable livelihood strategies, sustainable incomes for these people so that when we celebrate them today, tomorrow they are not forgotten. We do not want our children to lose these role models, when they see that they have become poor. 

The issue of Government pledges and commitments to these achievers: I was reading something back midyear that Dorcus Inzikuru was still complaining that the car that was promised to her many years back has never been –(Interruptions) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, give your colleague the microphone. 

MR KATALIHWA: Madam Speaker, we are all appreciating the sports people but I would also like to appreciate the minister of state for sports, our colleague, for achieving on behalf of –(Member timed out.)

5.12
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to associate myself with the previous speakers in supporting this motion. I would like to thank the mover of this motion very much. 

I would like to associate myself, first as a national leader in this House and secondly, as a daughter of a sportsman who contributed a lot to the sports sector in this country. 

The team that was referred to by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who played football in the UK barefooted - my late father, the late Abondi Odia, played No. 11 on that team. (Applause) They hammered the English team properly, 2-0. 

I am here to also congratulate Team Uganda for raising the flag very high, internationally. 

One thing that I must put very clearly in this House is that the sports sector belongs to a ministry. The sports sector does not fall under the President's Office. On this note, I would like to thank the President of Uganda, very sincerely, for all the efforts he has been putting in recognising the contribution of our sportsmen. 

However, Madam Speaker, it is time for Parliament to put sports where it rightly belongs. If the problem has been funding, it is upon this Parliament, through the budget committee – the ministry has got to come out clearly and we pronounce ourselves on it. 

Our programme and system of education encourages co-curricular activities. This is a stage at primary level where skills and potential are identified and we get to nurture them. The gap we have been having is coordinating from that lower stage to a higher level.

Our priorities are quite clear; that we establish stadiums in the regions. Our priority is that we have to come out with a performance reward policy in this very 11th Parliament –(Member timed out.)

5.15
DR CHARLES AYUME (NRM, Koboko Municipality, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion and congratulate the athletes and the technical team. To my colleagues from the Sebei region, thank you for making us proud. 

To give a bit of information, sports is about endurance. The advantage that the Sebei Region has is high altitude. That is why athletes have to go there for conditioning, because of the low oxygen pressure there. 

It is also about economic potential for the region because we are going to get athletes from different parts of the world coming to pitch there four months prior to the main competitions. 

We do a lot of knee-jerk reactions in appropriating resources for these gallant men and women. I think we need to come up with policies. I will resound what my colleagues have said; we should be asking ourselves why sports, before we go into appropriation. Is it because of entertainment? Is it because of employment? Is it because of medical reasons? Physical fitness? 

I would like to say that one of the biggest contributors of sports that we may not see, is national cohesion. In the post-apartheid era in South Africa when Mandela was released from prison, what kept that country together was sports. They hosted the Cricket World Cup, the Rugby World Cup, the African Cup of Nations and the rest is history. 

The guns went quiet in Liberia when George Weah flew all the way from Italy to the frontline to cool down the –(Member timed out.)

5.17
DR GEORGE BHOKA DIDI (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi): I would like to add my voice to the voices of other colleagues to congratulate the Olympians, the staff, the management and the Ministry of Education and Sports, for a job well done. 

I have three proposals to make. Number one is on the strategy. Sports people come from the grassroots; from the villages, the parishes and the parish model is now what we are all talking about. Can we make sports one of the elements in our parish model; to identify talent at the grassroots?

The second point is on the structure. We are talking about remuneration without having this in our organisational structure at national, regional, district and lower local government levels. 

Honourable colleagues, if there is a position in public service we have approved in sports, it is one sports officer at the district level. That is the person we can pay from the Consolidated Fund. Can we review this? This requires dealing with the Ministry of Public Service to ensure it creates structures at the national, regional, district and even at the subcounty level for sports officers, as well as referees and coaches, so that we can pay them properly through the Consolidated Fund. I thank you very much.

5.19
MS RITA ATUKWASA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbarara City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion but also to congratulate the sportsmen and women that have made us proud but an extra to a fellow woman, Chemutai.

Through you, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that we are in a partial lockdown, where sports activities have been allowed to go on, but observing SOPs. One of them is to have COVID-19 tests before they converge. 

While on my monitoring duties in Mbarara City - we have two prominent football clubs; Nyamityobora FC and Mbarara City FC. Nyamityobora was going to Jinja to play with Gadaffi, under the auspices of FUFA, where I am very happy to note that the mover of the Bill equally doubles as the President.

However, the issue of testing is very expensive for these clubs. Through you, Madam Speaker, could we be kind to direct the Ministry of Health that since sports activities have resumed, would it not be a kind gesture for them to provide free testing kits? We were stuck with this team, trying to mobilise money, not only for food, transport and accommodation but for testing at Shs 150,000 per player.

So, if this time, we could ask, through you, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health to provide that service free of charge, I think it would add value. Thank you.

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Ms Harriet Ntabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been in Parliament before. In the 9th Parliament, I presented a medal on the same Table which we have in front there. When a medal comes into the country, everybody is very happy. We applied prayers. We are now standing here, on behalf of Cabinet, to applaud my fellow minister, because in his term of office, four medals have been presented. (Applause) 

Out of a total of seven medals, four are in hon. Obua Hamson’s term. This is very good. You have one task ahead of you. You have heard the budget ceiling on sports, which everybody is talking about. You need to convince Cabinet and we give you support, in order to present the budget of at least a handsome sum of money to give the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

We have to convince them because sports is crosscutting. We have the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Sports, where the youth lie. We have the Ministry of Education and Sports, where your ministry lies. You have a very big team to support you. Why don’t you come up with a good budget and present it to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; because they are blaming the finance ministry? 

You need to come up with strong points. Put it in the budget – (Member timed out.)

5.23
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for giving me this opportunity but in the same way, being my maiden speech, I congratulate you upon the achievement of that position.

Madam Speaker, I support the motion, as moved by hon. Magogo, to support and congratulate our team that performed very well at the last Olympics. I want to also congratulate the officials and in a special way, congratulate the medallists, which is very important.

Members have mentioned a lot about what is happening in the field of sports locally here. I think the minister and Government will take a deliberate plan to ensure that they develop the infrastructure and also talent development, to ensure that our young generation is picked from the lower level and be promoted up to that level.

I want to make this special request to the Minister of State for Education and Sports. There is this commentator called Rob Walkers. He did a great job to market our country, to an extent of even talking about Nile Special. Can you please write to him and appreciate his services because you would have needed billions of money –(Member timed out.)

5.25
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also support the motion and pray through you, Madam Speaker, that hon. Magogo, at an appropriate time, should also bring another motion, thanking Express F.C for winning CECAFA and bringing us $30,000; that is your docket as well.

Madam Speaker, what we have to look at here is the amendment of the National Council of Sports Act. All the properties and stadia you talk about like Namboole would be under National Council of Sports Act. 

If you go to Ghana - take time and read – they have a very good Act and hon. Magogo knows this very well. What happens? All these multinational companies in this country like MTN and Airtel are mandated to fund at least one item of sports in the country, before Government gives money. Nobody should mislead you that there will ever be a Government that will give 100 per cent support for sports.

Secondly, the minister should tell this House; we gave them five billion shillings to go and make structural designs for all the stadia in Uganda, so that they construct them; Masaka, Mbale, Pece, name them. Nothing was done.

One time, in the Committee on Education and Sports, I even begged the ministry to offer at least some items for sports at every subcounty headquarters; sports start from schools. 

These children you see these days who have brought us fame have fought their own battles to reach where they are, but Government comes in at the time of procurement of tickets. We should desist from that. Let us go back to the drawing board and support sports.

When you talk about UPE schools, do they have money for sports? A set of drums in a school costs one million shillings and you are giving a UPE school –(Member timed out.)

5.27
MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to congratulate Team Uganda for the overwhelming joy they brought to this country. I have two issues.

First, on Friday when I visited Namboole Stadium, I realised it really needs to be worked on as soon as possible. Good enough, the number of COVID-19 patients has reduced. 

Therefore, I request the Ministry of Health to expedite the process of transferring those patients. When we are done with the mass vaccination taking place there, the process of renovating the stadium will commence to enable many of our athletes and other sportspersons to continue training.

To aid the local governments participate in sports, as the Ministry of Education and Sports plans to allocate some funds to the sports sector, let a good amount of the funds be sent to the lower local government entities to ensure each and every town council, sub-county or division does inter-sports within itself. At the end of it all, this country will be far better in sports. I beg to submit. 

5.29
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I am a very good sportsperson. The problem is the age limit. Otherwise, I am multi-talented in volleyball and the like. 

Anyhow, let me say that we want reports on action taken from the line ministry on the resolutions that this House has made severally, including those made by the Tenth Parliament, regarding sports. 

Secondly, I would be happy if we provided money for talent identification at the grassroots. Thirdly, what if we decided to pick a few roads in Kampala here and named them after these heroes of ours? We can do it in the rest of the country but Kampala is the centre and so, it is very important.

Madam Speaker, if you look at what is happening in the country, you realise that the President has done his part in appreciating our stars. However, there are former stars too. Let me request the President - because I believe he is watching – to also look out for those former stars who did not get cars. These are modern cars now. Your Excellency the President, may you also give the former stars. Hon. Acon missed out on a car. He is a very good star and did for us a good job in the past. I am not sure whether Inzikuru got a car. She needs to be given a car so that she is also proud –(Interjections)– she will fuel the car.

Finally, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. I know the kind of person you are. In that seat, you will be able to allocate money to make sure that sports activities are supported in this country. 

Besides that, let us appreciate the President for the gesture. I heard people say, how can you give a small thing? However, that was his heart. It is our duty to appropriate, through the main budget, for these issues. What he did was just a courtesy to begin and instigate – 

Before I yield the Floor for information, I want to say that I was a cheerleader at Parliament on the day that team won a medal. We were cheering like young boys and I think that gave them a lot of morale from a distance –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: The information I would like to give is that some of the athletes belong to the security services of this country. In the recent week, the talk has been about human rights abuses. At least, on a lighter note, they have produced athletes who have brought us gold medals. Probably, before we think of naming roads after them, we can think of naming garrisons and prisons after them. Instead of Kitalya, we call it Cheptegei Prison. 

MR AOGON: I do not want to sit down before thanking Mr Ogwel, the General Secretary of the National Council of Sports. I also thank my good comrades; hon. Magogo and hon. Obua. Hon. Obua is such a good man. We have played football together. I give him a pass and he gives me a pass. When he gives me a pass, I score. So, we are working together. Where we have reached now, we are assembling one of the best teams in the country of leaders who are concerned –(Member timed out.)

5.32
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request you to give me two minutes. I am a retired athlete but not tired. I am still moving and doing other things. 

I want to shake hands in congratulating my fellow Olympians. Honourable members, to be an athlete or a runner is one of the hardest things in this world. If you can be a champion in your own village, be proud. You can imagine how many people in your village you have to beat to be number one. Making it to the Olympics is one of the hardest parts. 

I competed in 11 championships. If I may tell my story briefly, in 1994, I boarded a flight to Lisbon, Portugal to represent Uganda at the World Junior Championships. I wore a pair of sandals; there were hardly any shoes in Uganda in those days. Fortunately, I was in first class and the flight attendant kept asking me, “Sir, where are you going?” You see, travelling in first class and putting on a pair of sandals for a man is crazy.

Anyway, I want to thank Chemutai. She shared a story where she dropped out of Primary Seven. She got second grade but she did not give up. She went into athletics. She did not want to get married and just sit there. Today, we are celebrating her. She won a Gold medal. She is the first female gold medallist in Olympics since Uganda started participating at the Olympics in 1956. Inzikuru was a world champion. World Championships take place every two years and Olympics take place every four years. 

I thank the Government because they have come up. They have raised awareness and are supporting the team. In our time with Davis Kamoga, as you would be going to the Olympics after four years and you would be given only US $100. 

I am thankful to the President; he awarded these medallists with vehicles when they came back last week. He also pledged to build each of their parents a house. He also made a directive to make sure the stadium of Teryet is completed, which I am sure will be done. He was very excited; I had never seen him do that. I also thank Minister Obua; he was with us full time. 

I was on a different occasion - I was invited to the World Olympian Association for Life, in which I am being initiated for life as an Olympian. Although I missed a gold medal for the Olympics, God turned things around. I won the Olympics at retirement while serving humanity.

Madam Speaker, I ask that this team who made it to the Olympics; those who won medals and those who did not win any medals, be paid something continuously to allow them prepare for next year. There is no resting in athletics or sports. If you rest for two months, it is equivalent to one year. I meet some of these athletes like Nanyondo walking to Namboole. This is very deplorable. I ask that they should be maintained so that they can pay a tax fare each and every time they go for training. That is enough. They do not need more. 

There are times you find them eating sugarcane to recover. You find them eating kabalagala or pancakes, which could be normal but I emphasise transportation to the main stadium.

When it comes to the coaches, they train these athletes on voluntary basis; they really do not achieve anything. My coaches – I think I still have one who is still surviving. Another died. He is called – (Member timed out.) Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tayebwa, when addressing the House, remember you had promised us that you are going to bring the law in two weeks’ time. The two weeks end today. You need to advise us. If you have failed, we can have a Private Member’s Bill. 

5.37
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, the minister responsible has been away in Tokyo. He is now back. He is going to work on that. 

I want to speak as an MP and not as the Government Chief Whip because sometimes I saw the President, the way he was complaining that he gave made a promise of Shs 5 million for our athletes but it was never fulfilled. 

As legislators, we also need to keep an eye on such promises so that during the reading of budget, instead of making good speeches in front of our athletes, we ask, “the President promised A,B,C,D; why don’t we see it in the budget?” We are the ones who sit here and make the budgets; we reduce money for the sector and then come and complain. So, I request that when the President has made a pledge, we follow it up during budgeting and ensure that it is covered. 

However, the honourable member is here, my brother – maybe I I should talk to hon. Ssewungu and we see how to convince these people from Kapchorwa on having intermarriages so that we share in their genes because I would want to see Ssewungu also producing an athlete one day. I would be the happiest finding that –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we have come to the end of the debate. I want to hear from the minister and finally from the Prime Minister. 

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SPORTS (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, and honourable colleagues, let me start with something that is not part of me, to humbly request you, as the presiding officer, ask you to grant me some latitude of time; one to lay on table the list containing the Team Uganda contingent to the Tokyo 2020 Olympic games and two, to make some general remarks and clarify on some general issues and three, to respond to the specific issues raised in the debate by the honourable colleagues. 

Honourable members, let me, in line with the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda lay on Table the list containing the gallant members of Team Uganda contingent to the Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games, for the record of Parliament. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we had 25 athletes and 38 officials making a total of 63. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how can you have 38 officials? The cost implication behind it - and you have 25 athletes! 

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I wish you could give me the latitude of time that I requested so that I explain some of those general matters –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter. I appreciate that the House unanimously approved the prayers of the movers of the motion to congratulate the team that gave us the gold and other medals. But Madam Speaker, it is important that you allow me to move an amendment. Amendment No. 1 should be on page 3 of the motion item 2; to say that item 2 considers increasing the appropriation for sports  -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, can you come with your amendment after the minister has finished his submission. 

MS OGWAL: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, let me state that the Olympics is the apex, is the pinnacle, is the epitome, is the peak, is the climax of all games and sports in the world. 

The 32nd edition of the Olympic Games hosted in Tokyo, Japan was attended by 205 Olympic nations in the world, with the exception of North Korea, to have a complete figure of 206.

This particular edition of the games were attended overall by over 11,000 athletes from the 205 countries and over 79,000 officials drawn from the categories of coaches, government dignitaries, Olympic coaches and technical officials. Mathematically, these was the ratio of 1 athlete to 8 officials overall; that can make us do the mathematics for team Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, these particular games, apart from being the best performance in the pre and post-independence history of Uganda, there are quite a number of positives that team Uganda picked from this particular edition. One is that the Republic of Uganda fielded the highest number of athletes combined for both the Olympic and the Paralympic games since 1972. 

Two is that this was the first time we fielded a lady boxer since the history of the Olympics in 1956. Thirdly, this was the first time that Uganda fielded a lady rower who, upon completion, is now ranked as the second best rower on the continent of Africa. (Applause)

This is the Olympics where Chemutai made history as the first Ugandan lady to win an Olympic gold medal since 1956. 

Madam Speaker, this is the edition of the Olympic Games where five people were inducted in the hall of honour; one picked per continent. On the continent of Africa, the Olympic fraternity picked a Uganda, a member of parliament - and he was one of the five people across the world and former Olympians, who were inducted into the hall of honour. And this is none other than our hon. Julius Acon, who represented the entire continent of Africa, and not only Uganda. 

In terms of ranking, the Republic of Uganda improved. Over all, we were 36th out of 205 nations of the world. On the African Continent, we ranked No. 2 after the Republic of Kenya, beating big nations with big investment in sports such as South Africa, Egypt and Morocco to mention but a few.

Ranking in terms of participation of countries that have membership to the Commonwealth, we were ranked No. 7 under the Commonwealth countries that participated in the Olympics, after the UK, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Kenya and Jamaica - after Jamaica, there is the Republic of Uganda. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, having provided that general information, let me still proceed to state that our success in this edition was not because of our power, strength, might, glory but because of the inspiration and motivation that we got from God. Uganda is a God-fearing country, there is no doubt about that. Our motto is: “For God and My Country.”

Madam Speaker, we have demonstrated, as Team Uganda, that it is possible; that there are lessons to learn, things to improve on and things to put in place if we are to go ahead, participate and compete favourably.

Madam Speaker, it is also important to brief this House that even if we are celebrating our prowess in the Olympic Games, there are pending championships where the Republic of Uganda must fill, prepare and have participation and competition and these are lined up.

Unfortunately, if the recent excellent performance of Team Uganda could meet with the drastic rise and fall, especially in the budget of the sports subsector, honourable colleagues, the two would fight to an extent that I do not know which one would win. Performance is going up, support in terms of budget - from Shs 25 billion to Shs 17 billion and from Shs 17 billion, we are now at Shs 10 billion. Our ideal budget, as the sports subsector, is Shs 38 billion minus development.

The Republic of Kenya is reported to be injecting the equivalent of Shs 450 billion. The Republic of South Africa is reported to be investing Shs 277 billion. –(Interjection)- You can give that information.

The moment you make a comparison, you must not compare yourself to those who are below you. We are advancing No.2 in Africa; we must be comparing ourselves to the greatest. A goat will always compare itself to an elephant and an elephant will never compare itself to a goat. You always want to move higher and higher.

Madam Speaker, some of the pending championships that have been lined up at the national level, continental level and international level are the Commonwealth Games 2022, All-Africa Games 2023, the Olympic and Paralympic Games 2024, the World Cup Qualifiers in different categories - and to mention, there are six matches for the senior national football team, back-to-back, between September and November 2021, the Islamic Solidarity Games, the World Athletes Junior Championship in Nairobi and the National Basketball team has been facilitated to participate in the AFCON finals in Kigali, to mention but a few.

Madam Speaker, may I now proceed to answer some critical issues raised in the submissions of Members. I would like to start with an external one. The BBC reporter who gave glory to Uganda - as a team, we met him and invited him. 

I would also like to announce that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities of the Republic of Uganda and the Uganda Tourism Board have already extended an invitation, through the Minister of Education and Sports, to this particular gentleman to revisit Uganda. This is not his first time but he will be coming for the second time for an all-paid expenses trip by the ministry and the Uganda Tourism Board.

Madam Speaker, there was the question of funding. I would like to affirm that for the Olympics 2020 edition, the Government of Uganda, under the leadership of President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the Ministry of Education and Sports under the leadership of the First Lady and the minister, made sure that Team Uganda was supported during preparations, clearance and facilitated to participate and compete in the 2020 Olympic Games in Tokyo, Japan.

Therefore, everything, however little it was, we were to prioritise it. When you receive Shs 10 billion and somebody is receiving Shs 450 billion - you plan according to what you have in the pocket. We planned according to what we had in our pockets.

His Excellency the President has equally guided more. We need to salute him for his goodwill gesture. He has rewarded the medallists and affirmed his commitment of paying, especially for those who win in the All-Africa Games, Commonwealth Games and –(Interjection)- CECAFA, unfortunately did not appear on the list. He only mentioned three: the All-Africa Games, Commonwealth Games and the Olympics - Shs 5 million per month for the gold medallists, Shs 3 million per month for the silver medallists and Shs 1 million per month for the bronze medallists and even payment of arrears.

He has particularly also directed that in our humble way as Uganda, all sportsmen and women should be identified. Honourable members, you will help us here; you have potential sportsmen and women in different categories. For those who have reached A-level, he has directed that the armed forces should recruit them such that they are entitled to the monthly payment to enable them continue practicing. Even when they are recruited, they should be given time to participate in training such that they can nurture their natural talents.

Madam Speaker, on the issue raised by –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you conclude?

MR SSEWUNGU: Honourable Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is, are we taking this as a Government assurance right now? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can he conclude? He is the minister of sports, in case you are not aware.

MR SSEWUNGU: I am on the Committee on Education and Sports, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am just reminding you that hon. Obua is the minister of sports.

MR SSEWUNGU: Yeah, but if it becomes a Government assurance on the Floor of Parliament, then it is subject to implementation. 

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I am reporting and putting on the record of Parliament what His Excellency the President committed the country to. I am equally tempted to believe and submit that this constitutes Government assurance, in my humble opinion, but is it a reported speech.

On the issue of the law, I would like to state that on the guidance of the senior minister, we realised that proceeding to repeal the 1964 Act of the National Council for Sports without reviewing the 2004 Sports Policy to incorporate new changes within the world of sports, we would not have done justice to that particular law. 

Therefore, as the Ministry of Education and Sports, we embarked on starting with the review of the 2004 Sports Policy such that when we repeal the Act, the new Act is anchored on the policy that has been revised to give rise to one of the best laws that the Republic of Uganda would wish to have on sports.

On the issue of sports infrastructure –

The deputy speaker: Honourable minister, we want the time when the Bill will be in place. Her Excellency was in this House and said it was ready. They were coming to present the Act in two weeks’ time. As I said, while you were away, the two weeks’ time end today. So, do not tell us stories.

You are acting on the law for 1964, which is even older than yourself. Honourable minister, wouldn’t you feel ashamed to act on such a law?

mr ssewungu: Point of procedure, Madam Speaker.

The deputy speaker: No. I want the minister to finish [Mr Ssewungu: Madam Speaker, he is misleading the House] No, he is not misleading. I am asking for something specific: how much time do you require? 

Mr obua: Madam Speaker, I speak in my mandate as the Minister of State for Education and Sports, whose responsibility is in the docket of sports. The information I give to this House is that, which emanates from the Department of Sports in the Ministry of Education and Sports of the Republic of Uganda.

The deputy speaker: Honourable minister, we are just asking you for something small. How much more time should we give you to bring the law?

Mr obua: Madam Speaker, as a ministry, we believe that we will conclude the issue of revising the 2004 Sports Policy at the end of this financial year. By the beginning of the next financial year, we should be ready to table the law that is in compliance with the policy.

Mr Patrick opolot: Madam Speaker, I expected the minister to tell us that they are tabling the law. After we have made the law, then we get to its operationalisation.

The deputy speaker: Yes. The law comes first and the policy comes next.

Mr ssewungu: Madam Speaker, I think we need to expunge part of what the minister has said. It is unprecedented for Parliament to believe that a policy determines the bringing of a law to Parliament for amendment. The Attorney-General is present; let him come to the Floor and explain.

Let the minister assure this House - we have fought for this law several times. I have been on the Committee on Education and Sports for the last 10 years and nothing has been happening.

The deputy speaker: Let us first find out when the policy is being laid on the Table.

Mr obua: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for understanding. The policy comes first followed by the law –

The deputy speaker: When do we get the policy?

Mr obua: Let me repeat that as the Ministry of Education and Sports, our planning in these bad times, which we all know, is to the effect that the 2004 Sports Policy of the Republic of Uganda should be ready by the end of this Financial Year 2021/2022. 

The deputy speaker: Honourable minister, since you were away - you are not helping us. The Vice-President, can we hear from you? Otherwise, the Government committed itself to two weeks.

6.04
The third deputy Prime Minister and minister without portfolio (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have to discuss this in a Cabinet meeting, after which it will come. Right now, we have not yet finished it. It will come soon. Thank you.

The deputy speaker: We know that you have to discuss it in Cabinet but tell us the time. We cannot act in perpetuity. 

Ms nakadama: Madam Speaker, by the end of this financial year, we shall be discussing it and it will come to Parliament.

Ms Ogwal: Madam Speaker, if we talk about the end of this financial year, we are talking about next July because the financial year has just started. We are trying to help the ministry. I want the Minister of Education and Sports to listen that all of us – you seem to have mobilised our minds to support you. Now that we want to, you are running away. That is exactly the impression you are creating.

We want to do it now and quickly so that we can justify the budget that we want to give you. In this motion, the mover has requested that we increase the budget for sports. We cannot increase it, when we do not even have a policy in place or a law. Parliament will be acting illegally. Can you please prepare us?

The deputy speaker: Honourable minister, all that is being said is in good faith. It is to help the sporting fraternity; no one is saying it in bad faith. We want to help you.

This business of all the time running to the President that you are going to look for money - the President has other issues. Why don’t you make a policy and law that enables you to get whatever you want in this country? If you cannot do it for yourself, we have volunteers who can do it for you.

Ms nakadama: Madam Speaker, we have seen that this matter is very urgent. We are going to look at our order of business in the Cabinet and prioritise this matter so that it is fast-tracked, then it can come to Parliament. (Applause) This is what we are requesting for. Thank you 

The deputy speaker: Honourable members, we need to conclude this. I am not accepting your procedural matter.

Mr aogon: Madam Speaker, our rules do allow for a Member to raise a procedural matter and it is granted –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, I am the one chairing. Can you continue? Hon. Aogon, can you sit?

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has guided. However, to my senior colleague, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the fact of the matter is, there exists a policy of 2004, which is undergoing review. There exists a law of 1964 that upon review will be repealed. Those are the legal instruments that we are operating under.

Madam Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you conclude?

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, on the issue of sports infrastructure, we are not only looking at Namboole and Nakivubo stadiums. We have a plan, if supported by this Parliament and Government. There are traditional dilapidated sports stadiums across the country. In Kabale, Mbarara, Masaka, Jinja, Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Tororo, and Masindi, we have at least one to mention but a few. 

I have stated that the ideal budget of the sports sub-sector is Shs 38 billion minus development. The moment we are supported, we will move in a phased manner to ensure that these traditional stadia that are currently dilapidated are face lifted, one after the other –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, I think what the colleagues are asking is; can we have a five-year strategic plan on how you want to revive the sports sector in this country? I was just reading here a strategic plan for the Chinese Government for the next 30 years; how they have planned in the next five years to build 18 sports cities in China. In the next 30 years, they want to build a sports power house in Asia. 

Therefore, we would love to see a strategic plan over the next 10 or 20 years; how you have staged repairing and building the new stadium, among others. That is what we would like to see.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa that has been one of the players. The minister will come with a strategic plan.

MR OBUA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Parliament and I speak with hope because I have seen how we are united in this motion, for sports. You need to support us, honourable colleagues. We have spoken in this House; year in and out. The role of Parliament is shared in appropriation with the Executive. 

For all these pending championships, if we do not prepare, we will be castigated by the people of Uganda but the fault will not be from the ministry. Give us the support. Just imagine in two consecutive financial years, we have lost Shs 15 billion from Shs 25 billion to Shs 10 billion. If I were receiving Shs 25 billion in a year and it is reduced to Shs 10 billion, definitely – the issue is COVID-19 but we have demonstrated to the country that we can do it. We need your support in enhancing the budget and supporting us on infrastructure.

One issue that I should not leave is that in 2018, His Excellency the President attended a conference in Beijing under the Forum on China African Cooperation, where he committed 27 projects in all to be constructed using the Chinese grant. Out of the 27 projects, two were sports stadiums. One is Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium in Lira and the other one was Buhinga Stadium in Kabarole.

Madam Speaker, the role of the Ministry of Education and Sports was to conduct detailed feasibility studies and environmental and social impact assessment, a mission we executed with precision.

We have handed over our report to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for purposes of processing these grants to construct the two regional stadiums promised by the Government of Uganda and His Excellency the President. I would also like to persuade Parliament that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, at an appropriate time, should inform us on the progress made to secure this grant to kick-start the two regional stadiums.

Honourable colleagues, salutations. To my gallant members of Team Uganda, I want to salute you for a job well-done. You have made your country proud and you have made me proud as your team leader. Forever, we remain indebted to you. You have gone on record as the best team ever in the record of the Olympics. I salute you. 

To the athletes, I want to thank you. Some of you are young. We have talked to you individually; please follow our wise counsel and continue bringing glory to your country. 

Madam Speaker, once again, thank you. To Parliament, thank you. To the Executive, thank you. I say all these for God and my country. I beg to submit. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. You are supposed to be a preacher. Prime Minister -

6.04
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Lukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also take this opportunity to thank our medallists and the team that was headed by our minister to these Olympics. We thank you very much and we congratulate you. You have made Uganda proud and we are really proud of you. 

Everybody is very happy because of this team. I would like to thank the Members of Parliament for the support that you have given or showed to the sports team. Your support is a climbing stone for the sportsmen and sportswomen. Like we have said, this is a programme –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I know we are going to conclude this matter but we have a standing issue that we need to resolve on this motion. I do not know whether I can come in now because I know when we conclude the matter, we cannot come back. I am proposing that in the next supplementary budget under item 2, we consider emergency rehabilitation under sports to prepare us for the next sports activity that Uganda will be involved in.

Under item 4, we should include that the Government should present, in the current budget for the next financial year, development and completion of Akii-Bua Stadium, which is an outstanding big project. 

Finally, under item 6, that Government presents to Parliament by the end of August 2021, a five-year strategic investment plan on sports. Madam Speaker, my conscience tells me that the Government also should consider some token of appreciation for those who played a critical role in sports in the early years, like some of the personalities we have mentioned.

I beg to move this amendment before the Prime Minister concludes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, just summarise. 

MS NAKADAMA: Thank you very much, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I think what you have also presented is part of what I am saying; that that is part of the support that you are giving to the sports team. 

I would like to say that we have heard. It is going to be presented to Cabinet for consideration. Thank you. 

I would like to thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for supporting his grandchildren. He has supported them. He has given gifts and this time he has given a lifetime salary. 

The person who won a gold medal will be given Shs 5 million, the silver medallist will be given Shs 3 million and the one of bronze, Shs 1,000,000 for a lifetime. We thank him very much for the support that he has given to this team. It is better than somebody requesting for a car without fuel. If one is given a car, in the long run, they will not have fuel for that car and they might at one point abandon it somewhere. 

As I conclude, I would like to urge Members of Parliament that we have a Government Assurance Committee, which can help us to make a follow up on the pledges of the President. This committee can support us in this area. 

I have heard Members talking about the pledges. Even you, Members of Parliament who are here, when you make pledges in your constituencies and nobody follows them up, you end up not paying. Let the Government Assurances Committee help us to make a follow up on the pledges of H.E. the President. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Prime Minister. I now put the question on the motion as amended by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Team Uganda for its performance at the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as the presiding officer today, I am humbled by your oneness. This is a motion that has brought the House together. It is because of the performance of our brothers and sisters, our children out there. We must make sure that we are always one in the House, especially when it comes to sports - even other motions that affect the livelihoods of the people out there. 

As national leaders, we have showed the people of Uganda through this debate that when it comes to issues that concern the local person, Uganda comes first. Not parties or anything else. Sports has proved to us that it can bring political parties together. I saw my sister Malende debate very well. We are highly indebted to the Ugandans out there. 

On that note, after looking and listening attentively to the debate, after appreciating what everybody has said in terms of sports, I am now ordering, as the presiding officer, that the sports sub-sector of the Republic of Uganda, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, should submit a comprehensive budget for consideration to Parliament within 30 days. (Applause)

The sports subsector budget that will be presented to Parliament and approved will be ring-fenced and protected strictly for sports.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is hereby directed by Parliament, to report to Parliament within two weeks, on the steps that have been taken on the money that hon. Obua talked about - the grant from China. How far have you gone in terms of getting that grant? Can you report to this Parliament on that grant which was supposed to be brought to Uganda? 

A supplementary budget should be brought to this House to work on the National Stadium, Namboole. (Applause)

The minister of sports should come with at least 80 names of corporate institutions or persons that should contribute towards the sports sector in Uganda. I saw some of them clapping their hands and yet they are not contributing. They should also contribute to the sports sector. (Applause)

Members, I would like to thank you for today’s debate. I am really humbled. 

On a sad note, the UPDF fraternity and Parliament of Uganda would wish to announce the demise of Lt Gen. Pecos Kuteesa. He was an MP in the 10th Parliament representing the UPDF. Let us have a moment of silence in his memory. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We would like to thank our visitors in the gallery. We would like to thank our athletes and in a special way, we would like to thank the Minister of Education and Sports and the Minister of State for Sports. You made us proud. Without you facilitating the team, we would not be here debating. Thank you. 

I now adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.26 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18 August 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 

