

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 18 August 2021

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. Our Order Paper today has a few but serious items to be discussed. We shall have the Executive address us on some issues concerning our Parliament and the nation at large. In this regard, we shall have a statement and responses from the ministers.

As I reminded you - ministers - yesterday, this business of bringing your statements when the House is already sitting is uncultured. We need to have your statements early so that we peruse through and are able to appreciate them. I call upon you to listen attentively to the statements and decide whether they satisfy what you raised on the Floor. I want to thank you very much as we work for a better Uganda. 

Let us have statements from these ministers. There are matters of national importance from hon. Sarah Najjuma and hon. Norah Bigirwa, the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs.

2.16
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise this issue of national importance regarding our nationals in Afghanistan following the fall of Kabul, Afghanistan into the hands of Taliban forces. We were aware of the acrimony in that country that has run for decades.

Madam Speaker, over the years, it has been a policy by the US to deploy private security firms to reinforce their troops on the ground in hotspots that they are engaged in. Hundreds, if not thousands, of Ugandans work in Afghanistan as private security guards under the employment of such private security companies.

My prayers are:

    i) What are the arrangements to extradite our people to their homeland, Uganda? 

    ii) The Ministry of Foreign Affairs should come to the House to enlighten us on the arrangements to bring Ugandans back home. 

    iii) In augmentation of the same issue, can we also draw a response from the minister regarding the situation of our people who were confirmed dead, after gunmen ambushed them on Juba-Nimule Road? 

    iv) Could the Minister of Foreign Affairs clarify on the possibility of Uganda hosting refugees from Afghanistan?

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

2.18
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you have become the minister to respond? (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: No, we asked to speak on the same matter, Madam Speaker - it was on the same matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you the shadow minister?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) I would like to thank you for giving me way. I thank the honourable member for raising this very important concern. 

In a related matter, Madam Speaker, we are reading on social media that Uganda plans to host more than 2,000 refugees from Afghanistan. We would like to raise the following, aware that Uganda is the country currently hosting the largest number of refugees in Africa.

We are number three in the whole world as a country hosting refugees. Currently –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which ones are the others; the first and second, since Uganda is the third?

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I will give the record to honourable members –(Interjection)- Allow me to finish first –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order here.

MR OLANYA: On that note, Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

MR OLANYA: Allow me to finish first then you come in. (Laughter) I know he is a very friendly man.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, Uganda is a signatory to the Refugee Convention and we have not yet renounced our obligations under that treaty –(Interjection)- Hon. Anywar is talking about “the Muslim friends” but I am talking about the law and the position of Uganda.

We are bound, under treaty law – under the concept of pacta sunt servanda - to host refugees because we have obligations under the Refugee Convention.

Is the honourable member in order to question Uganda’s ability to host refugees yet we have an obligation under the Refugee Convention? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gilbert Olanya, you have heard that Uganda is a signatory under the UN Convention on Refugees. Uganda is not making any mistake to have the refugees here. It is the law that makes us do it.

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I am not against Uganda hosting refugees. That is why the Member hurried. I was still bringing my point home and he did not know what I was going to say.

What I would like to put forward is that when refugees are coming to a country, the minister concerned should first consult Parliament, Parliament gives its blessing and we move on. 

I would like to find out from –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gilbert Olanya, you already have a law in place. He only needs to inform us. There is a law in place, which was signed by your country.

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, it is true we have the law in place –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker and congratulations to Members for sitting in this prestigious Chamber. I am rising on a point of procedure.

Hon. Norah Nyendwoha raised pertinent issues, which you are supposed to rule on. The Member who was holding the Floor should have been given the opportunity, if the information was taken by the previous Member. 

Madam Speaker, before you rule on the issue raised by hon. Norah Nyendwoha, is it procedurally right that a Member starts engaging a new topic, which is contradictory, yet the previous speaker had already made a submission?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Olanya is actually smuggling his own issues. Minister of Foreign Affairs, can we have a response to hon. Norah Nyendwoha’s matter? Come back and present a response next week onto what she has raised. Hon. Olanya, if you have an issue, you can come on your own. Do not smuggle issues into what someone has raised. 

2.24
MS DORCUS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to raise this urgent matter of national importance concerning the plight of the people of Alebtong and the entire Lango Sub-region, about the dire state of roads. 

Aware that COVID-19 has presented a fatal wave, which is affecting the lives of very many Ugandans - this requires robust action with well-coordinated efforts to meet medical emergencies, for example. As it stands now, however, we are hardly successful in saving lives. Even though we have ambulances, when the roads are in dire state and dysfunctional, we will not work effectively within the communities. 

Most of the districts in Lango sub-region have the worst roads in the country. A report from the Equal Opportunities Commission indicated that only 12 per cent of our roads in the sub-region are tarmacked. As such, most of our towns are connected by murrum roads. This has made the work on the ground difficult.

Aware that the cardinal function of UNRA is management, development and also maintenance of the national road networks, the road networks in Lango sub-region have continued to deteriorate from bad to worse, without due attention from UNRA. This has caused a lot of anxiety among the communities, especially when we are unable to save pregnant mothers and children in the medical emergencies I have just mentioned.

The most affected roads are from Amugu, Ebule and Omoro, which connect to the border of Otuke District and also the road from Alebtong Town Council via Omoro Sub-county, which connects to the border of Kapelebyong. The worst is the Kamdini-Lira Road, which is not existing anymore. What is there is not the road.

I have the following prayers:

    1. The roads in Lango Sub-region should be given due attention by UNRA especially that one from Kamdini to Lira, which no longer exists, and the others that I just mentioned. Can UNRA be able to put a team to task the contractors to ensure that work gets done and completed?

    2. The Road Sector Investment Plan of UNRA and the Ministry of Works and Transport should provide us an update on the progress and the general status of the roads earmarked in the sub-region, if possible, some site meetings by UNRA as well. They should also include some of the terrible roads which are aforementioned in other parts of Alebtong and Lango sub-region, as a whole, for development and maintenance. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Acen. Government Chief Whip, since I do not see the Ministers of Works and Transport and UNRA, kindly inform them to visit the subregion, hold a meeting with Members of Parliament from Lango sub-region and give us – [Member rose_] – To whom are you giving information? And give us the status of the roads in the Lango sub-region and the actions they are taking to work on the roads. This report should be given at the same time you are giving us a report on West Nile in the next two weeks. 

2.29
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Nakaseke District has only 11 kilometres of roads that are tarmacked. They start from Semuto to Kapeeka. The road from Matugga to Kapeeka had potholes and the Ministry of Works and Transport filled it with murrum. The rains have returned and the murrum is being washed away. As a result, the road is becoming impassable.

The road from Matugga to Kapeeka is the shortest route to the district headquarters. So, we are being cut off. The road from Luweero to Butalangu was supposed to be tarmacked and it was approved before I even joined Parliament. Some members were compensated on that road, but up to now, nothing is on ground. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Works and Transport should take interest in the roads from Matugga to Kapeeka and from Luweero to Butalangu that was supposed to be tarmacked, before I joined Parliament. Can I get information from the honourable member? 

MR WAKAYIMA: Thank you. The member on the Floor has mentioned the road in Matugga but it starts with Nsangi-Buloba Road. There was a Presidential directive, which says all murrum roads in local governments were supposed to be well gravelled but all the UNRA roads that are made are not gravel. 

The additional information I would like to give to hon. Najjuma is that the road from Nsangi to Matugga is not gravelled. All the murrum roads in Wakiso are not doing well. 

The President also mentioned that all town councils should at least, within a year, work on one kilometre of tarmac road. In Wakiso, we have Kakiri and Namayumba but no single kilometre has ever been worked upon. Why is it so? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, that Presidential pledge was made when Wakayima was still in the NRM. (Laughter) Can you give us your prayers, hon. Najjuma? 

MS NAJJUMA: My prayer is that the Ministry of Works and Transport should take interest in the roads from Matugga to Kapeeka and from Luweero to Butalangu that was supposed to be tarmacked before I joined Parliament.

MR WAKAYIMA: Madam Speaker, I have never been a member of the NRM. I want to correct the record. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not on record. 

MS NAJJUMA: My prayer is that the Ministry of Works and Transport should take interest in the roads from Matugga to Kapeeka, and from Luweero to Butalangu that was supposed to be tarmacked. Some people were compensated before I even joined Parliament but up to now, nothing is on the ground.

Madam Speaker, Ministry of Works and Transport should stop taking people for granted. Can you imagine a tarmacked road with potholes then you come and fill it with marram; Ugandans should not be taken for granted. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Government Chief Whip, address us in regard to the roads being mentioned by hon. Sarah and hon. Wakayima.

2.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, the response will come when we are bringing the responses for West Nile and Lango.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Wakayima, we are addressing your issues and you are busy laughing over there.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, I was excited and it should go on record that hon. Wakayima has recognised President Museveni as the President of this country when he clearly talked about roads pledged by the President. I am happy and congratulations honourable member.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. We will have a response in the next two weeks and an action that should be taken on the said roads. I am going to request the Ministry of Works together with NAADs to have sub regional meetings, and get issues that concern roads countrywide.

We are tired of having matters raised in the House as matters of national importance on roads as if we do not have ministries. Let them have meetings with sub regional teams and see what they can do.  If it requires budgeting for these roads, we shall do that and report back to this House.

2.34
MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to beg that when the minister is coming to present the report; they make an extra overview of the road units for new districts; or else, members will keep coming back for the same reason.

However, in most of the districts, especially the new districts, the roads are impassable, you cannot do anything. Now that the rains are coming, it will be terrible; yet we do not have a clear Government position on what is happening in terms of acquiring the new road units.

Therefore, I beg that when they are presenting on this matter, they also address road units for the new districts. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. We do not want them to just present the status, but the action that they are taking on these roads. It is not just a matter of saying I have visited this place and this is what I have found out. Tell us what you have done so far for you to be able to come back and report in the House.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is very welcome on our side as the Government. It also helps us to open up. I request colleagues, like the way we did with the Busoga Members of Parliament, it is very important that all the issues are handled on the ground. Then after, we do a comprehensive report as per your directive; which the Committee on Physical Infrastructure should look at and then we see how best we can budget for this.

This is a very welcome move and I request that in that period, which can last close to three months, we will ensure issues to do with roads are captured. I beg to submit. We are going to meet 18 subregions of Uganda and we cannot just meet a region independently. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let us first have the ones we directed in the next two weeks and then after that, we will give the time for the rest.

2.37
MS JOAN NAMUTAAWE (Independent, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech and I rise on matters of public importance.

Madam Speaker, as you may recall, from December 2019 to April 2020, landing sites of Malembo, Namirembe, Lambu and Kachanga in Masaka District were submerged by rising water levels of Lake Victoria; that destroyed people's properties and disrupted the economic livelihood of the fishing community. However, on 25 June 2020, this House passed a supplementary expenditure Schedule 3 and an addendum to supplementary schedule 3 for Financial Year 2019/2020 in which it supplied Shs 45 billion to the Office of the Prime Minister, to address the impact of raising water levels and floods in those areas. This was for supporting them through giving social service infrastructure, shelter and food.

Madam Speaker, as I present my concern, there is no evidence to suggest that the Government came in to intervene to rescue the affected landing sites as I mentioned above.

Therefore, my prayer is that I request the Prime Minister to conduct a fact-finding mission to establish the extent of intervention to support the affected residents at those landing sites.

I saw the Prime Minister was in Kasese. That is the same way I request the Prime Minister to get time and visit the people of Masaka, especially those in the landing sites. People are suffering; they do not have food and shelter. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.

2.40
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Prime Minister’s Office will arrange and ensure that indeed we do visit the people of Masaka and link up with the colleague.

However, Madam Speaker, on the issue of nature reclaiming its space, I would like to get supplementary information from the Minister of State for Environment here - just a minute –(Interruption)-

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. If I heard you right, hon. Namutaawe from Masaka, her instance was that money was voted by this Parliament to come to the aid of these communities, essentially two financial years ago. Your response is that the Prime Minister will visit. Would you like to explain the particular terms, if you are aware that this money was voted and nothing was done for these communities?

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was listening attentively and I was responding to a prayer by the honourable member. However, since the Leader of the Opposition also has his own prayers, which I would call supplementary – I heard the statement but that was not the prayer she made. Hers was for the Prime Minister to visit the way she did to Kasese and other areas and ascertain the situation. The moment you do that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, you should appreciate that, that was her maiden speech. The Leader of the Opposition is coming up to help her. Let us solve a problem and not capitalise on the small things.

Mr tayebwa: I did not know. Thank you. Therefore, should I go by the prayer made by the Leader of the Opposition or the one by the honourable Member or both? Okay. The Prime Minister will address both issues. I request to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just like you are a Government Chief Whip, this side has the Leader of the Opposition.

Mr tayebwa: Madam Speaker, my concern was that we have not responded to the matter –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What you need to do is to have the matter resolved, with amendment, from the Leader of the Opposition.

Mr tayebwa: That is what I pledged. Leader of the Opposition, we are going to clear that.

Mr mpuuga: Madam Speaker, let me be clear. I would like to invite my honourable colleague to appreciate my line of argument. It is not just prayers for its sake. I am also demanding for action on a question of accountability.

The honourable member, being new, probably did not toe that line but was very vivid in her statement, namely that money was voted two financial years ago. It is not just a matter of the Prime Minister’s visit. I am also demanding for an explanation from the Prime Minister on whether she touched this money or whoever was the occupant of the office did and probably in some way, it never reached these landing sites.

Therefore, it is a very clear and distinct matter being picked from her submission. As the Prime Minister comes, we would like to also have an explanation as to whether there is evidence that the money was provided but it never reached. 

Mr tayebwa: Madam Speaker, the Office of the Prime Minister will ensure that we follow up on that matter and the Prime Minister will ensure – Yes, the Prime Minister has an office. We shall ensure that we visit the sites in Masaka. Also, issues of accountability will be addressed in that same vein. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you are giving a response, you need to address yourself to the money supplied by this House under a supplementary budget and where it was spent. If it was meant for such an activity, was it used on that particular activity? 

Mr tayebwa: Madam Speaker, my submission here goes on the Hansard and remains in the records. I need to first establish whether indeed money was appropriated to that effect. Once we know that, plus the visit, we shall be able to answer clearly –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has a record of the supplementary budget that was passed by this House; she has quoted it. If I were you, I would go and verify whether it is true that a supplementary was passed.

Mr tayebwa: We are speaking the same language, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are speaking Runyankole. (Laughter)

2.46
The minister of state for water and environment (Environment) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Joan from Masaka for raising a very pertinent issue. The issue of rising water levels in this country is what has drawn me to come and make more clarification.

In Masaka, last year, I made an effort to visit some of those landing sites. Indeed, we did issue a warning to the country that due to heavy degradation of the environment; occupation of our water shores, wetlands and forests, climate change effects have caught up with us as a country. As a Government, we advised the population; when you see that you are endangered, please move away for safety. 

Regarding what the honourable member is raising, I would like to add that the water level is going to rise a little bit more. It is not only Masaka, which is affected. We have a duty to let our people, who are already endangered, move away. 

As my Chief Whip says, the intervention of Government through the Office of the Prime Minister will come to have some little intervention. However, the lasting solution is that for safety purposes, I implore colleagues to note that the water levels will continue to rise and we advise our people to move to safety. Start rethinking how we can restore our ecosystem; our natural resources, as a long-term solution.

Therefore, I will stand with colleagues. More of these will come so I am taking this opportunity to send that message that we advise our people to be conscious that the rising water levels will continue and people should move to safety. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mama Mabira, you need to go and talk to these people. What you are giving us now is required by those people but not us in the House. You need to go and inform these people that the water is going to rise further so that they make alternative plans.

Ms anywar: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the advice. As Government, we are going to address the press. However, we want to come with an address to Parliament starting with the Africa Climate Week, which we are going to host as a country. We shall have the status of the environment to which I would pray that we be fixed on the Order Paper so that we send out the message. These are people’s representatives. I would like to take this opportunity to also alert them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, honourable minister, we have never failed to put anything on the Order Paper. It is you people who are failing us by not giving us what to be put on the Order Paper.

2.50
Mr Isaias ssasaga (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I present a matter of national importance concerning malicious damage of property and murdering of a one Yusuf Nabugodi by the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) officials in the sub-county of Zesui last week.

In 1937, Mt Elgon Forest Reserve was declared to preserve ecological processes. In 1968, it was declared a forest reserve. In 1993, it was gazetted under instrument number 76 of 1993. In 2002, the national game reserve boundaries were expanded into Mt Elgon National Park. 

For the gazette instrument, the boundaries were not supposed to be altered as it was a game reserve. When it was upgraded to a game park, land from neighbouring communities was taken by Government to form a park. 

Unfortunately, the communities living along the Mt Elgon area especially in my constituency in the sub-counties of Zesui, Masaba, Bugitimwa and Bumasifa were not compensated. 

Different discussions have been held between the Government and the leaders in the Bugisu area. A team of technical officials was sent from the Prime Minister’s Office to that place. They had dialogue with the communities there. 

From the communication in my possession, which I can lay on Table, the matter had been ably discussed in Cabinet on 13 January 2016 and a directive by His Excellency, the President, had been made as follows: 
1. 	That an independent boundary reopening exercise be carried out, as per the 1993 gazette.

2. 	That the communities living in the affected areas be resettled with the resettlement package right from Bugisu up to the Sebei region.
 
3. 	That the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness compensates and resettles the eligible communities -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My brother, hon. Ssasaga, is presenting a critical issue. However, I am asking myself whether we are proceeding well for someone to read what he is referring to as “Cabinet Minutes.” This is because the submissions of Cabinet are a secret and are restricted to Cabinet. 

Therefore, are we proceeding well to entertain a document that is protected by the laws of Uganda? If he had said it was a certain communication – if on record it is captured as Cabinet proceedings. So, are we proceeding well? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are they Cabinet Minutes or he said it was discussed in Cabinet? 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: What is he reading exactly? That is why I need your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need clarification. Are they Cabinet Minutes or you said it was discussed in Cabinet?  

MR SSASAGA: Madam Speaker, if the Government Chief Whip had listened, he would have heard very clearly that I said that the Cabinet discussed and made a resolution. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, on 3 December 2015 presented this communication to this House – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssasaga, what are your prayers? 

MR SSASAGA: My prayers are: 

    1. That the person who was killed by Uganda Wildlife Authority officials, Yusuf Nabugodi, left a small family. He is a 22 year old boy that left a family and needs compensation.

    2. The crops that were slashed, apart from where the pillar stops – they slashed 200 metres away from the boundary outside the gazetted area. I have photos to that effect and I can lay them on Table. Therefore, they need to be compensated. 

    3. That the line ministry prevails over the UWA officials to prevent them from cutting further the crops.

    4. That they carry out an investigation over bribery claims by the residents over the UWA officials. 

The residents are concerned that the crops have been grown for five years, for instance, coffee and Matooke. They are harvesting them and the cutting is taking place now. Where were the UWA officials? The communities claim that during the time of planting, the UWA officials go to them and take money from them by hiring to them land. After hiring the land, when they are demanding small balances, they go and cut down the crops. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you talk about bribery, you should bear in mind that it is two-way; you who is giving and the person receiving it. Is there any evidence that they were forced to give? Government, can we have that issue investigated and a report be given to this House? If there was a killing, then action must be taken. That should be done and you report back to this House in the next two weeks.  

2.58
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. The issue of wild animals is unleashing terror and anguish to communities around the conservation areas.

I come from Kasese, particularly representing the people of Bukonzo County West, which borders the national park. We have lost count of the number of people that have been killed or died and even elephants are invading Kasese town. 

This very Parliament gave authorisation, in terms of budget supply, to the Ministry of Tourism. The President himself went to Bukonzo County West with the Uganda Wildlife Authority officials and directed them to provide an electric fence around the conservation communities. 

I understand that the wire was procured and is seated right in Kamwokya while our people continue to suffer and even lose lives. They borrow loans from banks and SACCOs and are losing property because the plantations are destroyed by wild animals. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that you direct the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the Ministry of Tourism to fast-track the fencing and all of those that have been affected, especially the destruction of crops on a large scale and that loss of lives should be compensated.

Our people have had enough and I am asking that the 11th Parliament – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is coming up as a substantial item; the minister is going to report about it. I wish you could listen because there is a substantial item on the Order Paper on wildlife. It was raised and the minister went there. When he makes his submission, we shall ask him what he has done, in terms of fencing off those conservation areas. 

MR KATUSABE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker and much appreciated. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope the minister is in today. Hon. Anywar, do you have any information? 

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to colleagues raising this pertinent issue. 

Before the close of the previous Parliament, we presented a loan request; I processed it. I brought it to Parliament and it was approved towards the close of the previous Parliament. It was a loan from the World Bank and it details what the colleague has just raised. They are all part of the activities to be undertaken. Part of that loan is supposed to restore and engage the communities around our natural resources and national parks to benefit from it. 

Therefore, the loan was processed; we have just not yet put it to use. However, those are the items, which are clearly going to be undertaken. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for the information. Members, I know most of you have matters of national importance but the ones who have not spoken today will speak tomorrow. Can we have hon. Musila as the last speaker – Dr Isingoma, what are you raising procedure on?

MR ISINGOMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what?

MR ISINGOMA: Madam Speaker, I am rising under rule 9(4) of our Rules of Procedure to question why hon. Ssemujju and hon. Nkunyingi are seated in an area, which you have reserved for us, the Independents. 

As a result of that, I am confined up here, where I do not belong. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for hon. Nkunyingi and his friend to be seated there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I get surprised when a Member of Parliament wastes this time, which somebody would have used to raise a national issue. Okay, it is free sitting.

MR ISINGOMA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

3.03
MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo East County, Namisindwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I, too, rise on a matter of national importance on a looming disaster. My colleague, hon. Ssasaga, spoke about environment and the killings around Mt Elgon National Park. It is serial and has been happening for the last 10 years. 

Today, I rise over the issue of cracks, which are a looming danger to our people. We have already seen this. Since 2006, Mt Elgon suffered a serious earthquake, which reoccurred in 2014.

The soils around Mt Elgon cracked over. In my own constituency, in Bumbo Town Council, where I live, and in the neighbouring Bibaale Ward, the cracks are gaping for everybody to see. I took journalists there to see what is happening. I carried the photos of these cracks. In my constituency, again, and the district, there is a 40-kilometre stretch of a crack from Bumbo through Bupoto up to the town councils up in Lulwa.

Madam Speaker, while this country suffers many other disasters, especially natural ones, my prayer and plea with the ministry responsible for relief and disaster preparedness and refugees – our guidance in the former fora was that we establish evacuation camps. 

Madam Speaker, you have seen for yourself that whenever we have landslides and mudslides in Bugisu, that is when OPM and other ministries rush there when people are already dead. Why can’t we establish - especially that landslides come with a warning of cracks, among others?

I also want to inform the House that once cracks are seen, they may take six months or one year and you will see either a mudslide or a landslide. Usually, this occurs between May and November and we are in the danger zone.

Madam Speaker, my plea is for the responsible ministries –(Interjection)- This is my maiden presentation, Madam Speaker, and I would beg that you invoke rule 83(e) that I finish my speech.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR MUSILA: My payers are that the responsible ministries - OPM and others - visit Bugisu so that they ascertain for themselves what I am talking about. I want to thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, when you ask for information and the Member does not give you, you do not force the Member. It is at the discretion of the person speaking to give you space. If he does not give you, do not insist; it is not your right.

MR MUSILA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wonderful protection. (Laughter) Having been my maiden presentation and not speech –(Interjection)- Yes, I may have spoken but this is my maiden presentation. 

Like I said, Madam Speaker, I want to end with a prayer that we establish evacuation camps, where we see these cracks.

Secondly, the ministries concerned - OPM, disaster preparedness, geologists, seismologists and others - visit Bugisu, sit with us and we plan together. I want to plead with you to reign over them. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government, take note. I would like to remind you that if you want to give information or raise a point of order, do not switch on the microphone and speak on it. It is not until you have been given permission that you can switch it on. Those are some of the things you will be told when you are undergoing orientation. Next item.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE DETENTION BY THE UGANDA POLICE OF A RETURNING MEMBER OF UGANDA’S CONTINGENT TO THE 2020 TOKYO OLYMPICS, MR JULIUS SSEKITOLEKO, FOLLOWING HIS DEPORTATION FROM JAPAN

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (GEN. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker, I am here to present a report about a member of Uganda’s contingent to the 2020 Tokyo Olympics, Mr Julius Ssekitoleko, following his disappearance and subsequent deportation from Japan. 

Madam Speaker, this is in a way anti-climax of what we were celebrating yesterday through the motion to pay tribute to our sportsmen and women, for their sterling performance at the Olympics. 

The subject of Julius Ssekitoleko is intimately related to what we discussed in yesterday’s motion and how to reorganise, recognise and reward sportsmen and sportswomen in this country. 

Julius Ssekitoleko started participating in weightlifting events since 2007 from Kisugu, Kampala. He joined the national team in 2018 and competed in a number of local and international competitions, where he won medals. He was selected by the Uganda Olympic Committee and included on the list of athletes to travel for the Olympic Games in Tokyo, Japan with the approval of the International Weightlifting Federation. 

The International Weightlifting Federation uses the weighting system for qualifying athletes and the points keep on changing, depending on the number of games played. Madam Speaker, at the time of travelling, Julius Ssekitoleko was on the verge of qualifying because his points were good. Ssekitoleko left Uganda for Japan, together with his coach, Hakim Musoke, on 8 June 2021 in the first team, which was led by Mr Ssemakula Katende of National Council of Sports. They were accommodated in Izumisano City in Japan, where a pre-qualification training camp had been set up under a Memorandum of Understanding signed between the Governments of Uganda and Japan in 2018 and confirmed on 17 June 2021, in which the Uganda Olympic Committee was to select athletes for pre-qualification training from the category of those who had already qualified and those who had a chance to qualify. 

Julius Ssekitoleko went in the category of athletes who had a chance to qualify. Madam Speaker, the participation of Ssekitoleko in the Olympic Games depended on confirmation which was to come from the International Weight Lifting Federation. 

On l7 June 2021, the Team leader, Mr Ssemakula Katende informed Julius Ssekitoleko that he had failed to qualify for participation in the Olympic Games and handed over to him a return ticket. Julius Ssekitoleko was devastated by this development and decided to escape from the camp to look for odd jobs in Japan instead of returning to Uganda where he had a lot of debts. 

He disappeared by boarding a train out of Izumisano City. His disappearance was reported to the Japanese authorities and immediately, a search for him was mounted by the Japanese Police. 

On realising that the police was looking for him, he handed himself in and the Japanese Police, in turn, handed him over to the Ugandan Team Management who immediately arranged for his return to Uganda. 

On 23 July 2021, he landed at Entebbe Airport and was arrested and taken to CID Headquarters for questioning. Therein lies the concern of the honourable Member of Parliament who raised the issue. The objectives of taking him in were to-

    1. investigate the circumstances surrounding the disappearance of Julius Ssekitoleko;
    2. interview witnesses and obtain their statements;
    3. establish whether his disappearance constituted an offence known to our law; 
    4. gather enough evidence to prosecute the suspect, if justified, and charge him in court.

Actions taken were:

    1. A case file was opened and investigations commenced.

    2. Four witnesses interviewed and their statements recorded, notably: 
    i. Jonathan Wankolo - Liaison Officer, Uganda Olympics Committee;
    ii. Mr Dominic Otucet – President, Uganda Athletes Association;
    iii. Ms Lydia Gloria Dhamuzungu – Assistant Secretary-General, Uganda Olympics Committee;
    iv. Rev. Canon Duncan Mugumya – Commissioner, Physical Education and Sports, Ministry of Education. 

Copies of these documents were obtained and attached to his case file. Indeed, like I said earlier, the suspect was interrogated and his statement also recorded.

Current status

Madam Speaker, on 27 June 2021, the Police file was submitted to the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions and the DPP’s opinion was that the suspect had not committed any offence known to the laws of Uganda. 

The DPP instead recommended for disciplinary action against the suspect outside the courts of law. The DPP accordingly ordered that Ssekitoleko be released unconditionally. On 28 July 2021, indeed Julius Ssekitoleko was released.

In conclusion, Ssekitoleko’s act of disappearing from the hotel, where he had been accommodated during the time of the games, to an unknown place in a foreign country like Japan, under the excuse that he was looking for a job, did not only create panic among the Ugandan officials but also portrayed a very bad image of our country. 

Prequalification for international features should desirably – this is a rider – be done at home in Uganda and not abroad in order to avoid unnecessary expenses on sportsmen who may not qualify and also such temptations of absconding by vulnerable sportsmen and women because of domestic pressures. 

Lastly, as already amplified in unison by this honourable House yesterday through the motion and attendant resolution to recognise the achievements of our team at the Olympics; reasonably rewarding and incentivising sportsmen and women through the various proposals made in that motion and subsequent resolution, this will reinforce and inculcate the idea of ‘east or west, home is best’ and be more attractive in the minds of these sportsmen and women.

This is in addition to adequate mentorship during training sessions beyond mere physical sports training activities. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We are debating this under rule 52 (2) and the debate is open now.

3.18
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me appreciate the minister for the statement.

It is crystal clear in his statement that Julius Ssekitoleko, according to the opinion of the Director of Public Prosecutions, was found to have committed no offence under the laws of Uganda. For that reason therefore, the young man, Julius Ssekitoleko, must be compensated by this Government for having been subjected to that humiliation. Even on the first page in the background, you vividly and unequivocally state that in 2018, Julius Ssekitoleko competed internationally and locally and won medals for Uganda. 

Indeed, yesterday, we were celebrating the medals that were won by our stars. So, Ssekitoleko then was very good and a star and actually –(Interjection)– Yes, still a good one. However, when it came to the time when he had been frustrated by being disqualified to participate in the Olympics and even immediately handed a ticket to return, Ssekitoleko, to any right-thinking person, required psycho-social support at that time.

If he had debts - even America has debts; it is a superpower country but I understand it owes China trillions of money. Even Uganda is heavily indebted as a country. So, the frustration that he suffered and the fact that he was eventually brought here in handcuffs and then found with no case - The Government must definitely compensate Julius Ssekitoleko.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I do not know where this Government concentrates its focus as far as sports is concerned. Are we, as a Government, only going to focus on celebrating and jubilating for medals that are won or the focus should shift like those other countries that are shining more than us. We should nurture and develop the talent that is in our athletes. That only can inspire others to do better for this country. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Unfortunately, you want this House to make a ruling, which it is not supposed to. Mr Ssekitoleko has his own rights. If he wants to get compensation, he can either go to Uganda Human Rights Commission or the court for that. I am just giving you free advice. This House cannot make that resolution.

MR NAMBESHE: For your information, arrangements are already in advanced stages for Mr Ssekitoleko to seek redress in the Courts of Judicature over this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no problem. I was giving you free legal advice because I know you are a teacher. 

3.23
MR GEOFFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity and I am the Shadow Minister of Sports. I task the minister to get time and answer Mr Ssekitoleko’s issue. I was present when Mr Ssekitoleko was brought back to the country. I met him at Jinja Road Police. 

I want to make some clarification, honourable minister. The prequalification camp was not there at all in Japan. We have to investigate more. Why was Mr Ssekitoleko taken, when they knew he was not going to participate? There must be another issue – maybe financial - the officials probably wanted something and they used Mr Ssekitoleko as a backup.

Secondly, as we have heard, Mr Ssekitoleko has a lot of debts. I request the necessary authorities to at least help him, since he is a national champion, to get something in order to motivate other sports personalities.

On another issue, I have heard that refugees are going to be taken to Namboole Stadium. I request all people with such an idea to drop it immediately. Namboole Stadium is a sports facility; not a refugee camp. Take the refugees to Bundibugyo and other camps and leave Namboole Stadium. It is the only stadium the Government of Uganda has. (Laughter) We have World Cup qualifications in September. Where are we going to train from? Will we be playing when the beautiful Afghans are jumping? I think that will not be possible. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kayemba, that is speculation. Namboole Stadium is under renovation. We have games. So, if it is true, then Government will come up with a statement to that effect, since we have incoming games.
	
3.25
MR MARTIN OJARA MAPENDUZI (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me thank the minister for providing this very useful information through his report. Picking from his report, however, it is clear that Mr Ssekitoleko has participated in several activities. The minister cited that he competed in 2018 and brought medals to this country. It is also clear that in the previous activities, he did not show any sign of disappearing. 

Taking from that, I think it is important that the Ministry of Education and Sports begins to consider ways to support our sportsmen and sportswomen in order to manage frustration. 

It is a fact that when most of our players go to compete, they go with a lot of expectations. Partly, I think it is because I think the ministry has not developed a clear system or ways of supporting the people who go to compete. So, when people go to compete, their minds are tuned to competing and winning so that when they return, they are able to get some rewards. 

I think it is important that we begin to design strategies where, first of all, we know how to help our players manage their expectations. Secondly, when they fail to succeed, there should be mechanisms to manage frustrations and dealing with stress. 

Thirdly, it is equally important that we look at creating an opportunity for every player, whether you get a medal or not - I think it is important that people who go to represent the country have an opportunity to be recognised but also supported. That is the message. Thank you. 

MS SANTA OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to seek a bit of clarification from the minister who made the presentation here about Mr Julius Ssekitoleko.

My son, Robert Okot who is now in the U.S, used to play rugby at junior level. The captain of the rugby team, Mr Wokorach, is my elder sister’s son. Many times, these young people have told me that each time they go out to play in the different countries, they come back in less numbers. This means that very many of them run away to live in Germany, Europe and other areas. Mr Ssekitoleko did that but the Director Public Prosecution (DPP) advised that he has not broken any law. 

I felt that next time a football team goes out to play in a different country - supposing all of them run away, what are we showing this country now? This is because it is not one or two athletes; at least I know of about six young people who went to play outside the country and disappeared to look for survival. What are we going to do as a country to prevent this occurrence from happening again? 

This is my question to the minister. Possibly, the minister responsible for sports should take it up and ensure that we find a way of avoiding the disappearance of our young people, when they go for international competitions. Otherwise, this is going to be on record. The athletes have already heard that Mr Ssekitoleko broke no law and, therefore, the rest will also disappear. Thank you.

3.30
MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for that good statement and the DPP for the good advice. 

The arrangements of the recent Olympics were a bit different. When I was still the minister in charge of sports, I signed a Memorandum of Understating with the Government of Japan for our team to stay there for more than a month while being looked after, in two cities. To me, after the team had gone to Japan and Mr Ssekitoleko disappearing in a few days would not be an issue because he would still be covered by the memorandum of understanding we had signed, unlike the previous arrangements. I think when the minister says he was released because there was no law to charge him, I salute him for that. 

Concerning the issue which my sister has raised, of course, it is indiscipline for the team to go and disappear. Usually, we wait until the last date of the games. Whoever now stays behind commits a crime but within the period, you cannot tell that somebody has disappeared.
Mark you, the prearrangement before the games, Sekitoleko was now putting on more weight. You never know it could have been due to the eating. That meant he was not going to participate and psychologically, because they informed him in advance and arranged a return ticket, it affected him. 

They would have left him to remain in the village until the last day. That was the crime that was arranged from there. I thank you very much.

3.32
MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, the statement gives a post-mortem of the problem and the diagnosis clearly comes out that the man was financially stressed. It could have been one of the reasons as to why he opted to disappear.

Madam Speaker, when these gallant young men and women represent Uganda outside and win medals raising our flag; we all celebrate them and they do good public relations for this country. Public relations is one of the most expensive items to pay for. You see the governments paying trillions in trying to do public relations. Some governments sponsor international teams for that purpose alone.

Madam Speaker, I beg that instead of continuing with the post-mortem; because if it is about financial pressure, you can be sure that next year or the other year, another one will disappear-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Kimosho, it is not financial pressure per se. If you look at the minister’s statement at 1.3, there is where he said, he had failed to qualify for participation in the Olympics Games and they handed over to him a return ticket.

Now, because he failed, he felt devastated; that is the reason; I have not seen anything relating to financial pressure there. Well he expected to get the money, but he failed to qualify.

MR KIMOSHO: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. However, someone made a statement to that effect. However, I would like to beg that as a Government and country, we put emphasis on supporting the sports sector. This will give hope to our sportsmen, win us more medals, do us more public relations and take Uganda to another level in terms of international recognition, instead of continuing to welcome in glory those who win medals and of course receiving people like Ssekitoleko in handcuffs for the shortcomings and challenges they meet in their career. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.35
MS SARAH NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is so unfortunate what happened to Ssekitoleko. As a sportsperson, I know that when you prepare yourself to compete –(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, I know why the members in the House are laughing. I think it is because of my size that the Members cannot believe that I am a sportsperson.

However, in this Parliament, I have won the trophy of the best shooter in netball for four consecutive years. I was the best shooter in the Inter-Parliamentary Games and they have laid those trophies on that table because of my shooting. I am actually waiting for the training to begin so that I can represent this Parliament again.

Madam Speaker, back to the debate, I feel sorry for Ssekitoleko. When you prepare yourself to compete, you have psychologically set your mind that, one, I am going to represent my country but also, two, you as a sportsperson, you have prepared yourself to either to benefit financially or- when you win and carry that medal, there is that satisfaction that you get as a sportsperson.

Unfortunately, Ssekitoleko did not get this opportunity. I know because of that, it might have put him off. Psychologically, he was tortured and he was handed the air ticket to come back.

My only challenge is that as the Government, we did not support this young man when he came back. The arrest and the way he was handled after coming back left a lot to be desired. I feel that our sportspeople need a lot of support.

Madam Speaker, when you listen to people who go to represent this country in sports out there, it is not only Ssekitoleko; look at the She Cranes; when they are participating, you will hear of reports coming back; either their leaders have disappeared, the money promised has not been given to them or they are not going to participate unless they are talked to. Therefore, you see that there is a lot of confusion even in the camps where they go. Even in football, the Uganda Cranes, the last games that we participated in at international level, you saw what happened in the camp. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, as a country, we need to invest more in sports and tap in this sector. Uganda has very many and good potential sportsmen and women who can sell us out there and come out with very many medals; not only two or three. The only thing we need to do is to invest in sports and put our hearts to it and we shall yield results. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.39
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I closely followed that young man’s issue and it was quite disappointing; the kind of energy that my Government put in, first of all in looking for him to ensure that they bring him back.

I listened to this young man when he was on an NTV talk show where he said “I had not disappeared but I had my visa that still allowed me to stay in Japan. Of course I have been in the country trying to make ends meet and I wanted to make contact.”

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it beats my understanding why these young men - and women by the way, because there is another lady who is a boxer in Katanga. I have met her and she has been trying to seek support. She has won medals too, but she has never got the opportunity and I have even watched her appearing on CNN as one of the boxers.

Madam Speaker, this young man had even sold his motorcycle so that he could have some little money to enable him to make some contacts and eventually find employment. One of his biggest issues that he raised is that he has tried to make ends meet through sports. 

He won medals and he even showed them; but he has never received recognition. He even mentioned that when he received some little money in one of the awards he won, the little money he got was taken by the promoters and those who transported him. He ended up with nothing. 

It was so sad that while this man was being looked for with all the media houses talking about Mr Ssekitoleko, his pregnant wife had been evicted from the rental house where they were staying.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Minister of Education and Sports – this young man has already suffered. Going through that process was torturous because when he returned, he had to go to his mother who is also living in a one-roomed house somewhere, in Kibuli I think.

I would like to thank Mama Fiina who gave him Shs 2,000,000 as start-up. I request the Minister of Education and Sports that it is not enough for us to receive this statement. Government should look into this young man’s issue and give him a little start-up. After all, we see people getting millions of shillings.

Mr Ssekitoleko should also not travel to Gulu to get money. He should be given some start-up so that he can find his way. He has just completed primary seven at a very old age. I am sure he wants to continue with education. Government could take him up and educate him so that we support him to build on his talent and he wins us more medals. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have always wondered. Before we say Government should take it up, what have you done as Parliament? Yesterday, I was dragged into Kamoga’s issue. I can ably tell you that I fulfilled the pledge today. I was with Kamoga. 

Therefore, all those people who are concerned about whatever is happening, as we wait for Government, what are we doing as parliamentarians? Hon. Sarah, what are you doing as a mother to a woman who has been thrown out of a house?

Ms opendi: Madam Speaker, I am going to lead a fundraising. I cannot handle this alone because I am supporting other people with similar problems. I will lead a small fundraising here. Even if it is Shs 50,000 from each Member of Parliament, let us give it to support Mr Ssekitoleko to start up his life. I hope Members will support me when I bring this paper.

Mr basalirwa: For record purposes, I have seconded.

3.45
Mr asuman basalirwa (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Parliamentary Sports Club, we would like to thank you for fulfilling your pledge. I met Mr Kamoga today and he did confirm that he received the Shs 10 million that you pledged. (Applause) I was with hon. Allan Ssewanyana and he was very happy with the Speaker for her magnanimity and equanimity.

Regarding the statement by the Minister for Internal Affairs, we would like to request the minister to advise police to stop arresting people without evidence. The idea of arresting people, detaining them and releasing them without evidence undermines our criminal justice system. It is a culture that is taking shape. I remember raising it with the President when we were in the Interparty Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD). 

Madam Speaker, if you went to any police station around, you are going to find people languishing in police cells for three or four weeks. I have had the privilege of being a political detainee in most of these facilities. You keep people there, no charges against them and at the end of it all, you release them. This is not very good. I am glad that now the Ministry of Internal Affairs has two Generals. I hope you are going to use your experience.

Over and above that, this particular person we are talking about; Mr Ssekitoleko - You even denied him access to his lawyers. Hon. Kayemba Ssolo is here and can attest that you kept him beyond the stipulated 48 hours. Why should you treat a person of that importance like a hardcore criminal?

I think that going forward, the issue of respect for fundamental rights of Ugandans must be taken with the seriousness it deserves. There was absolutely no reason for you to arrest a person then begin looking for charges. What kind of system is this? If you do not have any charge – He was already in Uganda. If you wanted him, you would have allowed him to go home and then issue summons. He would have come to police. But you arrested, embarrassed, violated his rights and then released him.

That kind of conduct by police deserves an apology. We would have expected the minister to use this platform to apologise to Mr Ssekitoleko and his family.

Madam Speaker, you have guided that perhaps this person should seek legal redress and the Chief Opposition Whip has said there are already court proceedings - We should not even go that way –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If there are court proceedings, why are we discussing this?

Mr basalirwa: This is the information we seem to be getting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is sub judice.

Mr basalirwa: Madam Speaker, the point I would like to raise in regard to that issue is that Government should not wait to be taken to court over a simple matter. Just swallow your pride, call the young man and apologise to him. Do not wait to be embarrassed in court. 

What are you going to tell court? The man’s rights were violated. The Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) has said there was no case against him. Why did you allow the matter to reach that stage? Apologise and have some compensation for the young man. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you respond to what has been raised.

3.49
The minister of state for internal affairs (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker, I have heard your concerns and they are well taken. I would like to propose to the House that rather than deal with individuals, we address this matter of the welfare of sportsmen in a comprehensive way, like we resolved yesterday.

Regarding the issue raised by hon. Basalirwa, I am also advised that the matter is sub judice through the submission of hon. Nambeshe. Therefore, I am not at liberty to – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not yet given you the Floor.

Mr nambeshe: For clarity to the honourable minister, the matter of seeking redress is still in its infant stages. It has not yet reached court. (Laughter)

Gen. muhoozi: Since it is a possibility, I would rather I consult with the Attorney-General and see how to discuss with the other side and proceed. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, thank you for your statement. It is disturbing that the sportsmen and ladies, who are taken out of the country without confirming their qualifications, end up suffering or remaining out there. Of course, when somebody tells you that you do not qualify, you get tempted to look for somewhere to go. It is also upon the state minister for sports to make sure that whoever leaves this country qualifies for a particular sporting activity; it is not just a matter of taking people. 

I also know some sporting persons who just take people because they want to go for “kyeyo”. Therefore, we must have a statement from the Minister of State for Sports on how they determine the qualifications of these persons they take abroad. 

The Minister of Internal Affairs should not just rush. They need to confirm from these young people what problems they face. We now have Emyooga. If the young man has a problem of money, you can be able to put him on the Emyooga programme. It is upon you to talk to these young people and find out what problems they face, other than just arresting and keeping them there for some time. This does not look good for our country. 

Therefore, we expect a report from the minister of sports on 24th on the selection and qualification criteria employed on international sports. The minister of sports should give us the criteria they used, but not just take people anyhow. 

STATEMENT BY THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL ON COMPENSATION OF VICTIMS OF THE LORD’S RESISTANCE ARMY (LRA) INSURGENCY IN VARIOUS PARTS OF THE COUNTRY

3.49
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi) Madam Speaker, my presentation is an update on the status of the compensation of victims of the LRA insurgency in various parts of the country – (Interruption) 

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I still remember that when this statement was presented on the Floor of Parliament, you directed the Attorney-General that he should come back with a comprehensive statement on the Floor of the House. You also directed that they should hold meetings with the regional Members of Parliament to address the concerns per region. 

I wonder whether the other regions were consulted. However, from our subregion, as Acholi Members of Parliament, we were not consulted and I do not know how they have come with a comprehensive statement, when we were not consulted on these issues. Are we proceeding well, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, maybe we need to first wait and hear what the Attorney-General has to say - if he had a meeting with the Members, what criteria he used to get his information – then we can query what he is saying. 

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The statement I am presenting is a status update of what we have done so far and what we intend to do. It is not a conclusive statement of the exercise per se’. I beg that you listen to me since I am updating Parliament because they appropriate money for this exercise.   

The scope and steps taken –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As much as we are going to receive your status update, you need to take instructions as they are given. We are going to receive the status update, which is fine. However, we asked your office to have sub-regional meetings. I am one of the beneficiaries of the compensation. Did I attend your meeting? 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I have something to say to that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR KAFUUZI: Most obliged.     

The scope and steps taken in the verification exercise are as follows: 

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is currently conducting verification of livestock compensation claims in areas affected by the insurgency and the districts which are presently in the advanced stages of assessment in Acholi, Lango and Teso subregions. They are listed as follows: 

    i. In Acholi Subregion, we are in Agago, Amuru, Gulu, Kitgum, Lamwo, Nwoya, Omoro and Pader districts; 

    ii. In Lango Subregion, we are in Alebtong, Amolatar, Apac, Dokolo, Kole, Kwania, Lira, Oyam and Otuke districts; 

    iii. In Teso Subregion, we are in Amuria, Bukedea, Kaberamaido, Kapelebyong, Katakwi, Kumi, Ngora, Serere, Pallisa, Butebo, Kalaki and Soroti districts. 

The next stage of the exercise shall incorporate districts affected by the insurgency comprising Karamoja sub-region, West Nile sub-region, Sebei sub-region, Bukedi (Budaka, Busia and Tororo districts) and Busoga sub-region. 

The specific focus of the verification exercise is “claims for livestock compensation”. The rationale for focusing on livestock compensation is that the traditional economies of the affected subregions were mainly based on livestock. Therefore, the loss of livestock during the insurgency severely impacted the affected communities’ livelihoods.

As earlier indicated, compensation of the areas affected by the insurgency was cited in line with the priority areas specified by H.E. the President for the budget of Financial Year 2021/2022, as clearly indicated in the second budget call circular on the finalisation of detailed budget estimates, paragraph l0(x), dated 15 February 2021. 

Additionally, the litigation by the claimants and beneficiaries in the High Courts of Gulu, Lira, Soroti, Arua, and Mbale and other claims focus on livestock compensation. 

In conclusion of the verification exercise in areas which are in the advanced stages, for example, Acholi sub-region with 16,946 claims, Lango sub-region with 42,042 claims and Teso sub-region with 33,664 claims totalling to 92,652 claims. 

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs in the Financial Year 2020/2021, procured materials (data cards) to complete the final registration of the genuine claimants and beneficiaries at sub-county and district level, based on bio data, including National Identity Cards and letters of administration for estates of the deceased claimants.

The exercise which shall be transparently implemented in conjunction with district leaders and district officials together with a committee of 20 elders, religious leaders, representatives and other stakeholders from each of the affected communities, shall eliminate all fraudulent claims.

Madam Speaker, we have tested this in Acholi sub-region. We want to have a committee of 20 people but the committee we have now, comprises nine people and it is led by a retired Judge of the Supreme Court, Justice Galdino Okello. So far, we are working well with them.

In Acholi sub-region, the inter-ministerial verification is working alongside the committee of elders, religious leaders, representatives and other stakeholders commenced the exercise of sensitising claimants, beneficiaries and stakeholders, at sub-county level, with the purpose of ensuring that only genuine claims are successful. The exercise is ongoing. 

A similar exercise shall be implemented in Lango and Teso sub-regions and other affected areas, including Karamoja, West Nile, Sebei, Budaka, Busia and Tororo districts, and Busoga, Iganga and Luuka districts.

The inter-ministerial verification committee, which is implementing the exercise is due to deploy in Acholi, Lango and Teso sub-regions before the end of this month. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs intends to conclude the entire livestock verification exercise in Financial Year 2020/2022 and accordingly, settle all livestock compensation claims and cases.

A concern arose during the implementation of the display of names of claimants and beneficiaries in December 2020, and January 2021 that the livestock compensation rates were different across the sub-regions. A bull was valued at Shs 600,000 in Acholi sub-region while the same bull was valued at Shs 900,000 in Lango, and at Shs 1,000,000 in Teso sub-region.

As a ministry, we intend to use one rate that cuts across. It was resolved that the livestock compensation rates would be harmonised across the respective sub-regions. A report with the final assessment shall be duly submitted to the Cabinet and Parliament for due consideration. 

Madam Speaker, you have talked about the meetings. Besides the exercise being led by the ministry, we are operating with an inter-ministerial committee for ministers in the sub-regions. We have prepared a Cabinet memo but we are also due to agree on how to engage with the leaders and Members of Parliament from the sub-regions. The inter-ministerial committee is chaired by hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny, the Minister of State, Office of the Prime Minister for Northern Uganda.  

We shall report back soon because we are going to sit and make a timetable on how to engage with the other people. My senior colleague, hon. Beatrice Anywar, is a Member of that committee. 

This report is intended to clarify on matters that were brought to Parliament, in regard to this exercise. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I now open the debate.

4.07
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a brief one. I take issue with the honourable minister’s repeated omission of Bugisu sub-region, among the beneficiaries. Multiple times, you have deliberately omitted Bugisu sub-region. 

Madam Speaker, Bugisu sub-region, as you will appreciate, is sandwiched between Sebei, Teso and Bukedi. It has always been among those that were earmarked for livestock compensation. I do not know why the minister has deliberately marginalised or rather left out Bugisu sub-region.

Most importantly, I would like to go on record and inform the minister that if you are talking about the Lord’s Resistance Insurgency, the chief strategist of Kony, the one Mataka Nyekorach, hails from my constituency, Manjiya, Bugisu sub-region. Your colleague, who is a Member of that inter-ministerial committee, hon. Beatrice Anywar, will ably inform you. Lakwena spent nights in Mbale. Therefore, if you are talking about spillage of this insurgency, you cannot leave out Bugisu sub-region, honourable minister. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there was an issue on Bugisu and Sebei that was raised by hon. William Chemonges. I think you need to handle that issue too, in your next submission. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I do remember clearly how hon. William Chemonges raised that issue. I will consult with my technical team. 

For purposes of allaying my senior colleague’s fears, I have nothing personal against Bugisu. I will consult with the technical team because this is also informed by investigation of what actually happened, and these are the Government records that we are following. Once those records point us to the right direction, then Bugisu will be brought on board. Most obliged.

4.09
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, and Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am glad that the Government is paying attention to the citizens. 

In 1996, Kasese had a similar share; it was invaded from DR Congo by the ADF and this is national knowledge. Kasese Municipality was set on fire and the business community lost part of their residential and commercial houses and vehicles were burnt. They went to St Johns and a tractor that belonged to the school was set on fire. Some students were abducted and some families around the school closely lost livestock. 

They went to Mpobwe town displacing the entire community and taking all their livestock. Madam Speaker, when they went to Kitooro sub-county in Bukonzo County West and murdered 10 LCs 1 in cold blood - for what crime? They were serving the NRM Government.

Many decades down the road, no single compensation has been paid by the Government to those families and affected communities. Even where the minister comes from; Kichwamba, the technical school was affected. 

It is my humble plea, Madam Speaker, that the 11th Parliament ropes in all of those communities, especially in the Rwenzori region, to be on the list of those to be compensated so that we save Parliament’s and Government’s time. We will never come back here to discuss a matter that would have been incorporated and co-opted into this particular subject.

Madam Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I appreciate that you have allowed me to answer as they ask – [Members rose] -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, it is good for you people to get responses when you ask. When you pile up the questions, they will only answer one and you will not benefit out of it. Why the hurry? I have chosen that for today as the Speaker and Presiding Officer. Okay? (Applause)

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I appreciate my colleague’s concern. The compensation exercise that I am handling was started around 2011. That is when the Government pledged to start the compensation but it arose from court cases that had been filed as far back as 2004 and 2005.

I inherited this and I am carrying it forward. I would appreciate it if Kichwamba and Kasese claims are brought on board. I may not be in a position to originate it myself. However, since you have made your concerns heard and Parliament has taken note of them, maybe I will be given the necessary direction. 

However, my fear is that every time we bring up something new, we shall be pulled back as far as the northern Uganda compensation exercise is concerned because we have taken some steps. The last time I went to the field, they said, “You promised us in 2011; you did not pay. In 2016, you did not pay. You are now coming in 2021.”

So, if I now go back to the drawing board and we start adding this and the other, we might be caught up by time. My humble request would be that Parliament, together with the Executive, segments these things and works on them concurrently. However, let this exercise that has already taken some steps proceed as we bring the rest on board.

I am equally an interested party because I know people who died in Kichwamba. I have been approached by leaders from Tooro and Rwenzori sub-region about the ADF issue and I tell them that I cannot, right now, combine the two because here, we are dealing with livestock and I would want this to be originated so that we do it concurrently. Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What we also need to appreciate is that there were court cases to that effect and among those cases, there was one from Acholi sub-region. There were others from Lango and Teso. That is what we should be asking first; how far have you gone with the issues of the court cases and paying of those people?

That is why the other time we were asking about how far you had gone on verification, especially of the people who won the cases.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, specifically on the issue of court cases, I must say we are held back by the claims of the lawyers. In one of the cases, the lawyers’ claim is Shs 53 billion. In another, it is Shs 40 something –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As legal fees?

MR KAFUUZI: Yes, as legal fees. We are saying that if we are going to pay – You remember in the past, Government had pledged Shs 10 billion per sub-region. We attempted to bring a supplementary to get Shs 30 billion to cover the three sub-regions of Acholi, Lango and Teso but that supplementary was shot down because the other sub-regions were not fully verified.

During campaigns, the President pledged that he would put Shs 50 billion in the sub-regions. Now, how do we pay Shs 53 billion to an individual lawyer when the sub-region alone is getting Shs 50 billion? It is not practicable. 

As we speak, we have taken steps, as the Attorney-General’s Chambers, to liaise with these lawyers to see how far back they are willing to adjust or, if necessary, we go to court and do a proper taxation. However, the Shs 50 billion, as pledged by the Government, will be given.

In the budget for this financial year, they started with Shs 50 billion and I think they would be willing to give us more, if they see what we are doing on the ground.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue is a concern of Acholi, Teso and Lango sub-regions, not so? Somebody has talked about Rwenzori and West Nile sub-regions. I am giving opportunity to one person from each sub-region. Hon. Akol – [Ms Catherine Lamwaka rose] – You will come later on a point of procedure, hon. Catherine Lamwaka. Do not worry. Hon. Akol is speaking for Acholi sub-region.

4.18
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I am actually shocked to hear the statement coming from the Deputy Attorney-General today, especially when he is telling me that money was not appropriated for payment of the people from Acholi sub-region.

I met the Deputy Attorney-General at Centenary Bank in Gulu. It was two weeks to the time of voting. He told me that, that particular week, people were going to be paid on their accounts. 

Madam Speaker, if you remember, just before we went for recess, the Attorney-General came on the Floor of Parliament and said they had finished verification for Acholi sub-region, Lango sub-region and Teso.

Today, the Deputy Attorney-General has come on the Floor of Parliament to tell us the verification is still taking place. When you are talking about Acholi sub-region, I do not even know how many times the verification has been going on. I wonder the kind of verification they are talking about.

If anything, many of the people who have been coming many times for verification have died. They have opened accounts many times and up to now, the people are still asking what the problem is. I do not want Government to come on the Floor of Parliament to keep telling us that verification is taking place. 

Where is the money and how come you are talking about verification today when before the election period, you were talking about people getting money the “next week”?

This issue of payment for livestock in Acholi sub-region was used many times during the time of campaigns. When it is approaching the campaign period, they are told, “You are going to be paid. You vote.” After voting, they start another verification exercise. 

Something that bothers me a lot is that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought Lango sub-region is going to speak.

MR MAPENDUZI OJARA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to provide is that just as hon. Akol has put it, on 30 June 2015, the President issued a directive that Acholi, Lango and Teso be compensated before end of December that year; money was earmarked. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and all the other relevant ministers were present.

It is quite disturbing that every time our people are being lied to; we have continued to lose elders. For example, a senior citizen, A.K. Banya, who served in a very high position in Government, one time called me and said, “Hon. Martin Ojara, I am going to die, simply because I have not received my money and I cannot afford treatment. I am supposed to be taken for a major operation”. Three days later, he died. 

We have continued to lose people. Every time we are being lied to – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Martin Ojara, being lied to is a strong statement. It is not the lie that killed the old man. 

MR MARTIN OJARA: Madam Speaker, I apologise but I think that is the best way to express our frustration. Our people have continued to suffer whenever promises are made. Even when the President issues directives, people do not listen. 

I am sure even after this report, we will have another report. I believe in you, Madam Speaker, that you will make a difference so that next time, we do not get the same report. It has become a song. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next report we are going to ask for is the report on payment; that is the report we are going to ask for. 

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I really applaud you for saying the next report coming from the Attorney-General’s office should be about the people who have been paid. Therefore, before we talk about verification, what about the 16,000 claimants who have been verified already? Why don’t you talk about paying the people who are verified, instead of waiting for another verification to take place? It is because, if anything, - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you finish please? 

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I am sorry. I respect the Deputy Attorney-General but the way he is behaving, I am – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is actually because I have given you a lot of liberty on the microphone. 

MS BEATRICE AKELLO: I want to give additional information. I remember by the time they were conducting the verification, I was the Resident District Commissioner. The Government has budgeted for that money to pay those who were already verified. 

I am getting another statement from the Attorney-General today, which brings in the issue of the LRA. If the issue of LRA compensation is coming, then we need more information because we have people who have been affected in various ways. We have the landmine survivors; some of them have lost limbs. We also have some people whose lips and ears were cut. They should also be included. It should not be only livestock. I beg to submit. 

MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I stood up about three times on a procedural matter for a reason. Now that you have given me the chance, let me bring this out. 

The Attorney-General, while presenting his report, made a presentation with a heading, “LRA War Compensation” and yet even in the content of his presentation, he traces this compensation back to a court proceeding in Gulu High Court. 

The cattle compensation of the Acholi people, which is in advanced stages, originated from the NRA War and not the LRA. The record must be put straight. On that matter, the presentation by the Attorney-General and even the debate on this report may not be procedurally right.

So, the origin of this cattle compensation started way back at the loss that a number of claimants made in 1986-1989. They even had commitments that were in writing. When they went to court, Government opted to settle the matter out of court. That is how they ended up agreeing to compensate these people.

Today, the Attorney-General is supposed to present a report on the LRA War compensation. I seek clarification from the Attorney-General; are we handling these two as one or these are two different things? It has to be cleared.

We have talked a number of times on the LRA war compensation. A number of petitions were brought in the previous Parliament on the LRA war compensation. Government’s response has always been that there was no legal framework that could guide them in handling compensations of war. In 2019, the Government of Uganda passed the National Transitional Justice Policy, which takes care of all these compensations. I seek clarification from the Attorney-General whether the compensation of the LRA war can be well taken care of under the National Transitional Justice Policy.

To me, I look at two things and not one. The cattle compensation that originated from the court directive, which stands alone, and the LRA War compensation. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is actually a very good development; NRA versus LRA. 

MR KAFUUZI: There are two issues. The issue raised by my senior colleague, hon. Akol –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First answer what hon. Catherine Lamwaka has raised. It was a procedural matter. 

MR KAFUUZI: Should I let you rule? The claims we are compensating are livestock claims arising from war, regardless of who perpetrated it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First check the heading of your report. 

MR KAFUUZI: I do appreciate the issue raised by hon. Catherine Lamwaka. It has redirected - that is a mistake that should be corrected. So, it is not only LRA. For example, if you go to Karamoja Subregion, there might not have been war as such but there was cattle that had been placed under the army. We call them protected villages. So, where they lost those animals, the Government has still pledged to pay them back. So, it is not just the LRA. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, what hon. Catherine Lamwaka is raising is, in your status report, you are talking about the LRA and not the NRA. What she thought you should have done is to first discuss the NRA or combine both of them. So, which one are you handling? I know she is just afraid to talk but she is one of the affected persons. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, we are combining all. 

MR AKOL: I think the best we can do for the Attorney-General is to make him go back and return to the Floor of Parliament later. It is because he does not even understand the claim he is talking about now. In real sense, the case that was in court was the NRA compensation and not the LRA. 

The LRA registration was done by the current Secretary-General of the NRM. He registered the LRA victims. On that, they have never talked about the compensation. If he is combining the two, then he has to go back and sit in his Chambers and come back with another statement. This one is not covering the registration for the LRA victims and the people to be compensated. 


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  My decision that you sit with the Members of Parliament from the respective subregions, I had a reason. You would have understood what is in a particular region.

Now, you did not appreciate why I said that and now you are going back to sit with those regional Members of Parliament and agree what is coming from each subregion. So, go back, have a meeting and report in the next two weeks.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE MERGE OF MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENT AND THE AGENCIES

4.31
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, this is a progress report on the implementation of the rationalisation of Government agencies and public expenditure; in other words, the merger.

Madam Speaker, Cabinet on the 22 February 202l, took a decision to merge, mainstream and rationalise government agencies, commissions, authorities and public expenditure, to facilitate
efficient and effective service delivery. 

In order to effectively implement this decision, Cabinet approved an implementation roadmap for the implementation process –(Interruption)
 
MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the minister is reading a very important statement. I do not know whether he has given us copies. We needed to know those institutions. 

I do not know whether even you, the Speaker, have gotten a list of those institutions that are due to be merged based on what the minister is reading now. We would be happy if procedurally, he would provide us with copies of the list of the institutions that the Government intends to merge or the ones, which have already been merged because we have heard of some.

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the honourable minister to proceed when we do not have those institutions that are intended to be merged? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, my office submitted - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have a copy of your report?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, my office submitted a copy of this report to the office of the Clerk. It was my honest belief that this copy of the report, as usual would be uploaded on our ipads. A quick consultation here with the clerk is that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What the honourable Member of Parliament is asking for is the list of the institutions that are supposed to be merged, the names of the MDAs; which MDA is supposed to be merged with which one. That is what he is asking for. Is the list of those institutions in your statement?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Yes, Madam Speaker, it is there in the statement that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  On what page is it?

MR MURULI MUKASA: It is in annex one, Madam Speaker.

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, is it the rationalisation?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Yes, that is the rationalisation.

MS BETTY AOL: If so, then the annex is not there.

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, what is downloaded is just your statement; the list of institutions is not attached. That is why we are asking that we be privy to the list? You might have not given them the list to be attached to the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  If we say that there are 157 government agencies that are supposed to be reviewed under this rationalisation of government agencies, which agencies are those? We need to know them.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that the annex was not uploaded. I would request, Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can we go to the next item as you get us that list.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Precisely.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We cannot debate in speculation.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE GENERAL OVERVIEW OF THE PERFORMANCE OF UMEME

4.36
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Dr Sidronius Okasai): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Dr Okasaai, I am not a Prime Minister. I was voted by this House; I was not appointed.

DR OKASAI: I am very sorry. Madam Speaker, a question was raised on the update of Umeme performance. I am going to present a report on the performance of Umeme Limited during the concession period, which ran from 2005 to 2020. It is quite a long report but I will give a summary. Otherwise, I would request that I lay it on the Table for study; we can consider it on a later date because the period is long from 2005 to 2020.

A review of the performance of Umeme Limited in the electricity subsector, in the previous 16 years, has been done using the key performance parameters agreed on at the time of the concession, namely investment, customer connections, reduction of distribution losses, days lag, collection of targets as well as realised operational costs, which are distribution, operation, and maintenance cost. 

The summary of the performance over the 16 years period is presented in the subsequent chapters. This is going to be a long presentation. I request to lay this paper on the Table. It is a 16 year report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Which report are you reading? Is it a statement to Parliament on the failure by Umeme to supply and install Yaka meters to some clients?

DR OKASAI: No. That is another one. This is a statement to Parliament on the general overview of the performance of Umeme. Do you have it? Isn’t it on the Order Paper? 

ms betty aol: Madam Speaker, what we have is just four pages; it is not as long as you are expressing. May we have that long statement? This one will not take a lot of time. Thank you.

Ms alum: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the presentation of the minister, the statement is very long but what we have here is only four pages. 

In addition, the Order Paper talks about “General overview of the performance of Umeme”. When you look at the statement, the introductory part talks about an issue raised by hon. Luttamaguzi; a concern over failure by Umeme to supply Yaka metres to some clients across the country and the urgent need for Government to come up with an explanation on the matter.

Therefore, are we proceeding rightly when what we have are only four pages and the introductory part of the minister’s statement talks about issues raised by hon. Luttamaguzi?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you read this report as it is? I hope we have the same report.

Mr keefa KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, I think there is a mix-up. There is the whole issue of overview of performance of Umeme, which is a completely different matter –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But it is not on the Order Paper.

Mr keefa KIWANUKA: That is right. What we expect this evening is why there was failure on the Yaka metres, an issue raised by hon. Luttamaguzi. I do not understand the context in which the minister is coming in with this report.

I think that, procedurally, we could go to the question raised by hon. Luttamaguzi. He can come back later with this report.

Mr olanya: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What we expect from the honourable minister - I remember last time Members raised concerns about Umeme. Some were raising concerns about the Yaka metres, the poles and about Umeme being very expensive. We, from northern Uganda, raised concerns about Umeme being irregular. In a month, we may have electricity constantly for less than 14 days. Other days, we have load shedding. 

Therefore, we expect the minister to come up and answer the queries of honourable Members. Is that a matter of going into detail as he claims? He claims he has about 200 pages of the report. We are not in for that. Let him respond to queries raised by honourable Members. That is what is on the Order Paper. The Order Paper states, “The general overview of the performance of Umeme.” Let him be brief and answer the queries of honourable Members. 

Mr mpuuga: Madam Speaker, as the Government tries to establish whether it is around or it long fell and as the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is trying to establish the meaning of a “statement”, I temporarily take over to advise the minister. (Applause)

Why we expend a lot of time trying to do business of the House - part of the complaint by Members - is that some of these ministers hardly attend plenary. When issues are captured for them, even those who capture them do it upside down. 

Members from both sides of the House rose and asked questions relating to, essentially, three issues and they were all about Umeme: the tariffs, intermittent distribution and failure to do connections. You would expect a prudent minister to rise in very simple terms and language, without having to go into semantics, to speak to the House about these issues.

Honourable minister, if you are ready, I resume my seat. If you are not, I take over and advise the House.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, withdraw your submission. I give you a week to come back and present.

Mr okupa: Madam Speaker, to avoid any confusion, after that one week, the minister must be very clear on what he is supposed to bring. I think the Speaker has been kind enough to give you time. Retreat tactfully and come back in a week, well organised. That is much better. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please present after a week.

Dr okAsAi: Most obliged. However, there were three questions and I had prepared three different papers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have given you a week. Go and organise yourself.

Mr oshabe: Madam Speaker, as the minister returns, I think he should answer the questions of the Members but not to give us an overview on the performance of Umeme.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a question by hon. Luttamaguzi.

Mr oshabe: And very many other Members. He should return to answer those questions. Thank you.

Mr keefa KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, the report answering hon. Luttamaguzi’s question is ready. You had guided that the minister proceeds and presents that and then he can come back with the other issues, which have not been –(Interruption)

Mr okupa: The Speaker has ruled. Let him come back after a week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In a week, we will get a response on individual Members of Parliament questions, starting with the one of hon. Luttamaguzi. 

RESPONSE BY THE Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees TO an URGENT QUESTION On the looming drought in the Lango Sub-Region and the attendant threat of food insecurity

The Deputy Speaker: Minister of Public Service, remember your issue is pending and it is a hot one. It will be discussed tomorrow.

4.49
The minister of public service (Mr Muruli-Mukasa): Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I am reliably informed that the annexes are being uploaded on Members’ iPads. We shall be ready to discuss this issue tomorrow. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next is the response from the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees.

4.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to respond to issues raised by Members. There was a particular issue here on the looming drought in Lango sub-region and the rampant rates of floods and food security raised by hon. Paul Omara, Member of Parliament for Otuke County. 

Madam Speaker, I also request to respond to the Kayunga issue because they have two issues on the Order Paper pertaining to the same. I will also submit a report on those issues as well. 

The issue raised by hon. Paul Omara is: Honourable members, you are aware that several parts of the country are currently experiencing a dry spell; northern western, eastern, West Nile and Central parts of the country are experiencing a dry spell resulting into reduced soil moisture, causing a high degree of damage on crop land, pasture and also hindering livelihoods. 

Heavy rainfalls caused floods and landslides for northern, eastern and western parts of the country resulting to moderate crop damage and displacement of persons. Waterlogging resulting from the rising water levels in Lake Victoria and Lake Albert has resulted into the rotting of foodstuffs in the gardens and affected the dry crops harvested, leading to huge post-harvest losses. 

We developed a Cabinet paper requesting for relief to support the provision of this food relief items to all these affected communities. Last week, we had a meeting with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they have promised to give us the money before the end of this week. We are also waiting for the releases to be sure that we shall be able to respond to most of these requests from Members.

We have also been closely monitoring the regions and there are parts of the country - using existing early warning systems at the moment. There has also been coordination of all sectors and stakeholders on food security to undertake the mitigation measures. 

On the directive that you gave me about Kayunga, Madam Speaker, we came up with a report that was uploaded yesterday. I am going to lay it on the Table. 

I also promised, on that day, to bring the delivery note that shows how much food items and non-food items were delivered to Kayunga – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the report about? 

MS ANYAKUN: The report is on the assessment of the living conditions of the over 4,000 households affected by floods and drought in Bbaale County, Kayunga District and the non-responsiveness of relevant Government agencies; the Office of the Prime Minister. That was compiled by my team and I. It is on the iPads. I beg to lay it on the Table.

I remember that same day, Madam Speaker, I had promised the House that I was going to bring the delivery note from Kayunga for the items of food and non-food items delivered to Kayunga, just to prove that the Office of the Prime Minister, through disaster preparedness, has been responding to the issues of floods of the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it Kayunga in general or that area where there were 4,000 people? 

MS ANYAKUN: It is general but there are these two subcounties in Bbaale County, Kayunga District, which were most affected. I beg to lay the delivery notes as well. Thank you very much. 

On the issues of the Afghanistan, we shall come here with a proper report, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

4.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Security had got an emergency and he will not be here today. We request that he comes next week.  I hope the Speaker has heard me.

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, my counterpart is not audible enough. I do not know whether he is not telling the truth or he is trying to hide something. Could you please try to be audible, hon. Tayebwa?

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: I am fasting and this is why I had issues but the Minister of Security will be here next week to make a statement. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Bahinduka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a report arising out of your directive to go onto the ground and do some fact finding about issues raised by Members of Parliament. 

On 28 July 2021, we moved with hon. Gilbert Olanya, basing on the question he asked on the destruction of livelihoods, property and life in Lakang sub-county, Amuru District, by marauding elephants and buffaloes from Murchison Falls National Game Park. 

In consultation with hon. Gilbert Olanya on 28 July 2021, we held a meeting with the district leadership of Amuru, who shared a comprehensive report about the human wildlife conflict in Amuru. We moved to Lakang sub-county, where we met the sub-county leadership, village chairpersons and the affected community members. We visited the family of the victim, who was attacked and killed by an elephant, the late Esther Akwongo. Together with the team from the Uganda Wildlife Authority, we promised to support the family of the deceased and right now, the process is on-going. 

We are also in consultation with the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to see how they can bring some relief to help the affected families, who lost a number of their food crops to elephants. We also agreed with Uganda Wildlife Authority to visit some of the patients that had injured because of elephant attacks. 

On 27 July 2021, there was a question raised on the invasion of areas of Kyakende, Nyamahasa subcounties by marauding wildlife and the attendant destruction of livelihood, raised by hon. Ngompek Linos, member of Parliament Kibanda County North, Kiryandongo District. 

On 27 July 2021, in coordination with the area Members of Parliament and local leadership, we held meetings with the district leadership, held field visits starting with Kibyama Village in Kigumba Subcounty, Kibanda South Constituency led by hon. Hellen Kahunde and hon. Jacob Karubange, we assessed the damage caused by elephants in these areas. 

Further, we still moved with hon. Ngompek to the areas of Kyakende and held meetings with the leadership. We also visited Kichwabigingo Subcounty, where we met the local leadership and interacted with the communities. 

A number of issues were raised and like the general one, we are still liaising with the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to see that some relief is given to help those that lost their crops to elephants. We also agreed on electric fencing that we shall extend the distance of fencing around Murchison Falls National Park. 

We also agreed to extend the excavation of trenches along the national parks in order to deter elephants from crossing into communities. 

On issues of recruitment, I think the board has come up with a directive that going forward, priority will mainly be given to communities neighbouring protected areas before the others, starting with the next recruitment. 

Concerning the issue raised by the Member of Parliament from Namayingo, about crocodile attacks, of course, UWA is doing what it can. Madam Speaker, we had a few challenges and we did not move there on time. However, we are liaising with the area Members of Parliament to see that we move there and see what we can do with the communities. On the discoveries of the tunnels in Komolo, the issue raised by hon. Isamat Abraham – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before you go to the tunnel, why haven’t you put the fence in these conservation areas, to avoid the animals from interacting with people?

MR BAHINDUKA: Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the issue of electric fencing raised by my colleague from Kasese, is a challenge due to financing constraint. So far, we have fenced 18 kilometres. Operation electric fence has been established in Koch-Goma Sub-county, Nwoya District and Kamdini sub-county in Oyam District, to prevent elephants from crossing into the park. Another 12 kilometre road is under construction and Government will continue to provide resources to UWA on an annual basis. 

Like I said, Madam Speaker, because of the expenses, Government can only make about 10 kilometres of electric fence per financial year.

The financing is a constraint but like the minister said, I think there are some funds available and we shall see how to expand onto the fencing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying that the process of giving these affected areas food, and other items, is ongoing?

MR BAHINDUKA: Yes, in consultation with the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. I think they also have challenges but they said that anytime they will be getting some funding and we are engaging them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Once you deliver this, I want you to come and lay ii on the Table, the delivery note; that you have delivered like the minister was doing. There is a tendency of ministers coming to make statements here and they walk away with it.

MR BAHINDUKA: Madam Speaker, we shall but like I said, it is mainly the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees that will help us with – 

MS NYAKATO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2012, the staff of Uganda Wildlife Authority dumped a number of Baboons and Chimpanzees in Kiziga Ward in the villages of Bubale, Bulemwa, Mwandate and Buhinga. In the same year, the Chimpanzees attacked and severely injured a three-year-old girl. 

In 2014, the same Chimpanzees attacked and injured a four-year-old girl. In May this year, a Chimpanzee attacked and injured one and a half-year old girl, a daughter to a one Godfrey Mbabazi. Unfortunately, we lost the baby. These chimpanzees were dumped in a place where human beings live and it is not even gazetted for these wild animals.

I pray that through this honourable House, the Government gazettes Chimpanzees, baboons and wild animals, back to the game reserves. I also pray that Government compensates the families of those victims, who have suffered attacks from these wild animals but also those who have lost their lives due to these wild animals.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a photo of one and a half-year old baby, who was attacked and killed by a Chimpanzee in Bulemwa and Kiziga Ward, on the Table. I also pray that the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities do compensate – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Asinansi, I want the minister to go and confirm on ground, and then you will lay after coming back with him.

MS ASINANSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BAHINDUKA: For your information, I was even discussing with her yesterday, and we agreed that we should come up with a programme and see how to help.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will discuss with hon. Asinansi and not with her. 

MR BAHINDUKA: With hon. Asinansi.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

5.05
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Oyam District, specifically the subcounties of Kamdini, Aber, Myene and Loro have greatly been affected by the wildlife. I have stood on this Floor of Parliament very many times talking about the same issue. I want to thank Government that when I raised the issue here, they started fencing off up to three kilometres. 

However, they stopped fencing at three kilometres out of 10 kilometres, which was supposed to give us protection against these wild animals.

There are very many people, who have lost their lives and Government has not compensated them. Now, I would like to know from the honourable minister in charge of this docket, when are you going to complete the remaining kilometres? As I talk, very many crops are being destroyed and Uganda Wildlife Authority cannot do anything. We have not received any compensation. 

Honourable minister, when are you coming to Oyam District to address these people’s issues? When shall we see you on the ground? I remember interacting with you but maybe, I would like to get an assurance of the compensation and fencing, and we see how this problem can be solved once and for all.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister had already said that they do not have money. Therefore, you have to choose between bringing a request for money in this House or losing voters. You need to have a choice. We need our people alive and we need their crops alive. 

The best thing you can do is to ask this House to give you money for fencing. You cannot continue coming here and lamenting “no money, no money” yet we are losing lives.

All these people who are standing come from those wildlife areas and the issue is the same. Every time, you come here, you respond to one issue. If I were a minister, I would take time and move from one area to another and make sure that I get the problems that are affecting those people.

MS BEGUMISA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to the House is that I come from the tourism fraternity, which has just sent me a message, when they saw the minister on the Floor of Parliament. We thank you very much, for the electric fence. 

However, may you please involve the tour operators in this country and I am one of them. The tour operators would advise the ministry well. One of the reasons for electric fencing in Kyambura Queen Elizabeth National Park – several times, our tourists has complained about electric fencing. Could you please involve the tour operators in this country and I think they would be of help to your ministry. Thank you very much.

5.09
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Than you, Madam Speaker. I want to the honourable minister for the submission. We have been affected as people from Adjumani, specifically, Arinyapi Subcounty from 2013 to date. We have been following only one promise. We lost three people and UWA made a commitment to them. Now, the families of the deceased are blaming us, as leaders, for not following up. We have done our best.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, as I agree totally with you and support you in the decision you have put forward, I request that the minister and the ministry take initiative to visit these families because they now feel we have betrayed them and as politicians, it affects us politically. 

Therefore, I request that the honourable minister goes to Adjumani and we visit those families so that you listen to them. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.11
MR CHARLES MATOVU (NUP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the information and I would like to give him some additional information in regard to my constituency.

We have an appalling situation in Busiro South. You know, it is an island and it has several sub-islands. Along the several sub-islands, we have aquatic mammals that attack people and kill them.

They are actually in the shape of hippos. They say hippos but I am not sure if they are hippos or drones because they attack people, kill them and leave them there. I am kindly requesting that you also pay a visit to my constituency. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can we first hear from you? It is the same thing. You were in the field with the minister.

MR BAHINDUKA: Indeed, we were in the field with my brother, hon. Olanya and we are already handling a number of issues. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, especially for the guidance and advice. I want to assure colleagues that I also come from a community that neighbours a game reserve and I share the same challenges with you. 

Like you guided, the challenge has been mainly financing, especially in terms of compensation. Currently, UWA is not bringing in any money because there are no tourists in these areas due to the COVID-19 pandemic. So, it is a big challenge.

We are going to move to all your areas, come up with a good report and see if you can fund us because the electric fence was a directive by the President and it has been tested and proved to work. The challenge is the financing to have it run in this community.

We shall come back to you, Madam Speaker and to this House for financial support. Thank you.

5.13
MR STEPHEN MUGOLE (NRM, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Madam Speaker, I am making a maiden speech in this regard, particularly because the matter being raised concerns tourism and I am a tourism professional. I want to tell the House that I represent Africa on the World Executive Board on matters of tourism and social responsibility.

I am on the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. Yesterday, we had the minister –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For Hansard purposes, mention your name.

MR MUGOLE: I am Stephen Mugole, Kabweri County, Kibuku District. In this particular area, what we are handling now is post-mortem. Whereas national parks are not supposed to be like parks which should be fenced throughout, it is prudent that because of the outcry of the neighbouring districts within the parks, we do that. However, we need to ask the minister why there is lack of lobbying in the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.

This is an area, which brings in the highest foreign income in this country but it gets very little budget-wise. Your guidance, Madam Speaker, is the most correct one. Colleagues, we may cry on but crocodiles shall continue to kill our people. Wild elephants and lions shall continue to kill our people.

The most important thing in this particular case is to ensure that we prioritise - just like we did for the roads, works and others. We should do the same for tourism so that we do massive fencing. For that one, it is only this Parliament that can ensure that there is massive fencing and trenching for areas with elephants, hippos and lions. 

We still need these animals but they continue to kill our people. I can assure you that this is done on a daily basis. Other cases are not reported but we have nothing to do apart from Government coming up with a priority that this year, we shall earmark this budget purposely for fencing national parks.

Even without fencing against wild animals, you heard what happens in Elgon. There may not be wild animals there but the people who come inside the park, maybe to get firewood, can be shot at because many of the workers in UWA have been killed by poachers.

In retaliation, these people end up simply shooting the wanainchi. We think your guidance is most important. The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should come back here but we should support them to ensure that we prioritise in a manner that is necessary for Government or the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to aid UWA to fence the areas that are risky for our people. I submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there anything new that anybody has brought up? Rastaman?

5.17
MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you so much. Jah Bless! I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. Again, many thanks.

We have heard the negative point of view of these animals. I am a naturalist and I speak for the baboons of Busitema in both Bugiri and Busia Districts.

The successive generations of these baboons have become domesticated. About 10 to 15 years ago, when I was travelling here, they would go for people’s crops. People would lay traps and some of them would end up with broken limbs. 

However, right now, I do not know what the minister is planning. They have become completely domesticated and are along the road. A quick count I made found about 230 but I think Uganda Wildlife Authority can do it better. They are along the roads in the mornings and evenings and are left to the people who give them gifts as we travel by. I usually spend about Shs 20,000 to Shs 30,000 whenever I travel through that road, feeding them.

Madam Speaker, my plea is how is the minister going to get these baboons, which are an attraction to tourists in this country –(Interjections)- Yes, a feeding programme for the animals just like in Uganda Wildlife Education Centre in Entebbe. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. John Musila, thank you for loving wildlife.

5.19
MS FLORENCE KABUGHO (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Being my first time, allow me to congratulate you upon taking that top most seat in the 11th Parliament. 

Kasese, being surrounded by two national parks; Queen Elizabeth National Park and Mt Rwenzori National Park, has faced a lot of destruction from wild animals; elephants, baboons and many more.

More still, the people living along the lake shores are also having trouble with crocodiles, which escape from the lake to destroy their property and lives. The cages that were put on Lake George and Lake Edward shores are too weak. They have been broken by the crocodiles and they have gone ahead to kill people.

I pray that the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities looks into that issue. They have to reconstruct strong cages into these lakes to hold back the crocodiles. Thank you. 

5.20
MS JUDITH ACHAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me congratulate you, as I deliver my maiden speech. 

One of the push factors that are affecting our education and causing poor performance of our pupils in school in Nwoya District are the constant attacks of wild animals on our people. 

I want to inform the minister that while schools are about to open, we are worried that our pupils may not report back to school. Children from the subcounties that border the park like Lii, Anaka, Purongo, Purongo Town Council and Got Apwoyo may be affected more. 

We have challenges in the education system in Nwoya District.  The Government’s education system of every parish having a school is affecting us because our pupils have to walk five to 10 kilometres to access their schools and always, they are attacked by elephants. Some of them have lost their lives and there has been no compensation.

I would like to interest the minister in this docket because we have the evidence. Even my honourable colleagues from Pakwach can bear us witness; each and every month, we transport corpses of people who have been attacked in their farms in Nwoya, to Pakwach District. 

During the rice season, men get “pregnant” because they keep blowing trumpets to chase away elephants. Women do not produce during this time because the men have to sleep outside in their farms to protect food crops. (Laughter) I beg for protection, Madam Speaker because this is an alarming issue. It is a disaster in our district. So, I humbly request the minister to tour these districts affected by the wild animals and forge a way forward. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am ordering you to tour all the districts that are affected. (Applause) Do not just come and make a sweeping statement. And when you go to visit an area that is affected, you must be with the area Members of Parliament. There must also be action taken before you to leave that area. That is when you will be a good minister or else, you will be nobody. Our people are dying outside there and you come here lamenting that you do not have money. So, who will give you the money if not this House?

We are asking you to support the people down there. Come with a report from each and every district that is affected by the wild animals and then we will take a decision as a House. 

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was an issue that was raised but I had not talked about compensation. This Parliament passed a law on 27 September 2019. Since the inception of this law, UWA has been setting aside 2 per cent of its collection, specifically for compensation.

Like I said, with the challenges UWA is facing today because of tourism challenges internationally, there is nothing much in this fund. So, we shall still come to this House with a request for additional funds so that in case of any issue or attack by wildlife or deaths, there will be immediate compensation from this fund without having to run to UWA.

Most importantly, like you guided, Madam Speaker, I will move around with my colleagues. We shall gather all the information and report to this House. I implore you, Members - like you already showed the support and as a tour operator, I assure you that going forward, I will be engaging with you. The challenge has been –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How do we get to know what is supposed to be compensated before you reach these people? That is why I am asking you to go to the ground. 

MR BAHINDUKA: Much obliged. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we look at the next item on the mysterious tunnel? I do not want a vote of thanks because you have not achieved anything. People have not been compensated because they are still suffering. Can we have the statement on the tunnel? 

Hon. Atkins Katusabe, I like you so much but first sit down. 

5.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Bahinduka): Madam Speaker, on the issue of the tunnel, like I have said, our technical team is in Ngora. Actually, they have discovered that there is more than one tunnel. That team is coming up with a comprehensive report. We shall engage our colleagues, the Members of Parliament from Ngora and go there to see how we can develop this –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you go to Ngora? 

MR BAHINDUKA: Yes, we did. Some of us did –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you go to Ngora as a minister? 

MR BAHINDUKA: I went through – but I was advised that the team wanted to discover all the tunnels there so that we can move and see all of them instead of seeing only one tunnel. That is what the technical team did. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me ask again; did you go to Ngora? 

MR BAHINDUKA: No, I did not. But it was on that advice –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, why are you lying to this House that you went to Ngora?

MR BAHINDUKA: No, I am not lying, Madam Speaker. Like I said, the problem was - they said there was a discovery of more tunnels. So, they wanted to come up with all the numbers there before we can visit the place at once.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not come and make a report that “they said” basing on hearsay. We want facts on the ground. 

MR BAHINDUKA: We shall do that. 

MR OKUPA: If this mysterious tunnel was something dangerous, then we would have been in a big problem. It is because this matter arose three months ago but to date, the minister is still telling us that they are still discovering. The people who are there have already seen all the tunnels that are down there. You have, however, taken three months and nothing is concluded yet. I even doubt the visit by your team to that place - because at least when we passed that place, we got information from the RDC and other leaders of the areas. 

The right thing the minister should do is to act fast. With the time you are taking to get information, if anything bad were to happen, it would have already happened. So, I implore the minister to act promptly. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, one thing we need to tell you is that the locals are now enjoying moving in that tunnel. So, if it collapses, we will lose so many lives. It is better that you act very fast on this tunnel issue.

Do not come back to the House – I have told you to stop being in air conditioned offices. Go to the field and help this Government. How come hon. Anyakun is telling us about how she has been to Karamoja and Kasese? Why don’t you come and report to this House that I have been to the field, and this is what we found out. Even the Government Chief Whip went to the field on Emyooga. He even arrested
people. (Laughter) Honourable minister, you need to be in the field and we need action.

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I will be there. It is unfortunate that I took the guidance from the technical team but I have no problem with being in the field. We shall move back there and ascertain.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member of Parliament for Ngora is here and wants to give you information.

5.30
MS STELLA ISODO (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since this is my maiden speech, allow me to congratulate you upon attaining that position. I would like to give information to the minister. He has not been able to clarify whether he reached Ngora or not. However, he has not been there. 

I happened to have been at the site and these Ngora tunnels are posing a hazard to the local community. At a certain time, one of the community members was digging a pit latrine and then the sand sank down. With curiosity, they went down to check and found that there were about two to three lanes where vehicles could bypass each other and they were endless.

Therefore, I would like to implore the minister to take this matter seriously and discover whether it is a geological problem or man-made – there is curiosity in Ngora. People need an answer and we are delaying on this matter.

As leaders of Ngora District, we are available for you, honourable minister, so that an answer is given to the public. Those tunnels seem to be transporting some things underground and it is risky and hazardous to the community. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let us not conclude that it is transporting something. Let us first get the truth of the whole matter. It would be speculative to say it is transporting something.

Honourable minister, you need to be on the ground. We would like to know what that tunnel is; information is good for our people. Now, people are enjoying going down and out of the tunnel and you, the minister, are not taking a step. 

Can we have the next item?

5.32
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, maybe as a rejoinder to the minister’s response, if it pleases you, the tunnels may look like tourist attraction and we have referred them to the tourism entity - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Even security needs to take a keen interest in that.

MR ANGURA: Maybe you would also add security such that we are able to ascertain all that. I thank you.

MS NEBANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I stand here to give information to the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities that recently, Butaleja has been invaded by hippos. We are facing a challenge -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Nebanda, we passed the issue of animals like the hippos and many more. We are discussing the mysterious tunnel somewhere. The minister is going to come and visit you in Butaleja. Therefore, expect him to come to Butaleja – (Mr Katusabe rose_) - Is there a tunnel in Kasese? (Laughter)

5.33
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, BUKONZO COUNTY WEST, Kasese): Madam Speaker, since there is a new discovery of the tunnels that has posed a security or health challenge, I am here to let you know, on a sad note, that if you went to the Uganda Cancer Institute, 80 per cent of those patients come from Kasese. Specially, when you cluster that number of cancer patients in Mulago Hospital, 60 per cent come from my community.

Therefore, I am just wondering why the cancer burden is concentrated in my community. The worry is that the Germans were kind and they gave us water that we call the Bwera Water Project. It is feared that the pipes that supply water from the source to the communities could have some elements of asbestos. It grieves my spirit to keep losing people from my community. 

I would like to ask the Government and this Parliament to interest themselves in what exactly could be the fundamental problem that is confronting Kasese communities, as far as cancer burden is concerned.  

Madam Speaker, through you, I ask this Parliament to direct our Government chemists to go to Kasese, specifically, to analyse the layers of the pipes so that we know exactly what the problem could be and why Kasese communities are accounting for a higher percentage of cancer patients in Mulago Hospital.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could that be under science and technology?

5.36
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very unfortunate, if those statistics are true.  The Minister of Health is going to investigate this matter and we shall link up with hon. Katusabe for more information so that, indeed, we ensure that the people of Kasese are looked after very well and if necessary, we report here. Thank you.

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Bahinduka): Madam Speaker, I had already spoken to the issue of the 2019 Wildlife Act, regarding a question that was raised by hon. James Niringiyimana Kaberuka.

I wish to inform the House that sections 82 to 84 of the Wildlife Act, 2019, provide for compensation for loss of life, property and injury caused by wildlife. The ministry initiated the process of developing regulations to operationalise these and other clauses.

I am happy to report that the First Parliamentary Counsel has finalised the drafting of the regulations, and that it will soon be gazetted to guide the compensation for loss occasioned by wildlife.

Uganda Wildlife Authority has, with the commencement of the Act on the 27 September 2019, been setting aside two per cent of the revenue collected from tourism services as compensation fund in line with the Act.

Unfortunately, COVID-19 pandemic has greatly affected the tourism revenues and, therefore, what is set aside for the compensation fund is little. What is available cannot definitely meet the demand for compensation claims. 

The ministry will be coming back to this House to ask for appropriation to operationalise this fund. Thank you.

5.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): I have listened attentively to the honourable gentleman, minister and friend, addressing concerns of colleagues on issues of wildlife. What is not coming through from the minister, which should have calmed the nerves of the communities affected, are the timelines.

The issues are various and the approach must be specific. You have had a law for the last two-and-a-half years and you must move to have regulations. The First Parliamentary Counsel has had the draft, what are your timelines? These are leaders. They must go and report to the people they represent.

Secondly, you said that from 2019, you have been saving two per cent. Is this the equivalent of the hon. Nabbanja legendary money? What is the size of what you have collected so far so that these honourable members can have an idea of what you probably need? Are you going to compensate en masse on a single day?

What do you have that people can have an appreciation of a minister with a plan, but not one with a plan at large? Do you want to be particular and help Members go and address their communities with certainty? 

Your statements are speculative and do not offer hope to these honourable Members that sounded very desperate. I am afraid, honourable minister. Thank you.

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition and a friend as well. Like I said, I am also new to the ministry. Probably, I would ask for about a month and a half – (Interjections) - Yes, at least I have been talking to my team. The pressure is too much but the biggest challenge is the funding. Even when we have this law in place, if you do not add anything else to it, I can assure you –

The Deputy Speaker: You are saying the pressure is too much. Do you mean you were given what is too big? (Laughter)

MR BAHINDUKA: No. This money –

The Deputy Speaker: Let us take this very seriously. We need action-oriented ministers. Do not come lamenting here. If you are talking about money, we are the people who give it. We will give the money because we want to save our people.

Therefore, when you are given that position, you must make sure you perform. Do not just come and start talking in a speculative way. Honourable minister, we do not want that lamentation. We want action. Just like you see, we have sent Members on ground on the issue of Emyooga. Honourable Members, we are going to have the debate on Emyooga in two weeks’ time. Tomorrow, we shall debate the report on COVID-19. Honourable minister, we appreciate the job is too big but we want results. 

MR BAHINDUKA: Madam Speaker, I can assure you the job is not too big. We shall come with our budget – (Laughter) – If we are well funded, the job is simple. We shall come before you colleagues even after visiting the constituencies and please, support us. Thank you. 

RESPONSE to an urgent QUESTIOn raised by Hon. Kauma Sauda On the slump in sugarcane prices due to bumper harvests and surpluses in the Busoga Sub-region

5.43
The minister of trade, industry and cooperatives (Cooperatives) (Mr Fredrick Gume): Madam Speaker, an issue was raised on the slump in cane purchase prices due to bumper harvest – 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable ministers, you know that you are now so many and some of you are new. It is courteous enough for you to mention your name so that we get to know you. With these masks, you cannot tell who is talking.

Mr gume: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. My name is Gume Fredrick Ngobi. I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon being elected to that position.

On the slump in the cane purchase prices due to bumper harvest and surplus in the Busoga region raised by hon. Sauda Kauma, Woman Member of Parliament for Iganga District, the market forces of demand and supply have a direct bearing on prices in the market. Currently, the supply of sugarcane exceeds the demand by the sugarcane millers. This has consequently led to a slump in the prices for sugarcane.

In addition, the global prices of sugar slumped from US$ 400-500 per tonne in 2016/2017 to US$ 330 per tonne in 2021. The prevailing sugar prices also have a direct bearing on sugarcane prices. The existence of unsold sugar at the mills is also an impediment to the millers to consume more sugarcane. 

Here below are the interventions that the ministry has done to address this scenario:

    1. The ministry has issued a directive to the sugar mills to consume more sugarcane from the farmers than from their nucleus estates.

    2. The ministry is assisting sugarcane out growers to supply their sugarcane from Busoga region to Atiak Sugar Factory in Amuru District, Bushenyi Sugar Limited in Kyenjonjo District and Victoria Sugar Limited in Luwero District. This will try to address the surplus.

    3. The ministry, with the help of His Excellency the President, has now secured some market for sugar to Kenya. This will address the high stocks at the sugar mills, which will create more capacity for the millers to purchase sugarcane from these out growers.

We have also gone ahead to license five more sugar mills to process brown sugar into industrial sugar. This will reduce the high sugar stocks that are being held at the sugar mills. We are in advanced stages of setting up a sugar mill in Busoga region to address this scenario. I submit. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, hon. Gume. There was an aspect of the BAT Continental.

RESPONSE to an urgent QUESTIOn raised by Hon. Nyakato Asinansi On the status of payment to tobacco farmers from Bunyoro Sub-region who supplied tobacco to M/S Continental Tobacco Uganda Limited and M/S Nimatabac Tobacco Company Limited

5.47
The minister of trade, industry and cooperatives (Trade) (Ms Harriet Ntabaazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to respond to the questions raised in respect to tobacco farmers. Allow me to inform you that the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is in the final processes of concluding the payment agreements of Shs 11,261,217,641, which was appropriated by the 10th Parliament to pay Bunyoro Tobacco Farmers with the 2018 crop arrears. 

To expedite the process and conclude it effectively, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister instituted an inter-institutional committee, which comprises the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, the Internal Auditor in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Attorney-General and the tobacco companies where we have Continental Tobacco Uganda Limited and Nimatabac Uganda Limited. 

Madam Speaker, I am glad to inform you and the august House that as a result of our interventions and collaboration, the major issues that had caused delays in the payment process to Bunyoro tobacco farmers have been resolved. Some of these include: 

    i) Harmonisation of the exact amount of money owed to farmers by each company with the amount of money in the internal Auditor-General’s report; 

    ii) The agreement on the recovery of this money from the companies because we are lending them the money; and

    iii) The mode of payment to the farmers. 

The inter-institutional committee has concluded as follows: 

On harmonisation of the outstanding balances owed to Bunyoro farmers by tobacco companies, we have agreed as follows: 

    i) Continental Tobacco Uganda Limited agreed to the figure of Shs 7,001,936,300, which is in line with the internal Auditor-General’s report;

    ii) Nimatabac agreed to a figure of Shs 3,979,281,341 which is also in line with the internal Auditor-General’s report.

The agreement on recovery of the money from the companies after they have given it to the farmers 
I would like to inform the august House that the Attorney-General is finalising an agreement with the tobacco companies on the mode of recovery of the funds by the Government. Since we need it back, we are going to lend it to them and then they pay it back. 

Mode of payment to the farmers 

During the inter-institutional committee meetings, the following modalities of payments to the farmers on the outstanding balances for the 2018 crop season were proposed:
 
    i) The use of mobile money given its wide coverage and ease of access. Considering the small amounts owed to some of the farmers like Shs 50,000, members thought this was convenient; and

    ii) On the use of Post Bank; now that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has been availed with the funds, we shall settle the matter as soon as possible. 

I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We had asked you for a report of verification of the persons that were going to be paid. Could Members of Parliament from the region have access to that verification report? Otherwise, you may pay people who are not the right beneficiaries. 

Secondly, what legal instrument backs up the Memorandum of Understating (MoU) between the Government and the tobacco companies? We agreed that you should come up with a legal instrument that authorises us to give money to that tobacco company. We are not money lenders. So, we need a legal instrument with sanctions, in case the company fails to pay. Before you even dispatch any money, there must be a legal instrument to that effect. 

MS NABATANZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the issues you have raised. 

On the verification of the people who are going to benefit, we harmonised the lists with those who supplied the tobacco to the companies together with the internal Auditor-General’s report. The trade ministry went to the field to compile the list, which was given to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic through the Office of the Internal Auditor-General, to verify. We came up with a concrete list, was submitted here for verification and a supplementary budget was passed by this Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the verification was done after a question was raised by an honourable Member of Parliament. How much would it cost you to involve Members of Parliament of the area in that process? These are the representatives of the farmers; their voices. Without these Members of Parliament, those farmers would not be able to speak in this House. Why wouldn’t you involve them? 

MS NABATANZI: Madam Speaker, most obliged. I am going to consult all of them and we share the list.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you start talking about making mobile money payments, are you aware that in the recent payments, some people were paid twice or thrice? Is that what you are going to do again? This is taxpayers’ money. 

5.57   
MS ASINASI NYAKATO (FDC, Woman Representative, Hoima City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The maximum amount of money that can be remitted in a day, according to the mobile money policy, is about Shs 6 million. There are farmers that demand over Shs 30 or 20 million. So, that will also bring inconsistencies. 

I pray, through this Parliament, that the Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives do consider the representatives of the farmers into that committee she talked about. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.  

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I appreciate that the minister has committed herself not only to concentrate on the farmers but to also involve the Members of Parliament. 

I have been interested in this tobacco issue for a very long time. What I have observed is that the Government seems to be more interested to know how much the farmers are paid. They have not focused on these tobacco dealers who have already received the goods. They have manufactured these people’s goods and they have sold them. They have not told you that since they bought the tobacco, they have not processed it. They have processed their products and sold them but where is the money? That is one aspect you have not made clear. 

Madam Speaker, I think that is an issue that, we, as Parliament, cannot ignore. These people have been trading on the farmers’ money and they have not told us where the money has gone. All we know is that the goods they have been receiving are manufactured and sold.

Secondly, now that we have agreed, can we give them a timeline because we have been talking about these things since the 10th Parliament? The money was allocated and the issues were resolved but up to now, we are still discussing like nothing had been done. Can we agree today that the minister should commit herself, or the Government Chief Whip should commit the Government that by the end of the month or this financial year, these people will have already been paid? I think we need to tag a timeline. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before, we ask for that commitment, one would need a memorandum of understanding laid on this Table between Government of Uganda and Continental, and then Nimatabac. We need it to be laid on the Table such that we know the terms and conditions that we use for giving out our money.

Secondly, the question hon. Cecilia has asked, is very pertinent. What did these people do with the money? We need somebody to investigate that. I know the President made a pledge, and that is okay because he feels for his people. However, these people should also be brought to book. They have to pay that money back to the Government of Uganda. That is why we need a stringent MoU that is pinning those people. 

Thirdly, we need a timeline. I know these people have been crying for this money for years. There are people, who have already been verified. First of all, we need the leaders of the area to be involved. If they had involved Members of Parliament in Emyooga, we would not be having this mess. Now, we do not want any Government money to go out without involvement of the Members of Parliament. (Applause) 

We need Members of Parliament to be involved because they will not cheat their people because tomorrow, they will be going back for votes, they will be very transparent to their people. 

Therefore, we need the area Members of Parliament to be involved. Hon. Harriet Ntabaazi, the best you can do, is to call the Members of Parliament from Bunyoro and West Nile areas on those that need to be paid and you agree on the schedule other than wasting time for Parliament all the time. These are things you should resolve in your office.

How much time do you need to have the MoU?

MS NTABAAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. Our ministry is giving a very sensitive and urgency this matter needs because it is a directive from the President. Money – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When the President gives a directive, he does not tell you to act outside the law. You must appreciate that. By the time he gives you a directive, he tells you to handle it but you must act within the law.

I am giving you two weeks to provide this House with a Memorandum of Understanding. 

MS NTABAAZI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Let me use this platform to call all the Members from Bunyoro and meet them with hon. Namuyangu because she is the Minister of Bunyoro, who has been handling the agreement part of it with the Internal Auditor-General’s Office. 

Therefore, we can meet tomorrow, at 10 o’clock in my chambers and we agree – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In your office. It is only us who have chambers – (Laughter) 

MS NTABAAZI: In my boardroom. We can agree on very many things because there are things that we wanted to agree with them.

Secondly, issues at – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: They are not only Members of Parliament from Bunyoro, who are interested in this matter. I told you that I have been interested in this matter for a long time and that is why I can give you the details. 

Now, when you say Members of Parliament from Bunyoro, then you are cutting me off. (Laughter) So, can you please clarify, or say whoever is interested in the matter? When I come to this Parliament, I stand for everybody; I do not only stand for the people of Dokolo. I am interested in any matter that affects the people of Bunyoro. Likewise, I would like the people of Bunyoro, also to be concerned, when they are talking about animal compensation for Lango.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia, we are the ones who have asked the honourable minister to harmonise with the area that is affected. I do not think that I can come up from Teso and say that I know any beneficiaries there. For now, let us first have it harmonised with the affected areas and it will be reported to this House, where we shall all support.

West Nile and Bunyoro, why don’t you discuss that issue tomorrow, in the meeting? Is that Dr Aboka?

MR ATIMA: This is hon. Jackson Atima from Arua.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Aren’t you from West Nile? West Nile and Bunyoro sit and agree on the way forward on the tobacco issue. Tomorrow, do that and report back to this House. We need an MoU. You can co-opt hon. Cecilia Ogwal, in the meeting.

MR ATIMA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

6.06
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I want to speak for the farmers of Uganda. About two years ago, this Government encouraged farmers all over Uganda to grow vanilla. 

Religiously, they did it and Government promised to –(Interruption)

MR ZIJJAN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under Rule 4 of our Rules of Procedure, which provides that proceedings and debates of Parliament shall be in English. I would wish to get clarification from you whether we are proceeding well with the honourable member. 

I failed to understand the language he is proceeding under. I have no problem if it is English, but in the event that it is a different language, Madam Speaker, I would wish that you rule on the matter that the honourable member proceeds in the language of the House. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: She has given me clearance because I think we have been here for too long. Therefore, I am grateful for hon. Zijjan to bring that up.

Madam Speaker, two years ago, this Government encouraged farmers or citizens to grow vanilla and the citizens responded to the Government –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katusabe – (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Blame the mask, Madam Speaker, not me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Speak in the English that we can understand.

MR KATUSABE: I do not know which English now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In Ugandan English that we can understand.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, can he speak in Ugandan English, which we can understand?

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, excuse me -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member. Kindly use the sanitizer and remove the mask. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: A lot of people are understanding, Madam Speaker. I think that was just a light note from my colleague. However, the point that I am trying to communicate is that when Government encouraged citizens to grow vanilla, it made a pledge to buy a kilo of vanilla at Shs 250,000. 

However, as I speak, a kilo of vanilla goes for Shs 25,000. Because of the pledge that came from Government, there was a boom rush. People went to banks and saccos and got money in form of loans. They are stuck; they are losing property.

I am just asking you, Madam Speaker, whether my honourable sister’s ministry cannot put a provision where some of those Ugandan farmers affected in that category can be helped because they are choking on loans. 

As I see it, I am wondering why a kilo of coffee goes for Shs 3,000 in Kasese and the same coffee elsewhere goes for Shs 50,000. I am wondering why a kilo of cotton in Kasese goes for Shs 2,800 yet same cotton elsewhere in the country goes for Shs 6,000. 

Madam Speaker, this is something that is frustrating the farming community. The only job and source of earning is farming and we are condemning the farming system to something like cheap labour. I feel like the reason we are here as peoples’ representatives is to ensure that we represent our people.

This is something that is not restricted to Kasese; it is nationwide. I ask you, Madam Speaker, to use your discretion to direct Government so that we have harmonised agricultural prices. This will help our farmers and fellow citizens to afford basic needs in terms of education for their sons and daughters and food for their families. I appreciate you, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. This is not to be answered now. We do not expect your response now. We want you to go and find out why there is that variation and why there is a price difference, say in Kasese. For example, if you looked at cement, it is more expensive in Kasese where it is being made. You need to get this information for us and present to this House, say in two weeks’ time. They are asking whether you have understood what you will say. 

Hon. Gume is there; he will support you in what hon. Atkins Katusabe is saying and it is very important. I am actually surprised that cotton is Shs 2,800 at your place. In my place, it is Shs 1,000. So, you need to get that and report to this House. 

Honourable Leader of the Opposition, she had not finished what she was presenting and on the orders that I was giving her. I will give you a chance to say a word.

MS NTABAAZI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. All the issues that you have raised are very important. I wanted us to agree on one thing because what I meant by meeting the Members tomorrow was if they were only from Bunyoro. 

However, if we are incorporating other Members from West Nile, well-wishers and other interested parties then the advice that you gave of two weeks would work for me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No problem.

MS NTABAAZI: Thank you. The other one is on the issue of the timelines. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since the issues are different and the money for Bunyoro was already provided, why don’t you handle Bunyoro before you move on to another area where there is such a complaint? Because that money might get some legs.

MS NTABAAZI: Thank you so much for the wise advice. As we talk, the money for Bunyoro is in Bank of Uganda, ready for supply. We are just following the procedure, like you guided, that if the President gives a directive, you do not just go and start implementing without following the law and this is the law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not a procedure that I have guided; it is what ought to be done.

MS NTABAAZI: Thank you so much. We are going to follow exactly that. On the issue of the mobile money, we are going to consult further but we wanted to bring to - for those who have little money -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go and discuss those things in your committee tomorrow and report to this House. I want an MOU from Government. [Ms Ogwal rose] Can I have Government first?

6.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, can we agree that no payment should be done before the MOU is brought here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the ruling I have given; no payment.

MR TAYEBWA: That is very good because I know some people might push for that. No payment should be done before the MOU is brought here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You ministers, we are going to hold you personally liable for your actions. (Applause) If you do something contrary to the law, we will hold you personally accountable. Remember, the President has immunity so when you go against it, we will handle you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I am tired. (Laughter) I adjourn the House to tomorrow, 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.17 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 August 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
