

Wednesday, 24 August 2016

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today we have Prime Minister’s Question Time starting at 3 O’clock. We will be using between 45 minutes to an hour to conclude that and then there will be a response from the Leader of the Opposition before the Prime Minister concludes. If you have short questions that you would want to ask, please prepare them now so that when that time comes, you can raise them. 

Honourable members, this House starts at 2 O’clock. The Speaker has to get ready to be here. So if you need to see the Speaker to advise or consult with him, you need to do that at least 20 minutes before 2 O’clock. If you come after 20 minutes, I will be trying to dress up to come to the House; I will not see you because I have to come to the House at 2 O’clock. 

Please make it at least 20 minutes before 2 O’clock so that we can have a discussion. Even if you needed an hour we can have it, but at 20 minutes to 2 O’clock we will not have even one second to have a discussion. That is my rule and I will live by it. If it offends you, that is a problem, but I will not allow to be delayed to start the House at 2 O’clock under any circumstances. Thank you.

2.11
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the conduct of foreign nationals in Uganda.

Much as we are not opposed to legal cross-border movement, it has been observed that some foreigners have abused our courtesy as a country. They are very unappreciative and consider themselves to be above the Ugandan citizens.

Mr Speaker, on several occasions we have heard of foreign nationals in Uganda abusing the rights of our people. Today I want to bring forward an issue that involves my constituent called Ms Nambi Fazila. On 17th of August, while in Kampala at Sir Apollo Kaggwa Road, where she had gone to visit a clinic at around 9.00 am in the morning, she was attacked by dogs that were set on her by an Indian lady by the names of Monisha. Ms Nambi sustained injuries on almost all parts of her body, which were stitched and dressed at Mengo Hospital as first aid, and this was done at the insistence of some boda boda riders who witnessed the attack.

Mr Speaker, we have been reading that such things used to happen in apartheid South Africa. However, you cannot imagine that happening here in Kampala; a foreigner living with us can set her dogs to kill a citizen while she is laughing.

My constituent, Nambi Fazila, has reported a case at Old Kampala Police Station under reference No. 87/19/8/16. However, the police have instead asked her to provide them with money so that they can go and arrest the suspect. She is now rotting in her small house in Mukono, Kitete Zone. 

This comes as one of the many atrocities Ugandans have suffered at the hands of foreigners in this country. Parliament will recall that there have been rape cases, and cases of sexual abuse, violation of labour rights by foreigners and all sorts of criminal acts meted out on Ugandans. However, most of the time, the police have not come up to assist these Ugandans.

Therefore, I wish to request that the Minister of Internal Affairs furnishes this House with information regarding foreigners living here- how many they are and what they are doing here.

Mr Speaker, in my area in Goma, Seeta, we have so many Sudanese living there but they torture my citizens and abuse them. When they are walking on the road, nobody is supposed to pass by them and nobody is supposed to join their group. They also keep beating up people. Now that there is a war in South Sudan, they are so many in my area. Why aren’t these people in refugee camps as they should be?

Mr Speaker, specifically, I would like to request for three things: One, the Ministry of Internal Affairs furnishes us with information regarding the number of foreigners living in Uganda and what they are doing; and why the Sudanese living in Uganda are not in refugee camps. Further, I demand that the case that was reported to the Police by Ms Nambi be investigated. Ms Nambi should be treated and given compensation for the harm she suffered, and that particular person, Monisha, be brought to book. Lastly, the said police officers at Old Kampala Police Station should be investigated for their misconduct.

Before I conclude - I will take the honourable member’s information. (Interruption)

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. We are also worried about the rate at which foreigners are buying land in Uganda. The Land Act provides that foreigners are supposed to be leased land and not to buy, but the rate at which they are buying the land -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are the matters related?

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Yes, they are related to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let it relate to what the honourable member has raised.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: They are related, Mr Speaker. Most of our local people are being made landless. In Luweero recently, more than 40 people were evicted from their land by a Sudanese national. I would like us to look into that matter also.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, after receiving that information, I wish to lay on the Table the medical documents of my constituent, Ms Nambi Fazila, who was attacked by the dogs; a report from the police surgeon; medical reports from Lubaga Hospital; and another medical report from Mukono Town; Moslem Health Centre. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what kind of documents are those? Are they photocopies?

MS NAMBOOZE: Definitely, they are photocopies, but they will be used if the minister wants to follow up this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will not make them part of the record of this House; instead, the person who is taking up the investigation will use them. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, please be kind to allow me lay on the Table the photographs showing the extent of harm that Ms Nambi suffered at the hands of these dogs. The photographs properly captured everything and they are original. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how come these things are happening?

2.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Nambooze for raising this important matter, which sort of adds to what hon. Connie Nakayenze once raised regarding the abuse of the spirit of Pan Africanism championed by this Government. 

This Government is not going to tolerate such abuse. It is regrettable that our hospitality is not reciprocated by some of the people who we help. The matter can be investigated further by the minister concerned and a report can be given to this House on what that minister has done and what arrangements will be put in place to make sure that we curtail such abuse.

When it comes to foreigners acquiring land, as hon. Luttamaguzi said, the laws regarding that are clear. However, I think we have gaps as far as sensitisation of communities is concerned. It is these landlords who want quick money and some of the foreigners here have such money, so they rush to sell land which could even be having tenants. We have to do much as far as sensitisation is concerned so that the owners of land know what kind of venture they are entering into when they sell this land.

I take it upon myself to work with the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban development and Housing to make sure that the people of Uganda are sensitised, so that they are careful when selling their property.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, you need to look at those photographs and if they are real photographs, then it is a serious matter of concern. Let those photographs be a record of the House and action should be taken.

2.20
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli Central County, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

In April this year, there was a heavy downpour and hailstorm in one of the subcounties in Bugiri called Nankoma sub-county, in Isegero Parish. This hailstorm destroyed people’s houses and crops and it also destroyed schools, churches and many other public institutions.

Mr Speaker, this hailstorm affected and displaced about 2,000 people who were rendered homeless. We had to do site visits; I personally had to go and visit the area and the people affected, and the Bugiri District Woman MP also visited the site. The parish is devastated. We went ahead and wrote to the Office of the Prime Minister, seeking support and a statement so that the people of Isegero Parish could be given hope. However, as I speak now, we have not got any information and yet these people are homeless, hungry and the situation is worsening by the day.

Mr Speaker, that is why I came here today to request the minister concerned to give us a statement regarding this issue. We wrote and talked about it and we have done a lot. I, therefore, request you to instruct the minister concerned to give us a statement or a response on this issue. Thank you.

2.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, after the debate we had yesterday, following the statement presented by the minister in charge of disaster preparedness, I used the opportunity of today’s Cabinet meeting – Cabinet sits every Wednesday - and informed Cabinet, chaired by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, about the gravity of food scarcity. I also informed Cabinet about what hon. Ecweru told us regarding the hailstorms which we are expecting. Cabinet has now directed the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic development to get money to respond to the issue of food scarcity and other issues similar to what hon. Silwany is raising. 

In the meantime, I would like to advise the honourable member to follow the established procedures, namely, the district disaster committee. It needs to do the assessment. Assessment is a requirement so that we know the gravity of the situation and the contingency to deliver. Once that assessment report is forwarded, the Minister of Finance Planning and economic Development will have been looking for the money and we will not waste more time doing assessments. However, I presented the matter to Cabinet this morning and we discussed it – (Interruption)

MR HATWIB KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I want to get from the minister is about our people who get hit by a storm and schools are washed away, crops destroyed and then you tell me to follow procedures. Which procedures? If it was your constituency, what would you do? Do you also go through those procedures?

Mr Speaker, I remember one day I came here and when the minister promised something, I went to tell the people but I ended up buying salt and other things by myself. So, what procedures do you want someone to go through after being contacted by the poor people from the constituency? What would be the use of a Member of Parliament?

MS AGNES TAAKA: Actually, when the disaster took place, a report was made and submitted. It was made by the committee after an assessment was done and it was submitted to the Office of the Prime Minister. However, up to now, despite following up on the issue, there is no response at all.

MS DOROTHY AZAIRWE: I just want to inform the pre-current speaker that as far as disaster preparedness is concerned, we have structures right from LCI through to the district and up to the ministry. It is true that the structure is there, and the district CAO is the chairperson for the district. All the procedures are always followed and the documents are always submitted after the assessment, to the Office of the Prime Minister, specifically to the Permanent Secretary. However, in most cases, the responses are not given. 

Maybe as our Government Chief Whip has already clarified that the ministry has not been able and that it does not have anything in the stores, we hope for a positive response after the –(Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a matter of grave concern especially when we talk about matters of disaster. I come from disaster-prone Bududa. The matter of great concern is the “I don’t care” attitude on the part of the line ministry, and that is, the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) and the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. The Member’s concern was that ever since the matter was raised –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural point?

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, despite the fact that we have district disaster management committees  that give reports, is it procedurally correct for the Member to say that it has to stop there, when in the actual fact, procedurally, the ministry has to carry out a needs assessment? Is she procedurally correct?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedural point must always relate to the procedures of the House and not any other procedures anywhere. (Laughter)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, in my message, there is good news, which I would like this Parliament to take note of so that they can put us to task. I informed you that I used today’s Cabinet meeting to inform them about the debate of yesterday. I also informed you that Cabinet has directed the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development  to make sure, whether it means cutting from various sources, that we get money and feed the people so that we can stop them from dying.

Those of you who were here yesterday appreciated hon. Musa Ecweru’s lamentations; not so? What do you want me to do? It is not the “I don’t care” attitude, please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it was not lamentations; it was a ministerial statement.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes, it was a ministerial statement but when he was lamenting that he does not have the money, he was genuinely informing you as stakeholders. 

I have taken note of what hon. Taaka has informed me, that the assessment is already done, which is very good. It is now up to us in Government to make sure that we cut from everywhere possible and get money to save people from dying. 

Before I sit down, hon. Katoto the same procedure I am explaining to you is the same procedure the Government Chief Whip followed to secure some iron sheets when her own primary school, where she went for primary education, was de-roofed together with the church and people were hit by flying iron sheets. It is on record that I presented an assessment. There is no way a minister will just move without an assessment; otherwise, it would be further disaster. Therefore, that procedure has to be followed. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Tula Primary School in Wandegeya, represented by hon. Latif Ssebagala and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome.

2.33
MAJ. (RTD) FRED BWINO (NRM, Kigulu North County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter of public importance. It is a concern about the inaction by Government to mitigate proven contamination of food and feeds on the market with unsafe levels of a natural toxin called aflatoxin.

Mr Speaker, over the last three months, I have received complaints from produce buyers about the emerging decline in their businesses due to their produce being rejected by bulk buyers on grounds that the produce is contaminated with unsafe levels of aflatoxins. This prompted me to carry out an inquiry into this matter. My findings were: 

i) 	Researchers have proved that food and feeds in Uganda, especially maize and groundnuts, are contaminated with these toxins. These toxins are produced by micro-organisms that are resident on grains, flour and pastes. 

ii) 	That these contaminations are adversely affecting the economy and human health. They are affecting the economy mainly by contaminated produce being rejected by the produce buyers – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please raise the urgent matter that you would like the attention to be drawn to. Raise it and leave out all the details. Raise the matter so that they can deal with it. 

MAJ. (RTD) BWINO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter is that despite all this being a proven fact, Government has not come out to do what is expected of them; for example, they have not come out to educate the masses about this problem. They have also not come out to enforce the standard that was set by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, that these toxins can be tolerable at a level of five micrograms per kilogramme of grain or food. My prayer, therefore, is that the concerned ministries - the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries –

MR  ROBERT  KAFEERO  SSEKITOLEKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Bwino for giving way. The issue being raised by the honourable member is really paramount and has already begun affecting our people negatively. Sometime last week, I was approached by some scientists who informed me that a few months back, the people of Teso sub region had gotten a tender to supply maize through the World Food Programme to Karamoja sub region. However, when the World Food Programme staff tested our maize from the Teso sub region, it had 20 milligrams of aflatoxins. So, their maize was disqualified and the people lost business. 

Therefore, this issue is already affecting our economy. Those people also told me that as innovators, they went ahead to develop an aflatoxin biosensor to be given to farmers to test and try to reduce aflatoxins. Thank you.

MAJ. (RTD)  BWINO: Mr Speaker, to conclude, I pray that the responsible ministries, particularly the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, together with the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, come out with an action plan to mitigate this problem and report to Parliament. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, there is a national plan to mitigate this. I will direct the minister to come here and tell us what arrangements are in place to handle cases of contaminated feeds, food and other products. 

2.28
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance concerning Jinja Mental Hospital, that serves the entire Busoga Region. 

For the last nine months, patients in this hospital have not been getting drugs. About a month back, they had to come to Butabika Hospital for medicine but they were unable to get it. In yesterday’s The Daily Monitor newspaper, there is a story in which the doctor was still lamenting and saying that the situation is getting out of hand, as most of the patients are becoming violent. 

I would like to find out from those responsible what is happening and why they have failed to execute their mandate. Two, when do they hope to supply these drugs?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I have been looking for the ministers of health. They are on the Order paper in respect of item 4 and I expected them to be here. However, since they are not here yet, I will take action as usual.

MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Some time back, we raised an issue about a young man called Sam Mugumya whom the UPDF Spokesperson said the army was holding. When they communicated to the country, they said “he is finished”. We did not know what they meant then but sometime later, we were told of his arrest and that he was in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). 

Mr Mugumya has been there for two years now and nothing is happening. He is in detention at a military facility called Ndoro and yet he is not a soldier. He has not been taken to court. Yesterday, we got information from there that he is seriously sick. We do not know what the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is doing to secure his life as a Ugandan -(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I want to thank my colleague for giving way. I raised the same issue with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I wanted clarification from Government whether DRC is a hostile country to Uganda, because there are quite a number of people who have been incarcerated in DRC and they are languishing in prisons. Our Government should tell us whether DRC is a hostile country to Uganda and why these people have been incarcerated or why they have not been brought to court in case they committed offences. The Government should come up here and tell us. 

The Minister of State for Foreign Affairs promised to inform the whole House about Ugandans who have been incarcerated there. It is in the interest of Uganda and the law if one has committed a crime to be brought to court. Sam Mugumya has been in a military detention centre for over two years and there are other Ugandans who are in prison too. The Government should tell us what it is doing to rescue the Ugandans who are languishing in prisons in DRC.

MR MWIJUIKYE: Thank you very much. As I conclude, I would like to say that we asked the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to tell us what they are doing about it or why they cannot send a protest note to the Congolese Government for detaining Ugandans without trial.

The other day, I saw the President of DRC with the Ugandan President and they looked like they were friends and there is no problem; I saw them posing for pictures! (Laughter) However, what is happening does not demonstrate what we saw in the media. We really need to know. The other day we were evacuating Ugandans from South Sudan. This means we are always concerned about Ugandans’ lives outside this country. So, what is happening to our people in DRC?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you brief the minister when he comes to make the statement to accommodate this as well instead of having a debate on this matter differently? Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE COMMON MARKET FOR EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA TREATY IMPLEMENTATION BILL, 2016

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Common Market for Eastern and Southern African Treaty Implementation Bill, 2016” be read for the first time. I would like to present the Certificate of Financial Implications which is attached.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling within the framework of the rules, and advising the House on the next step to be taken.

STATEMENT ON OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH OF WORKERS IN THE COUNTRY

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (LABOUR, EMPLOYEMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) (Mr Herbert Kabafunzaki): Mr Speaker and honourable members, you recall that on 20 July 2016, this House directed me to present a statement on the status of occupational safety and health in the country. This was as result of numerous accidents that had been reported in the media.

The Constitution of Uganda, Article 40, provides for the right to a clean and healthy environment to every Ugandan. In line with Article 41(1)(a), Parliament enacted the Occupational Safety and Health Act, No. 9 of 2006.

The Occupational Safety and Health Act No. 9 of 2006 spells out the general duties, obligations and responsibilities of employers, self-employed workers, manufacturers, suppliers and transporters in regard to ensuring safety and health measures at work and working environment.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, through the Department of Occupational Safety and Health (OSH), is mandated under the Occupational Safety and Health Act No. 9 of 2006 to do the following:

1. 	Develop, review and enforce the legislation. Under this, the ministry is in the final stages of developing a national occupational safety and health policy. The draft is still at consultation level with Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and the private sector. 

We shall have the Uganda National Occupational Safety and Health Policy by 31 December 2016. This will guide the effective implementation of OSH systems at all workplaces. Similarly, over ten regulations have been developed to operationalise the Act. 

2. 	Undertake occupational safety and health inspections and workplace registration of all public and private workplaces in the country in order to identify, recognise, evaluate and control hazards at work and give technical advice.

Section 40 of the OSH Act requires the Commissioner for Occupational Safety and Health to keep a register of all workplaces in the country. Pursuant to this, section 41 requires that an appropriate fee be paid before a workplace is registered. The aforesaid section in the Act is being operationalised by the Occupational Safety and Health Regulations 2014 that spell out the amount of fees to be paid by individual workplaces depending on the nature of work, level of risk they pose or the number of workers they are employing. 

The ministry has assessed, registered and inspected over 2,500 workplaces. These workplaces range from small, medium to large scale industries, companies and organisations. The workplaces registered include Government institutions like the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Office of the Prime Minister. The registration of places, certification of plant and equipment and approval of architectural plans/drawings generates approximately Shs 2 billion annually as non-tax revenue to the consolidated fund.

Similarly, the ministry has designed and established an Occupational Safety and Health Information Management System (OSHIMS). The OSHIMS is an office automation system that facilitates OSH business processes such as workplace registration, workplace inspection, occupational accidents and diseases investigation, OSH reporting and architectural drawings/plan approvals. 

The analysis, design and implementation process are guided by the Occupational Safety and Health guidelines and standards. The system is hosted in-house at the ministry and runs on a subdomain as oshmis.mglsd.go.ug. The system has enabled the ministry to process data that helps in occupational safety and health inspections and audits.

3. 	Examine and certify the safety of all statutory plant and equipment in the country. Section 69 to 82 of the OSH Act requires a fee be paid for examination and certification of statutory plants and equipment like steam boilers, air receivers, gas receivers, mobile cranes, tower cranes, power generators, overhead cranes, lifting chains, shackles and lifts among others. The ministry has examined and certified over 2000 equipment and plant in the last five years. 

4. 	Approve all architectural drawing/plans of commercial, public and industrial structures. Section 42 of the OSH Act requires the Commissioner of Occupational Safety and Health to approve architectural drawings or a plan of a new workplace and/or any alteration of an existing workplace before a construction. 

The ministry has reviewed over 100 architectural drawings/plans of commercial, public and industrial structures. It should be noted that Wakiso District Local Government has the highest compliance level in advising the developers to first subject their plans to OSH scrutiny before their approvals.

We are currently engaged in negotiations with KCCA and other local governments to ensure that they comply with the law. Most of the structures in Kampala are illegal in line with the OSH Act, 2006 and they are not safety compliant. 

5. 	Undertake investigation of occupational diseases and accidents and prevent re-occurrence. For the last five years, 50 accidents have been investigated and reports produced to prevent their re-occurrence. In that year alone, safety and health investigations of people drowning at Aero Beach, Sports Beach, Lido Beach, Spennah Beach, Kisubi Beach, Nabinonya Resort Beach and Ggaba Beach between 25 and 26 December 2015; fatal accidents at Nile Breweries Ltd, Tembo Steel (U) Ltd and Ivy Hotel, among others, have been finalised. 

6. 	Undertake training and sensitisation of employers, employees and the general public on occupational safety and health. Both employers and workers have been sensitised on OSH issues to a less extent because of inadequate funds. The ministry is currently involved in enterprise based inspection and training. This is where the training is done at work during the inspection exercises, and in every quarter approximately 400 workplaces are inspected and training conducted at the enterprise level. Similarly, the ministry has increased its sensitisation campaign in both print and electronic media. 

7. 	To undertake workplace health surveillance to detect and control occupational diseases and other work related illnesses. The ministry has supported Hima Cement Factory to conduct workplace health surveillance for over 1600 workers. The ministry has also assisted Finance Trust Bank to assess their workers’ fitness to work. In this year alone, the ministry has settled workers compensation disputes totalling to approximately 70 cases in line with the Workers’ Compensations Act of 2000.

8. 	To undertake applied and basic scientific research on occupational safety and health. The ministry is negotiating with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to release funds for this critical function.

9. 	Supporting local governments. The ministry has supported local governments in the rolling out of an occupational safety and health implementation strategy in the health services sector in 15 selected districts, namely Oyam, Amolatar, Busia, Kamuli, Mityana, Mubende, Namutumba, Kabarole, Dokolo, Mbale, Butaleja, Kisoro, Mbarara, Tororo and Kyegegwa.

Significance of Occupational Safety and Health

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the implementation of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2006 has great benefits, which, among others, include the following:
i) 	Approximately Shs 150 billion could be collected annually to the Consolidated Fund through workplace registration and plant and equipment examination and certification. 

ii) 	The creation of 200,000 jobs mainly for scientists to oversee safety, health and quality management issues at workplaces. Note that during the workplace registration assessment, each workplace/enterprise, among other, criteria is assessed to establish whether it qualifies to employ a safety and health officer. 

This means that if all workplaces in the country are registered and enterprises sensitised about this best practice, new jobs could be generated moreover for scientists who could also help the owners of businesses in reduction of counterfeit products/services being produced. 

iii) 	This law focuses on the prevention of diseases, illness and injuries in workplaces and ensuring a good working environment. This means that once diseases, illnesses and injuries are prevented, less people will be seeking health services hence less Government expenditure on preventable illnesses and injuries. 

iv) 	The adequacy of occupational safety and health management systems will boost productivity and competitiveness of enterprises as there will be less accidents and diseases that contribute to lost time at work. However, also companies and enterprises will find it easier to acquire international standards certifications and accreditations like ISO 14001 on environmental management; ISO 9001 and on quality management standards; and BS OHSAS 18001 occupational health and safety once compliant with the law. This will allow our products easy access to high quality foreign markets. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to inform and request Members of Parliament to: 

1. 	Note that the Government of Uganda has prioritised occupational safety and health as evidenced by the recent approval of key programmes. These include the Chemical Safety and Security Programme and the Green Jobs and Fair Labour Market Programme. These aim at not only creating decent and green employment opportunities but also fostering good working conditions. The challenges of manpower, financing constraints, tools equipment will be solved once the two programmes have been allocated funds in the financial year 2017/2018.

2. 	Note that the Government of Uganda, being aware of the large number of growing businesses in the country vis-à-vis the small size of inspectors, the ministry is soon starting the process of engaging service operators in occupational safety and health to undertake OSH services delivery on behalf of the Government through public private partnership arrangements.

	The focus shall be in the areas of workplace registration, plant and equipment certification, architectural drawings/plans approval, accident investigation and training in OSH management.   

3. 	Note that the Government is aware of the increasing number of accidents in construction, manufacturing, on road and water among others. The road accidents have become so rampant. Therefore, the ministry responsible for occupational safety and health, being the custodian of occupational safety and health in the country, in collaboration with all relevant MDAs is coming up with a National Transport and Equipment Safety Policy. The policy will streamline and guide all stakeholders involved in transport and equipment used on technical safety systems that need to be adhered to. 

	You may also note that the driver is a worker and his cabin is his workplace; and the vehicle is the equipment and working environment. Hence, there is a need to follow safety standards that are spelt out clearly under the Occupational Safety and Health Act. Clear roles of the Uganda Road Safety Council, Uganda Police Force, UNRA and transporters will be spelt out and training conducted on technical safe systems of work.

4. 	Note that the ministry has requested Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to authorise the use of non-tax revenue at source. This would enhance the department’s performance in terms of hiring more staff, purchase and installation of analytical and clinical laboratories and other tools that are of necessity. For instance, the ILO standard ratio of inspector to workers is 1 to 1,000,000. Currently, there are only 16 Occupational Safety and Health inspectors to oversee all workplaces in the country.

5. 	Support the ministry in reporting any violations of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2006. I must commend the Inspector General of Police (IGP) and the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) who attached two senior crime investigators (detectives) and senior state attorneys to the Department of Occupational Safety and Health that are helping the ministry in instituting cases to courts of law and subsequent prosecution of the culprits. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you recall that this arose from a question that was raised by a Member. The minister was supposed to make a statement but the minister’s statement is very wide and involving. I do not know whether we can resolve it by debate or whether we are better off having this matter looked at by the responsible committee such that we have a comprehensive coverage of the whole subject. From the way it is and the time we have, we will not exhaustively discuss this matter. Would that be a proper way to proceed, Members?

3.00
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I thought that the minister, in responding to this matter, conveniently chose to report on the obligations and the Act and yet the obligations are various. So, it is very difficult for a Member reading this report to decipher whether actually the ministry has acted on the obligations. 

There is no report, for example, on the obligations under sections 5 and 6, which I would love to know about. Mr Speaker, the minister is also reporting on the thin spread of inspectors, but the House would love to know where these inspectors are, especially for anybody suspecting foul play on the part of the manufacturer, an importer or a developer.

Secondly, the minister is reporting on investigated accidents. However, we also know that section 102 of the Act mandates the minister to undertake compensation where matters have been determined. We are not getting reports on what happened after these investigations took place. So, I would –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we handle it the way I have proposed, Members?

MR MPUUGA: I am going your direction, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are taking time.

MR MPUUGA: Yes, I am doing this so that the minister can brief the House properly on these matters. I am only trying to speak in your very terms; we need to know more about these issues such that it does not simply become a text of English. I so submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. After hearing what the minister has said, it would be difficult for the House to proceed in those terms and come to any meaningful conclusion. That is why I proposed that it would be better to send this to the committee and the committee comes back with more detailed recommendations for us to take decisions on. Would that be a proper way to go? Thank you, Members. 

Honourable members, it is now 3 O’clock and this is the time we start the Prime Minister’s Question Time. However, if I could seek the indulgence of the Prime Minister for fifteen minutes, to allow us receive very urgent statements, which are related to questions that were asked last time and now there are answers for them. 

The statements are from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development about salaries and the other is about the status of the Contingency Fund that seems to be empty and causing some unrest in some sections of this country. If you could allow us fifteen minutes to receive these statements, then we go back to you, Sir, that would help us. Can we deal with the two statements? They will be presented at once and then we will deal with them quickly before we handle the Prime Ministers Question Time.

STATEMENTS ON THE DELAYED PAYMENT OF CIVIL SERVANTS IN OVER FIFTY (50) DISTRICTS AND NEWLY CREATED MUNICIPALITIES AND THE STATUS AND USE OF FUNDS IN THE CONTINGENCY FUND UNDER THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have ten minutes to handle both statements so that we can at least have five minutes of responses.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me begin with the status of payment for quarter 1 salaries for the financial year 2016/2017.

Mr Speaker, Government uses the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) for budgeting, budget execution, accounting and reporting. All central Government ministries and agencies are connected to this system. On the other hand, the local governments use three modes for financial management - tier I, which is connected to 14 districts; tier II, which are separate standalone systems and have 42 local governments; and the remaining local governments are on manual systems but are connected to the IFMS or payment of salaries and pension. These do not have a connection at the site of operation and they process either at regional centres or at the Treasury and are thus are termed hybrid IFMS.

Government is committed to connecting all the remaining hybrid local governments to the IFMS in a phased manner. Twenty-two local governments will be connected to the integrated system and tier I this financial year. The remaining 84 will be connected in the next two years.

Status of Salary Payments for Quarter 1

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, all funds for quarter 1 with respect to wage, pension and gratuity were transferred to the respective spending agencies and local government accounts in Bank of Uganda in the first week of August 2016. Pension payments are up to 79 per cent of the bulk of unpaid pensions awaiting verifications.

As you are aware, payments of salaries by respective accounting officers were implemented in the financial year 2014/2015 when they decentralised salary payments from Ministry of Public Service to the respective votes. Mr Speaker, as of this morning, all Government entities have paid salaries for July; that is, all agencies, ministries, referral hospitals, local governments, universities and municipal councils have paid 100 per cent except for three votes namely, Nansana Municipal Council, Kira Municipal Council and Kabale University. 

The reasons for non-payments are: the two municipal councils are still reconciling with the districts from which they were created. We have requested them to come to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development Treasury to sort out this issue as soon as possible. Kabale University is still aligning its structure and we are in touch with them. However, the funds are available for them, only that they are still recruiting and sorting out the payroll.

Mr Speaker, the table below shows that for the central Government votes, 55 out of 55 have received their funds; 115 districts out of 115 have received their funds; 16 out of 16 hospitals have received their funds; nine universities out of 10 have received their funds; 38 out of 41 municipal councils have been paid.  On average, 99 per cent have been paid. The responsibility now remains with the spending agencies. Additionally, several entities have already paid August salaries and pension, as can be seen from the table below - that is 16 out 237 votes, which is seven per cent - but still, the municipalities have not yet started paying.

In conclusion, on the issue of salaries, we apologise for the delay of payment of salaries. We know those affected have been hurt. However, this was because of the new processes which we have now resolved. We appeal to all accounting officers to comply with the deadline of 28th of every month, thereafter, in terms of paying salaries of civil servants. I would like to submit on this issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us get the next statement.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the next statement is on the issue of the Contingency Fund in the 2016/2017 financial year.

Honourable members, Article 157 of the Constitution states “Parliament shall make provision for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund and shall make laws to regulate the operations of that fund.” The Public Finance Management Act was enacted to operationalise this Article. Section 26(1) of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act 2016 states, “There is established a Contingencies Fund which shall, every financial year, be replenished with an amount equivalent to 0.5 per cent of the appropriated annual budget of Government of the previous financial year.”

Accordingly, the Contingency Fund for Financial Year 2016/2017 was supposed to be replenished with Shs 80.91 billion, which is 0.5 per cent of the appropriated budget of Shs 16.181 trillion for the Financial Year 2015/2016. 

Honourable colleagues, those who were here in the Ninth Parliament when we were appropriating the budget for the Financial Year 2016/2017 will note that due to inadequate resources, we were unable to provide funding for the Contingency Fund for this financial year. Parliament was informed about this during the budgeting and appropriation processes. Therefore, we do not have money in the Contingency Fund but we would like to ensure that next financial year, it is a priority.

My colleague from the Office of the President mentioned something to do with emergency funds under OPM and I would like comment on it. An emergency is a sudden serious happening needing prompt action. Given their nature, it is difficult to plan and budget for emergencies or disasters in form of time and magnitude.

The Office of the Prime Minister has a provision of Shs 6.1 billion under disaster preparedness, of which Shs 1.6 billion was released. They do have, under development for humanitarian assistance, Shs 3.6 billion which is in this budget. In instances where the financing requirement is absorbable, the responsible institution frontloads within their budget. In the case of the war in South Sudan, Shs 450 million was frontloaded within the budget of the Ugandan Embassy in South Sudan to enable them handle the situation. Where an emergency is far above the budget provision, Government mobilises assistance from donor communities. 

Mr Speaker, this morning, Cabinet has instructed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to mobilise funds, even if it means cutting money from other ministries, to ensure that we have adequate funds to cater for the emergencies. We will comply with that directive in any way possible. Therefore, we will handle the situation which was raised yesterday, but we would like to inform Parliament that where they have money, they should frontload and utilise what they have. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is the matter of Article 157 of the Constitution and section 26 (1) of the Public Finance Management Act a discretionary matter or a matter of law, that once the budget is passed that money is sent there? Is it a matter of discretion that you can decide when to put it there?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we normally bring the budget here for appropriation and I know it is a matter of law but yet there is also the process of appropriation. I also seek your guidance on this issue because when we bring a budget here and it is appropriated and nothing is put in the Contingency Fund, then as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development our hands are tied. We cannot alter what has been appropriated by Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought the appropriation in itself already has that component of the Contingency Fund by law.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I will give an example. For Financial Year 2015/2016, we had appropriated Shs 150 billion in the contingencies fund. Parliament made a decision to remove it and appropriate it for other areas – (Interjections) – That was for Financial Year 2015/2016 and it is clear. For Financial Year 2016/2017, we do not find funds because the final institution on issues of budgeting is Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who makes the proposals? Honourable members, it is now Prime Minister’s Question Time but let me say this: This was for information; these particular statements are not ministerial statements in the sense that is referred to under the rule on ministerial statements. However, this is arising from Prime Minister’s Question Time on matters that the Prime Minister did not have ready answers for and they were sent to the ministries to respond. There were also questions that came up as matters of urgent public importance that required the minister to supply information. Therefore, they are not strictly ministerial statements that we have to debate fully. 

Can we streamline this and then go to the Prime Minister’s Question Time? It is about time to start that. I am going to limit this so that we go to what the law allows us to do – Prime Minister’s Question Time.

3.18
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the minister for giving us information concerning payment of salaries.

I would like to request the minister to clarify on Kamuli Municipality salaries. He only mentioned three municipalities that have not been paid and those are Nansana, Kira and Kabale. However, by yesterday at 1.00 p.m., I was at the district with the chief accounting officer, the CAO, and he told me that there is no salary for Kamuli Municipality. May I get clarification from the minister? Thank you. 

3.18
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I recall very well as a member of the budget committee in the Ninth Parliament, we argued a lot about the Contingency Fund. We said that there is no way Government should fail to plan for the Contingency Fund since this country is very prone to many emergencies, as you are aware. We pushed that money should be allocated. I do not know why the minister says that we did not appropriate money to that vote. Perhaps we need evidence to that effect.

Mr Speaker, the minister talked about pensioners in passing. It is very unfortunate when we meet very many pensioners in our constituencies crying and suffering, some on their deathbeds. I would love that we prioritise the pensioners because these are people who have served. I think that is why people would like to amend the age limit so that they do not retire because retirement is a very terrible thing in this country. I hope this is taken into consideration.

3.20
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true the minister has sent money this morning and I do agree with my honourable sister who says that by yesterday, there was no money. I have just talked to my Town Clerk and he told me that the money reached Mukono this morning. 

However, there is an issue about the June salary. The money that has been sent to my municipality does not include salaries for June. In my constituency, the total amount is Shs 417 million for Mukono Municipality workers. This includes teachers, health workers and the technical staff. I know that what is happening in Mukono is likely to be happening in all other local governments, that whenever there are arrears, when sending money you miss out on some of the months.

Secondly, I do not know what the ministry is doing to negotiate with the commercial banks which give loans to the local government workers. When you do not send the money in time and they have salary loans, they are penalised. When these teachers go to fetch their salaries, they find that most of the money has ended up paying penalties. We were told that salary loans do not attract penalties when it is proved that the delays were from the centre. However, lately, the teachers and health workers have been penalised. I am told even Members of Parliament are penalised. 

Honourable minister, what are you doing to discuss with these commercial banks so that the teachers’ and health workers’ salaries do not end up paying penalties? You have only apologised about the delay of the money, but to the local government workers, it means much more than that; the apology cannot cover for the loss they have suffered.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, hon. Watongola. The statement is clear and we do apologise that we have delayed to remit the money. However, as of this morning, Kamuli has the funds to pay the salaries.

The second question was from hon. Ruhunda of Fort Portal Municipality about pensions. We are working on it. He also raised an issue about whether any money was allocated to the Contingency Fund. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, as I said, appropriation is a shared responsibility between Government and Parliament but Parliament has the final say. However, we do take the responsibility for not catering for this and we apologise. Next financial year, we will make sure that we propose an amount for the Contingency Fund and we request that when this is proposed, please ensure that you support us to approve it. Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. On this matter of the Contingency Fund, the budget committee needs to advise the House at an appropriate time. The chairperson should consult with the committee and come back and brief us on this issue of the Contingency Fund and why it was not in the 2015/2016 and 2016/2017 budgets. We need some brief on this because it is a dictate of the law that it should be there. If it is not there, somebody is not implementing the law and we need to find out why.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Bukedea Lifeline Primary School, Bukedea District. They are represented by hon. John Bosco Ikojo, hon. Peter Opolot and hon. Anita Among. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, we will pause the statements for now and go to the Prime Minister’s Question Time. However, there is a procedural matter from hon. Nambooze.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I did not hear the minister respond to the two issues I raised about penalising teachers when salaries delay and the fact that you have not sent the June salaries.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the only answer I have for that is to apologise that we delayed to release these funds. Secondly, moving forward, we have to ensure that these funds are released to the districts on time. However, as to whether Government can come in to help in paying the penalties, the answer is no. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the moment we have been waiting for is the Prime Minister’s Question Time. For the next one hour, we will be doing that and then we will go back to the Order Paper.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.25
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Uganda National Curriculum Development Centre is mandated to review the curriculum of this country from time to time, in order to address the challenges the country is facing at hand. 

According to the education roadmap, the ministry is supposed to roll out the new reforms starting next year. However, on the ground, there is no preparation for the country to roll out the implementation of the new education reforms. Therefore, how prepared is the country to begin the implementation of the new reforms, come February next year? I thank you.

3.26
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I know the Ministry of Education and Sports is making arrangements to ensure that it satisfies the country’s requirements on the issue of reforms and it is on schedule.

3.27
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, cotton was one of the major crops grown in Busia. We had a ginnery that was processing cotton at Dabani and also a machine for pressing cotton seed oil. In the last six years, however, there has been no activity at all. Is this factory dead? More than 200 former employees are redundant; what is the Government’s plan for this?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do not have specific information on the specific ginnery. Nevertheless, I can say that ginneries have been essentially owned by private people and they have moved from ginning to other things depending on where they see lucrative business.

Secondly, there has been fluctuation of cotton prices and now Government is encouraging big farmers as opposed to smallholders. However, on that particular ginnery, we will need to find out from the minister responsible and he will be able to give us that information.

3.29
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek information from the Prime Minister. 

Last year, a list of areas that would undergo rural electrification was published in the newspapers and one of them was Lira District from Anai. This was supposed to have been effected from February this year but up to now, the area has no electricity. May I know what could have transpired? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the country now is being covered widely by the electricity authorities. In fact, as I speak, 26 per cent of the homes in Uganda are connected and more money is being put aside for that. There are so many plans underway to cover different parts of the country, Lira included. I will link up with the department concerned to get the specific details about the areas in Lira or Lango that you are asking about.

3.30
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to know the status of the National Youth Policy that has been under review by Government for the last five years. 
Secondly, I would like to know the status of the national youth service that is meant to benefit the Ugandan youth. Thank you.
           
DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we have been reviewing youth policies from time to time. I do not know the latest information about further review but I can tell you that national youth service is part of the programme that Government is going to embark on. It is part of the manifesto and it will be implemented within this five-year period in a phased manner.

3.32
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Koboko Health Centre VI was upgraded to a hospital two years ago but up to now, we do not have new staff, the drug stock has not been increased nor have the funds. When will it operate as a hospital? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there are a number of health centres IV that have been upgraded at policy level as we await for resources to enable them become district hospitals. Nevertheless, Government’s target is to ensure that each district gets a district hospital through elevation of health centres IV to district status. Koboko will be one of those beneficiaries; in fact, it is one of the leading ones like Kaberamaido and a few others.

3.32
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, recently I toured selected primary schools in my constituency and the head teachers complained that they do not have textbooks for their pupils. There was an NGO that promised them textbooks but the school had to make a contribution in order to access those text books.

It is Government’s obligation to distribute textbooks to primary schools but Government is not doing that. What is your plan as far as distribution of text books to primary schools is concerned?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the plan is indeed to make text books available to schools in a manner allowable by the resources available. (Laughter)

3.33
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the Prime Minister what the Government is doing to rescue our people who are incarcerated in DRC and whether the Government of DRC is a hostile state to Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this matter came up earlier as a question and an urgent matter; so, you need to handle it.

DR RUGUNDA: Well, there are a number of categories of Ugandans in the DRC that I am aware of. Therefore, it would have been helpful to know which category hon. Wamanga-Wamai is referring to.  

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, Uganda has got a mission in Kinshasa. The Prime Minister once headed our mission in New York and as a head of mission, he used to write reports and send them to the ministry. I expect the ambassador of Uganda to DRC has written reports informing the Government of Uganda about Ugandans who are incarcerated. 

Therefore, I expect you, Mr Prime Minister, to know what is happening in Congo because so many Ugandans are in prison. I expect you to tell us what Government is doing about it and whether DRC is a hostile state to Uganda.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I know, and indeed that is why I wanted to ask which category we are focusing on because there are Ugandans incarcerated near the Rwenzori and that is the ADF. Many of them are there not voluntarily but because they have been forced to be there.

As for the group you are talking about in Kinshasa, the two governments are in contact at a very high level. President Kabila was only recently our guest in Uganda and the two Presidents discussed many issues including normalisation of relations regarding Ugandans in DRC and vice-versa. So, this is a matter being handled and followed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

We could get an up-to-date statement on the matter from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs so that we have the latest facts on the group that you are talking about.

3.37
MS NABILA NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Government for encouraging investors in key sectors of the economy. Our people in Uganda have limited capacity that allows them to just do petty trade - wholesale. I would like to know whether there is a special category of Chinese investors who are invited to Kikuubo and if Government has those statistics.

DR RUGUNDA: The question of the number of Chinese investors being invited by Government to Kikuubo does not arise because Government has not invited any Chinese to come and do petty trade in the Kikuubo area. (Laughter)

3.39
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono South County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we had a disaster in Mpunge in April. Mpunge sub-county has only one primary school under the Universal Primary Education programme. It is one of the areas on the shores of Lake Victoria, where we just encourage people to study. The procedure and process of reporting the disaster was fully followed and we submitted a fully-fledged report to your ministry.

On Friday, the term will close and for the whole of this term, all the seven classes have been conducted outside. We are lucky it was not a rainy season. What information can I give the people? I have been invited as chief guest as they close the term and prepare for third term. They have 47 candidates.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I agree with the honourable member that he indeed rightly informed Government about this problem with the school. The disaster preparedness department has been trying to mobilise very limited resources to come and work with the people, including the Ministry of Education. I expect that the solution to that problem will come soon.

3.40
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister about South Sudan. We are aware of the stalemate on the issue of the unity government that was put together by the two principals. Now that the stalemate continues, there were two issues which have come up. One issue is on safety. We know that not all Ugandans were able to leave; there are some still in South Sudan and the situation is still volatile. What conclusive arrangement is in place? Secondly – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; only one question.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issue of South Sudan and the security of Ugandans there concerns Government and all of us. As you are aware, Government recently carried out a courageous mission and the UPDF rescued many Ugandans and other internationals that were resident in South Sudan.

Indeed, it is true that there are still many Ugandans in South Sudan. Government is working with our neighbours in the region and the Government of South Sudan to help normalise the situation as quickly as possible so that both the people of South Sudan and the Ugandans there can live in peace and work in a secure environment.

3.41
MR TOM KINOBERE (Independent, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the UPE funds that are sent to primary schools. I recall very well that UPE started in 1997 and at the start, schools were receiving Shs 2.8 million. The cost of living and the prices of scholastic materials then was a little bit low, but they have still maintained that money and it has become a challenge for schools to perform some of these activities.

Recently, in my constituency, only four schools participated in athletics because the rest had no money. They got the money but it was reallocated to buy scholastic materials. Hon. Prime Minister, when do you intend to increase the remittances you make to these primary schools and by how much? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, UPE has been a blessing to this country. I am happy to say that within this august House, we have many people who are UPE graduates and indeed in the rest of the economy. (Laughter)

Secondly, the honourable member has raised a valid point. Suffice it to say that Government has just recently increased capitation grants and these should be able to benefit the UPE schools. Some money has already been made available by Government.

3.43
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the Prime Minister why the Minister of Agriculture has not responded to my question that I raised on 12th July this year. Our cows in Nyabushozi and the rest of the cattle corridor are devastated by the tick-borne diseases that have become resistant to all the acaricides in this country. When will the minister answer my question? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought there was a Prime Minister’s response and then a statement from the minister on that subject. I think that was sufficiently answered, and there was even a ministerial statement on this. If there is no follow-up, then you can ask for the follow-up instead.

Hon. Prime Minister, I think it is a follow-up question; up to now, nothing is happening. There was a statement from you and there was another from the minister but on the ground, there is nothing. Maybe you can deal with that.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I think you have guided very well. However, like we have discussed many times in this House and in the media, the problem of ticks in the cattle corridor is a serious one. Government is fully aware and it has sent delegations and teams there. We are working with experts within Government and outside the country to ensure that a solution is found. 

Suffice it to mention that the main problem has been using one drug for a very long time in one area. The ministry concerned is devising means of possible rotation of use of acaricides in order to combat the issue of resistance. Government is actively pursuing the matter.

3.46
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The unemployment rate in this country is estimated at 83 per cent and about 400,000 young men and young women are estimated to graduate every year with diplomas and degrees.

For a very long time, Ugandans have been waiting for a comprehensive strategy that shows how this chronic scourge of unemployment is going to be dealt with. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what strategy do you have to deal with unemployment?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issue raised by Ndugu Karuhanga is a very well known problem that Government is paying special attention to. In fact, both the President and other Government officials have repeatedly articulated the Government position on this. We have decided that now that we have peace and stability in the country - That is the first and most fundamental response to the issue of unemployment because it creates an enabling environment for local and external investors to come into the country and invest and therefore create jobs.

Secondly, we have put focus on education, as you are very well aware. However, in the process, we have also found out that some of the education institutions are producing people that are not easily employable. Hence, the strategy of re-skilling people to enable them acquire skills that they can sell or use to create employment for themselves is underway by the Ministry of Education and a number of other institutions.

Thirdly, Operation Wealth Creation has been a major response to arm the population, especially the young people, to be able to do something for themselves either on land or any other business that will make sense.

The next point that I would like to put across is that Government has got money available for the youth through the Youth Livelihood Fund, the women and to other groups to enable them to be creative and innovative in order to create jobs for themselves and also for others.

To conclude this point, Government is fully seized with this challenge and it is embarking on long, medium and short term measures to ensure that we deal with it decisively.

3.49
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about Doho Rice Scheme in Butaleja District. The district is well known for growing rice in the whole of Uganda. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there are some people who were masquerading as investors who went to Butaleja last week and conducted a meeting with the farmers and informed them that they would like to take over that rice scheme. This has caused protests since then. On Saturday, the residents plan to have another meeting which is likely to result into other protests. 

I am afraid that the area Members of Parliament are not informed about this investment and yet these people claim to have been sent by the Office of the President. May I get more information from you?  

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do not have additional information to give to the honourable member. I advise the honourable member to get the details from the Ministry of Agriculture.

3.52
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is noted that the budget allocation of Shs 218 billion for essential medicines and health supplies to all health facilities across the country has remained constant since 2011/2012, in spite of the increase of the number of patients. What plan does Government have to ensure that funding for essential medicines matches the increase of the patients because this has affected service delivery? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the need for more resources for the health sector and for the drug supply section is well accepted. Government has taken some steps to ensure that we get benefits from promoting local manufacturers of drugs. We have also embarked on bulk purchases of drugs in order to ensure that we have the best results for the amount of money we have. Nevertheless, we accept the point that Government will endeavour to make more resources available for essential drugs.

3.43
MR JOHN BOSCO IKOJO (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minster, we are aware that in 2007, Kenya had a post-election crisis and our economy suffered. Most of our traders suffered a number of losses. I would like to know what mitigation measures the country is putting in place now that Kenya is about to have elections in 2017? I would like this House to be assured that indeed, the country is prepared for any eventuality. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, firstly, let us pray that our brothers and sisters in the neighbouring and friendly Republic of Kenya go through their elections as peacefully as possible.

Secondly, yes, Uganda is ready to face any situation from anywhere as we have recently handled the question of South Sudan.

3.45
MS MIRIAM NAIGAGA (NRM, Namutumba District, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my concern is access to safe water. In Namutumba District, 80 per cent of the schools have no access to safe water and this could be a similar situation in other districts.

My district receives funds for only 11 boreholes annually; that means that each subcounty gets one borehole. What plans does the Government have to ensure that at least there is a borehole at each public institution? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the critical point is not a borehole but safe water supply to each institution and indeed to the people of Uganda. Government has been making very significant advances in ensuring safe water supply to the people of Uganda. Were formal channels of water supply, from say the National Water and Sewerage Corporation or Department of Water, fail, people should be as creative and innovative as possible. They could use boreholes or collect water from the roofs. 

Now the Government is embarking on a programme of encouraging solar water pumps. Government will do whatever is possible to ensure that the young people in schools and the people of Uganda access safe water.

3.56
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are all well aware that during his campaigns especially in districts and constituencies that are near water bodies, the President suspended operations in waters. You are also aware that on this Floor of Parliament, my colleague, hon. Anthony Okello, has time and again brought up the issue of insecurity on our waters as far as illegalities are concerned and also operations on water. 

Just last Friday, there were incidents that happened on Lake Kyoga in Amolatar District; people fought on the lake and engine boats were burnt. What does Government have in plan to restrain these kinds of circumstances? Now that there is even no minister responsible for fisheries, what is in place to rescue those who are fishermen and doing business in fishing?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a very pertinent question. It is true there has been some very bad conduct in the area of fisheries; for instance, in one of the areas she has quoted, there were issues of immature fishing, which have really depleted our lakes and literally led to the closure of our factories.

Government has been holding a number of meetings with stakeholders with a view of coming up with a definite position to respond to issues of security and also bring an end to immature fishing, which has undermined this potentially very lucrative industry for the country.

3.59
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli Central County, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Government of Uganda entered into a contract, through the Uganda National Roads Authority to construct Musita-Nankoma-Namayingo Road via Busia. As I speak, they are left with 13 months of the contact period, but there isn’t even a kilometre of tarmac on the road. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what plan does Government have to see to it that this road is completed and on time? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is good some work has been done on this road. I will ask the minister responsible and UNRA to find out why there is a delay. I will ask them to deal with the problem expeditiously so that the citizens can have their road properly done.

4.01
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I read in one of the newspapers that about 300 UPDF officers will be sent to the districts to fight corruption. I would like to know whether that is true and how they are going to relate with the RDCs and the officers who are running Operation Wealth Creation in the districts. Do we also still need RDCs in districts?

DR RUGUNDA: I do not have authoritative information on that matter, Mr Speaker.

4.02
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A contract was awarded to Techno Three construction company to construct a road from Nakasongola via Kikyusa to Katikamu. That road connects through a number of constituencies such as Nakasongola, Bamunanika and Katikamu North. This is a three-year contract worth about Shs 6 billion. However, nothing has been done on the road and yet the contract is about to end. I can say that shoddy work has been done - there are no offshoots, culverts are poorly installed and the road is very narrow. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what can I tell my countrymen who are the beneficiaries of that road? Why has this road been poorly done by the Indian construction company and yet we have local companies that can do even better murrum roads?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issue of value for money is critical to Government, Parliament and to the country. If there are questions about the performance of that contract, then the ministry responsible for works and UNRA will take it up. I will also instruct the minister to follow it up and provide information as to what the corrective measures are.

4.04
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Prime Minister when this Parliament will have the opportunity to discuss the subject of climate change and how it is adversely affecting this country, particularly economic development and agriculture.

I am particularly raising this question at this material time because we are aware that in November there will be an international conference on climate change. This is where the entire world converges to discuss how we can have mitigation and adaptation mechanisms in all the countries affected.

We know that Uganda is one of the countries that have contributed a lot to that discussion but we have never been given opportunity as a Parliament to have our input to that discussion. Therefore, can we know when this Parliament will have an opportunity to discuss the perimeters and how Ugandans have benefited from those discussions so that we can also, as Parliament, make our contribution? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am very happy that our sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, has raised this matter. Climate change, as all of us know, is so important that we should pay special attention to it.

It is true that Uganda has been playing a leading role in this matter especially when hon. Sam Kutesa was President of the UN General Assembly. He did steer many of these discussions including the issue of SBAs. 

I do share the view that it would be right, if Parliament has not done so yet, to spend some time and discuss this very important matter as it affects Uganda, Africa and the world. It would be right to discuss what political leaders and Parliaments of the world can do to play their rightful role to ensure that there is better management of our environment and that global warming is brought to acceptable levels.

This would be very acceptable to Government and I would be happy discussing with the Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition to agree on the format of this debate. I think it would be very good to the struggle for better management of our environment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you either ask a minister to make a statement or somebody proposes a motion and then we have a debate.

4.08
MS HELLEN ADDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Monday, I was in Serere and I went to the district headquarters and to one subcounty. I was shocked to find that most civil servants not at work. The reason for this was that they had not yet received the operational grant and no activities were taking place in Serere. To make matters worse, they have not received salaries for the last three months, although they had been promised salary for one month by yesterday.

It is so frustrating, especially for teachers, who have loans to repay. The teachers were wondering how they are going to mark exams for other people’s children when their own children have dropped out of school. I would like to find out from the Prime Minister when the operational grant and accumulated salaries will be sent. Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister was under the impression that the issue of salaries has now been sorted out. I am rather surprised to hear from our sister, hon. Hellen Adda, that in Serere there are still unpaid salaries for months. I will ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to inform the House tomorrow on the position of salaries and other benefits for the people in Serere. Thank you.

4.10
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising these two questions on behalf of the Opposition -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One question, please.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I would like the Prime Minister to inform the country under what arrangement a Member of Parliament elected on the UPC ticket is serving in the NRM Cabinet and the implication of this in the law.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the presence of some members of the Opposition in the Government of Uganda is an extremely welcome development. It is an eloquent testimony of the maturity of our politics and I would strongly recommend that this be scaled up. I thank you. 

4.11
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda North County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that during the State of the Nation Address, the President decried the high haemorrhage in this country, where our people continue importing many of the products we use from abroad.

Mr Speaker, you are aware that most of the funds we are using, as Government, are borrowed and most of our procurement guidelines are formulated to international standards, leaving little room for our local suppliers to supply Government. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, does Government have any plans to build the capacity of our local suppliers so that they can favourably compete with the Chinese and other international companies? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has again raised an important point. The ministry responsible for trade and industry has already brought a policy on “buy Ugandan goods”, which has been adopted by Cabinet.

Only recently, President Yoweri Museveni made a pronouncement to the effect that Uganda has been a supermarket for all sorts of things and he directed that Government agencies, especially the security organs, would now be getting all their uniforms locally produced. In fact, Uganda Police already produces its uniforms. The policy is to build local capacity in procurement of goods and services and all of us should support this call. Government, definitely, is in the lead with this.

4.14
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the people of Kumi longed for a municipality status and Kumi was elevated to a municipality. We congratulate you upon accepting our plea and we are happy. However, we have an issue. Kumi is a municipality now but we do not have water. Most of our national leaders have never taken the time to go and spend a night there so that they can have a feel of the situation, probably including the speaker. 

A loan was approved by this Parliament to take water to Kumi, but up to now, nothing has been done. Who is not doing their part and has caused us not have water in Kumi? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I know that National Water and Sewerage Corporation have an aggressive policy of reaching even small towns. I am rather surprised that Kumi has been bypassed. This is a matter that I will take up with the minister responsible for water so that Kumi can benefit from this modernisation. 

4.16
MR ANDREW MARTIAL (NRM, Igara East County, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are many vacant positions in Government departments, especially in education and health. In addition, there are so many well qualified teachers in schools who are not being paid by Government. Hospitals and local governments are equally understaffed and when you read through the various ministry policy statements, you realise that there are many unfilled vacant positions. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when is Government planning to advertise and recruit to fill these vacant positions? Thank you very much. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Martial would know that Government, very regularly through the Public Service Commission and other Government recruiting agencies, advertises these jobs. 

It is however true that there must be money for wages before recruitment can take place. Therefore, we would like to fill all the positions but there must be resources so that the recruitment agencies can do their work. 

4.18
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, I would like to ask you about the Social Action Grant for the Elderly (SAGE) programme. This programme is being implemented in less than 50 districts of Uganda. The people of Moyo would like to know when their elders, who are 60 years and above, will start getting this money. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as you very well know, this is a frequently discussed issue. Actually, we would like the grants to the elderly to be nationwide. However, resources have been limiting. Government is working with development partners to gradually expand this programme to cover the entire country but this is being done in a phased manner because of resource constraints.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We have come to the time when we should close. I will allow only two Members but the people who will remain on the list are Bushenyi-Ishaka, Ngora District, Budadiri East and Kyaka South. Those ones will not be able to ask questions today but I will take Kilak and Maracha.

4.22
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, are you aware that currently, there are Ugandans who are registering as refugees from South Sudan? As I talk, they have joined the refugee camp in Adjumani. 

If you are aware, what plans do you have to resettle them back to Uganda? A case in point is in Amuru District, where parents have joined refugees from South Sudan and as a result, we have two schools that are about to close because the pupils have joined their parents at the refugee camps. 

The schools are Bibia Primary School and Ilego Primary School. Rt hon. Prime Minister, what plans do you have to bring back those people to settle in their homes so that the children go back to school? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as my brother hon. Olanya would know, Government has been actively pursuing this matter and the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, working with our friends in the international community, have in place plans, which are being implemented currently. Therefore, they will be able to assist these people as soon as possible.

4.26
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, tobacco farmers continue to suffer under the hands of tobacco companies licensed by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives by way of non-payment, delayed payments, variation of grades and a number of other issues. We know that Government continues to earn money from tobacco companies while the farmers are unattended to. 

I would like to know from the Prime Minister, what plans the Government has to avert the continued suffering of farmers. In addition, what support does Government intend to give to the tobacco sub-sector similar to the kind extended to other sectors like diary, coffee, among others?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, farmers should choose crops or animals that will give them the best income. Therefore, we should assist them to choose what to do and if necessary, to leave tobacco and tend crops that will give them better incomes.

Secondly, it is difficult to compare tobacco with dairy and other related issues. You know very well, honourable member, that tobacco has caused a lot of health problems, especially causation of lung cancer. The expenditure on our health, because of tobacco, by far outweighs the income we get from tobacco. 

Therefore, in a nutshell, please advise the wanainchi to choose crops, animals or activities that will give them better incomes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will bring us to the end of the questions. Let us have the Leader of the Opposition say something and then the Prime Minister will wind up. We can have the procedure after we finish this.

4.32
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to emphasise the issue of Ugandans who are detained in DRC. Rt hon. Prime Minister, this is a serious problem because most of our Ugandans there are suffering. We have been raising this issue for a long time. Next time, please come with answers. Otherwise, our people are suffering in DRC, from the reports that we are getting.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we demand an explanation from Government; under what arrangements is hon. Betty Amongi serving the ruling regime? We know that hon. Betty Amongi is a member of UPC in this Parliament and that is why, most of the time, she is not in Parliament. I do not know where she is going to sit under this arrangement. We therefore demand an explanation from the Attorney-General to tell us under what arrangement she is serving the ruling regime. 

Rt hon. Prime Minister, in 2015, there was massive recruitment of crime preventers across the country and they were prominently engaged by the Government during the elections. After elections, they have not been catered for. What is their status, as of today? This is because most of these crime preventers are around and you know what they are doing. 

Therefore, we would like to know their status. Otherwise, in our constituencies, we have challenges. Under what circumstances is Government still working with the crime preventers?

Rt hon. Prime Minister, what policies has the Government put in place to deal with the increasing number of street children in the urban centres of this country?

Lastly, Rt hon. Prime Minister, please brief this House concerning the progress of actualising Uganda’s dream of producing commercial oil in 2018. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issue of Ugandans in DRC is well taken and this will be followed up as we have already informed the House.

Secondly, hon. Betty Amongi is an illustrious member of Government. She is a very effective Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and she will be on the front seat of Government.

Regarding the issue of crime preventers, I am glad that this matter has been raised by the acting Leader of the Opposition. Crime Preventers are patriotic Ugandans who have volunteered to make sure that their country is secure, stable and is moving forward. They should be saluted and congratulated. In fact, they must be supported because they are doing great work.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, let me invite my colleague in the Opposition to appreciate the great work that these people have done. They have not been abandoned; they are volunteers. In fact I saw in today’s papers or yesterday’s papers that crime preventers won a big tender somewhere. They are self-reliant and are trying to support themselves. We should also support them.

Regarding the issue of –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister has just congratulated crime preventers for winning a tender to supply food to the police. However, as we speak, this matter is before the IGG, because some other people who competed for the same tender petitioned the IGG, citing irregularities and fraud in the award of tenders.

Is the Prime Minister in order, therefore, to start cheering people who have been arraigned before the IGG? Won’t that bias investigations by the IGG? Is he in order to congratulate people who have been cited in fraud in this august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, are you aware that this matter is before the IGG?

DR RUGUNDA: I have just heard it from hon. Nambooze, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you do not have that information then you may proceed.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you. On the question of street children, I am sure that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development can handle that more effectively. 

Regarding the question of commercial oil, we are making plenty of progress to have our oil flow. The rigidity concerning calendar months could divert us from the objective of having our oil flow but we know that it is going to flow soon.

The final comment I would like to make, Mr Speaker, is that on Friday, in Kibuku, we will be re-launching the barazas. Barazas are for a where the wanainchi monitor Government services and we get feedback from them. We call upon all colleagues in this august House to take interest in these barazas and to participate in them. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. As we progress, you can see that the issues are becoming clearer and the questions are becoming wider and policy-based. That makes the responses more appropriate in terms of answers from the Prime Minister. Specific questions about specific things might not be within his knowledge, but policy issues, I am sure, are within his knowledge so he can deal with them more appropriately. That brings us to the close of the Prime Minister’s Question Time. We can go to the next item.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to rule 35(4), “The response by a minister to a question asked of him or her shall be sent to the Clerk within five working days and the Clerk shall distribute the response to Members within five days.” The request of the minister is required to be in writing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which rule is that? 

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Rule 35(4). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those are questions for oral answers.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Yes, but Mr Speaker, this procedural issue that I am raising will help Parliament to be – For example, regarding these questions that we have asked the Prime Minister or the questions we ask the ministers on the Floor of Parliament, how do we get the responses if they are not written? If we get these written answers, we can use them to explain issues to our voters. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is a gap that needs to be cured in our rules. The particular rule you have quoted relates to questions for oral answers. A question for oral answer is submitted, answers are written and copies are sent to the Clerk and to the person who asked the question. The minister then comes and orally answers the question based on that. The Member who asked the question has the right to ask a supplementary question. 

That is different from what happened here. What happened here is that you raised an urgent matter, which was forwarded to the Prime Minister and the minister was asked to make a statement. The statement came from the minister in response to what had transpired in the House. Therefore, it does not fall within this scenario where the responses were in writing.

Even then, I remember that the minister in charge of this sector came and made a statement here on those issues and it was debated. The statement was in writing but it was presented orally and debated. Let us leave it there but we could look at other avenues in the rules to see if they can be improved for better management of the concerns of the Members. Thank you. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL UNDER ARTICLE 94(4)(B) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I am looking at today’s Order Paper and would like to know whether you amended it. There is item 4(e) on the status of operations in Uganda’s foreign missions. Was the Order Paper amended because I see item 6 coming in?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have dealt with item 5 and so we went to item 6. Let us proceed.

4.36
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. This is a motion to introduce a Private Members’ Bill moved under Article 94, sub-article 4(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 111, sub-rule (1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS Article 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I know that Eng. Kafeero is very eager to do what he wants but I do not see the document, which he is talking about because he is moving a motion - it is something, which is very dangerous but he is talking before we have got the document and Members of Parliament have not got iPads; at least I do not have one. Therefore, is it procedurally right for a Member to continue before he gives us copies?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we have copies of this motion? [All: “No.”]

MR KAFEERO: Mr Speaker, as per the requirement of our Rules of Procedure, I submitted, to the Clerk, a copy of this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we have copies of this motion circulated? If we do not have copies of this motion then there is going to be a little difficulty because – (Interjections)-Are the copies with the Clerk? Are they available for distribution? If there are no circulated copies of this motion, we will stay it for now. If the copies are available, we will proceed with it.

MR KAFEERO: Mr Speaker, I will check with the Office of the Clerk right now and get back to you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The rules are clear that we need copies and the copies are not here. We cannot debate a matter whose copies are not here. If the copies are available, we will proceed. We cannot proceed without copies.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF ON-GOING AND UPCOMING ROAD PROJECTS 2016-2020 UNDER THE UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY (UNRA)

4.41
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 16 August 2016, I presented the National Roads Development Plan for financial year 2016/2017. The following day, during the Prime Minister’s Question Time, hon. Hamson Obua, Member of Parliament for Ajuri, wanted to know which roads are included in the programme for the period 2016 to 2020, particularly in Northern Uganda. 

I was therefore requested by honourable members to present to the House the Medium Term National Roads Development Programme up to 2020. Mr Speaker, allow me to give the background of the National Roads Development Programme up to 2020. 

The overall Government policy and planning framework for the transport sector is the National Transport Master Plan (NTMP). It covers the period 2008 to 2023 and recognises the importance of the transport sector in unlocking the country’s economic potential, which is necessary to sustain high economic growth rate. 

The National Transport Master Plan also recognises the continued need to reduce costs of doing business through investment in infrastructure. Furthermore, the NTMP puts emphasis on road transport as the dominant mode of movement of goods and services. 

Therefore, Government places emphasis on the provision of technically sound, economically justified, financially and environmentally sustainable infrastructure. The policy and medium term strategy is based on the promotion of affordable, safe, efficient and effective transport sector to support increased agricultural and industrial production, trade, tourism, social and administrative services.

The second National Development Plan (NDPII) of 2015/2016-2019/2010 prioritises investment in transport infrastructure, which includes the upgrading of strategic national roads targeting the roads that support exploitation of minerals, oil and gas, tourism and decongestion of traffic in the city of Kampala. 

The sector now targets to pave 1,500 kilometres of road in the next five years to facilitate the implementation of the development priorities. The manifesto of Government has been analysed to align it with NDPII and to ensure that the aspirations of Ugandans are fully attained within the prescribed period.

The progress 

Mr Speaker, with the above background, I wish to update the House and highlight the status of the National Roads Development Programme. In the last financial year, Uganda National Roads Authority completed the upgrading of 238 kilometres from gravel to paved bituminous standard. 

The following development activities are still on-going:

Road projects under construction;
Road projects under rehabilitation;
Bridge projects under construction;
Road projects under preparation and design and; 
Road projects under procurement to be implemented in the midterm.

Mr Speaker, below is a summary of the projects under each category: 

Under on-going road construction, we are doing 1,268.8 kilometres. 
Under on-going road rehabilitation, we are doing 838.4 kilometres. 
Under projects under preparation and design, we have 1,500 kilometres. 
There are also projects under procurement; that is procurement for design and civil works for roads and bridges. A list of the on-going procurements is attached in the next table. It is a big table and I request honourable members to go through it so that I do not have to read the specifics.

Mr Speaker, more detailed information on the status of the on-going and upcoming road projects is contained in the project status report, which is attached. We are aware that there are other roads proposed by Government for inclusion in the plan, whose details we are yet to confirm but also, unfortunately, for which funding is yet to be identified.

I wish to add that the plans are regularly reviewed to ensure that they are responsive to the prevailing needs and Government priorities.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, UNRA pledges to continue implementing all the Government development plans as envisaged, in the most efficient way, over the midterm period and this will be through a well-coordinated implementation plan that will ensure that the public gets value for money from the investments in public roads. 

The tables attached are under (3). We have the upgrading and road projects, the projects under rehabilitation, the bridges and development projects all grouped together, projects under design, projects under procurement and you will find a list of pipeline projects. These are projects that have been mentioned. We have the good will but the funds have not yet been identified. I submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, as I said before, these are not statements that originate from the minister, which would have fallen under our rule 44. Rather, these are statements that are generated by the House on either questions that have arisen or from the Prime Minister’s Question Time. This one was specifically raised by the Member for Ajuri. Let us have a debate on this matter and I will start with Kinkizi West.

4.49
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi West County, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this presentation. 

I have risen on a matter, which the Minister of Works committed herself on, on the Floor of Parliament the other week and it is about 78.5 kilometres of the Rukungiri-Kihihi-Kanungu Road, whose funding was passed by this Parliament. I am surprised that she has mentioned that there are some roads, which have not got funding. Could this road be among those that have no funding? (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Kaberuka, my colleague, for giving way. I just wanted to give information that what hon. Kaberuka is raising is right that the Rukungiri-Ishasha–Kihihi-Kanungu road is missing in the minister’s report. What I know is that, on the evening of 14 December 2014, this Parliament approved a loan request from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because this road is supposed to be funded by ADB. UNRA was in the process of finalising the procurement process but the best evaluated bidder withdrew and I think a decision has been taken to re-advertise this contract. 

We have been assured that early next year, the civil works should be up and running and therefore, as I give information, I think the honourable minister needs to go on record that this road should be among those, which should be presented in this paper.

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This road has attracted a lot of debate but surprisingly, information from UNRA, which is a government agency, is altered day by day.

The document presented the other day to the people and leadership of Kanungu stated 78.5 kilometres. Last week when we were meeting the Committee on Finance and other committees, you presented 66 kilometres and you gave information to the Members of Parliament that the procurement process for that road was being concluded.

Mr Speaker, Rukungiri and Kanungu are in a mess because their Members of Parliament have no conclusive information to tell the populace as the information is always altered. Should they happen to access this document, what shall we say? Is the road being worked on as you promised or is it a hoax?

4.53
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for the questions. I seek clarification because there is a rumour going on that the Kanungu road has bad luck. Others are telling us that maybe it is no longer going to be worked on. When I do not see it in this report, I get scared like my people.

I would like the minister to assure me that this road is going to be worked on within the stipulated time, like the roads which I saw in the newspapers where Kanungu was included.

4.55
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara West County, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the honourable minister for this information. 

Under number 3; projects under procurement, road number two is the Ishaka-Katunguru road. Mr Speaker, sometimes as Members of Parliament, we do not know where to begin and where to end on certain things. The Ishaka-Katunguru road has been budgeted for and money has been provided for it in the Budget for three consecutive years. Last year, around this time, in Prime Minister’s Question Time - I wish he was here. I asked the question on how far we were on this road and the Prime Minister said it was under procurement.

The year before, around May/June, the same answer was given; that the road was under procurement. Honourable minister, three years down the road, the road is still under procurement. Is procurement something we get from abroad?

Mr Speaker, if we went down to the west, this road connects Uganda to Rwanda and Congo and in the national park, it is now the worst road in the country. You do not want to believe that this is a road that is supposed to promote tourism, foreign trade and so on. 

Honourable minister, I would like a specific answer. What should I tell the people from Bushenyi, Kasese – Should I tell them to vote wisely? They did and there is no doubt about that. That is why I am here. (Interruption)

MR OSEKU: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I am rising in respect of the same situation affecting Tirinyi–Pallisa -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you from Ngora District? 

MR OSEKU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My name is Richard Oseku and I represent Kibale County in Pallisa District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I asked for Ngora District.

MR OSEKU: Yes but now that I am on the Floor, I was giving information -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was giving you information when you had finished?

MR OSEKU: Mr Speaker, as I was saying, I am giving information in respect to the same area and in connection with the road from Tirinyi–Pallisa to Kumi and then Pallisa-Kamonkoli. 

Just like my colleague was saying, this road has, for the last 15 years, been under procurement -(Interjections)- for the last 20 years and this is the same report that was given by the President during campaigns. Work was reported to have commenced in April this year. Here we are in August and the report from the responsible minister is that this road is under procurement.

Unfortunately, today I read from the minister’s report that it is Tirinyi-Pallisa and then Pallisa-Kamonkoli. Kumi has apparently been struck off. I would like to understand from the minister if recent developments have reduced the road. At least I am happy that it is indicated meaning that it is out of the grave where it had been buried. Thank you. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question is, when you say that the road is under procurement – You have heard that theirs has taken 20 years. I have been complaining for three years now. Are you going to procure a carpet road and lay it? We need some explanations. Give us the time frame for some of these activities because the people of Bushenyi, Rubirizi and Kasese are very bitter about that road. Thank you.

5.00
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the minister for your statement. I am going to speak on two issues: one is in regard to the projects that the minister has read; the roads that are in the pipeline, those on-going and those under design.

I will give an example of Ngora. In the 2013/2014 Budget, Ngora was allotted some kilometres of road for tarmacking. It was budgeted for and we passed the Budget in this Parliament but no work was done. The minister has mentioned the on-going projects and those are in the pipeline but Ngora is off the list.

In addition, Aleles Bridge that connects Ngora, Serere and Pallisa has also been struck off the list. I am also wondering because when the President is reading the Budget or giving the State of the Nation Address, the Kumi-Ngora-Serere Road is not mentioned. I wonder where we are now. When it comes to the modus operandi, how do we benefit from the country’s road network?

Finally, I would like to draw the minister’s attention to her concluding statement. She said, “We must ensure that there is value for money.” I will refer to Kampala, the city that accommodates me. Makindye West has the worst roads. If you look at the road that was worked upon when the Queen of England came to Uganda, today it is full of potholes. 

As we take into consideration the design of these roads and value for money, that road has not lasted for four years. What measures is your ministry putting in place to ensure that we have long-lasting roads; roads that will benefit pedestrians and motorists, especially in urban areas like Kampala? (Interruption) 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that I have observed some dangers on the road being constructed in Nansana. The way it is being constructed leaves no provision for pedestrian walkways. In addition, on both sides of the road, are very big trenches and women returning from work in the evening can easily fall in and break their legs. I wonder whether the ministry is supervising the road construction because I reached there and got surprised, Mr Speaker.

I beg the minister, who is here, to take this seriously and talk to those people. Before you pay them our money, we want to see pedestrian walkways. Thank you.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, hon. Karungi. Mr Speaker, whenever we get the opportunity to travel outside the country, what welcomes us is the state of the roads in those particular countries. In Uganda, we are still lagging behind. As the minister undertakes the design for Kampala and its flyovers, let us put Kampala on the map so that when any foreigner arrives in Kampala, they will return to their country with a good impression.

In most cases, when I travel and interact with foreigners, they ask me, “What happens to Uganda; your roads are very small and yet there are many motorists struggling to use the same roads?” Sometimes we just have to be diplomatic. Thank you.

5.03
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very surprised and shocked not to see Kapchorwa-Suam Road, which has been a song for very long. That road is now killing people, especially women, as we cannot access our hospitals. We were told that money was acquired from the African Development Bank. 

Mr Speaker, our colleagues on the Kenyan side have already started work on their side while we, in Uganda, have not even started the paper work. Madam Minister, I would like to hear about the Kapchorwa-Suam Road today. Thank you.

5.05
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, honourable minister, for your report. The report stated that you have targeted roads that support the exploitation of minerals, oil, gas and tourism. 

Buliisa district has Murchison Falls National Park, which is a major tourist attraction. We have Bugungu Wildlife Reserve, Budongo Forest and the biggest number of oil wells. However, I am very surprised that the Minister of Works has not taken note of working on the road that comes from Masindi to Wanseko and from Hoima to Wanseko. I request the ministry to take note of this road.

Right now, Mr Speaker, we have heavy trucks that ferry waste from Buliisa District and they have worsened this road. I request the minister to indicate this road as one of the priorities. Thank you.

5.07
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the updates on the status of on-going and upcoming road projects in the country. I am very happy that for the first time, Karamoja has seen a tarmac road, that is, Moroto-Nakapiripirit. It is also good that some of our roads are in the plan. However, there is fear that on this Moroto-Nakapipirit Road, the marble trucks will destroy it within a very short period. Honourable minister, you need to do something to address that. Give us weigh bridges because the lorries that carry marble stones are so heavy and will destroy that road.

In the Ninth Parliament, we passed a loan for the Muyende-Nakapiripirit road and the honourable members in this House then, looked at the Contingency Fund and saw that it was big enough and there was a proposal that the money be taken to Amudat to construct a road from Nakapiripirit junction to Amudat District.

I am seeking clarification from the Minister, on page 19; number 23, the Minister is talking about civil works for upgrading 92 kilometers from Moroto – Nakapiripirit to paved standard and 25 secondary link roads. I would like to find out about this secondary link road; are you referring to the junction from Nakapiripirit to Amudat? Thank you.

5.09
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kaberamaido is a peninsula and it is a link to many districts. It is a shortcut from Soroti, Karamoja, Lango, coming into Buganda through Nakasongola. The road Kiri- Katine through Kalaki up to Ochero and going on to Nakasongola was already on the list.

The people of Kaberamaido voted and smiled when they saw the works on the bridges. However, the road has disappeared from the list. Our people are really distressed and do not know what to do. I see several Members from the link road; I see Nakasongola and many other people, we are all talking about the same link. What is the problem?

We have to be serious. The principle of equality and equity must apply to all districts. It is very unfair to have a road put on the list in last year’s budget and then, in this year’s budget, we do not find it. What do we tell our people?  (Interjections)  I have the information, Mr Speaker, can I finish? Let me explain what happened.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are on record, honourable member. Do not start negotiating (Laughter)

MS ERAGU: Mr Speaker, it is the road that has been delayed and the problem is that it is not being worked on. Thank you.

5.12
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for this presentation; in particular, mentioning Luwero-Butalango and Butalango-Ngoma Road, for tarmacking. However, this road has been under design for the last seven years. I would like to find out from the minister, how long does it take to design a road, yet the money for this road was identified in 2010? Up to now, the loan processing has not yet been finalised.

Under the bridges, Kabale Bridge has been mentioned. This is the bridge that connects Kyankwanzi to Ngoma. Many Members of Parliament have travelled on the canoe from Kyankwanzi to Ngoma. This is a stretch of one kilometre but it has taken a whole parliamentary term to construct. Is this value for money? Once you borrow money, you pay interest commitment fee on it. If it is utilised at a very slow pace, it becomes expensive. 

I conclude by requesting the minister to include, Kayonza-Migera Bridge. This project was partially started on and the road up to Kayonza and from Migera to the Aswan was opened up. What is remaining now is constructing the bridge. However, I am surprised that it has not been mentioned here. Madam Minister, can we have it included, please? This is the Kayonza-Oyite Ojok-Migera Bridge. I thank you.

5.14
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for this statement. In the Budget Frame Work Paper, in the background for the fiscal budget for 2016/2017, we had Ora bridge, which connect Offaka to Okollo sub-county; we also had Ijii Bridge, that connects Anyiribu Offaka and Uleppi Road. 

In this list, the two bridges have gone missing. The Ora Bridge was constructed in 2005 – a foot bridge was constructed by hon. John Arimadri that was the area Member of Parliament. After two years, this bridge was swept off by the floods. In the Budget Frame Work Paper, it was said that the contract for these two bridges was already signed. If the contract was already signed, why are bridges left out in this list? 

The two bridges have for over ten years been under procurement. This time round, when the contract was signed, we were hopeful that they would be constructed. However, now that they have been left out of the list, what plans does the honourable minister have to have them constructed? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.16
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamoji County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. I would like to first of all make one observation. When I read through the table, there are some roads, which are planned for upgrading, which actually run parallel to the existing roads. They even go to the same destination.

I think honourable minister, you need to revise the way you prioritise the roads. I may not want to mention them here but I can give you the list. However, you find two roads that start from the same point, and run parallel to the same destination. I think this is not worth it.

We have been receiving promises from the President, pledging that the road from Buwenge via Luzinga, Nalugodya, Kaliro, Saaka and Pallisa is planned for upgrading. However, honorable minister, you might not be very conversant with Busoga sub-region. This region is composed of ten districts and of these, the road I am talking about connects five; in other words half of the whole of Busoga.

It starts from Jinja via Kamuli, to Luuka, Iganga, Kaliro then joins Pallisa. It is interregional, I can say, connecting Busoga to Bekedea sub region. I am surprised that road is not appearing here.

There are some roads that I feel are less important but included. I want to implore you, honourable minister, to prioritise that road. It has been pending. The President has been speaking about it but if it is not included, I do not think we shall have good explanations to our people.  (Interruption)

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, colleague, for giving way. The road the honourable member is talking about comes from Kamuli, Bulopa, Kaliro and other places. However, there is a trick in this ministry. They came out with an issue and touched only two sub-counties in order to make the Members comfortable.

I would like to inform the honourable member that the road you are talking about has been only mentioned in two sub-counties. I do not know where it starts from and where it ends; that is Kamuli to Bulopa. We do not have such a road but we have one from Kamuli, Bulopa up to Kaliro. Thank you.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for the information. Honourable minister, I hope the point has been driven home. We need to consider the efficiency and viability of this project. How far does it connect in the region before we take a decision on which road we should start with when we are considering a particular region.

Therefore, the roads from Buwenge to Kaliro connecting to Pallisa via Osaka Bridge should be considered and captured so that it is reflected in your plan. Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker.

5.20
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Going to any home or any village or town or even looking at any individual, you look at the front. 

Some other places call it “kyenyi”, others “anyim” and others call it “nyime”; meaning the forehead. The forehead of our district has lasted for over 25 years connecting Butaleja, Busolwe, Tororo. The Namutumba, Budumba, Nabumali road is long overdue. We have been having hope. In fact, as we were campaigning, we were telling voters that people of Tororo and Bukedea would have alternative routes.

Madam Minister, this thing was there before you came in. Didn’t you feel comfortable with it or it was a typing error that could have caused the disappearance of this. (Laughter) I believe it is just a typing error because the President was very passionate about these roads. How do we go back and tell the people the good President of Uganda could have been economical with the statements when he was campaigning? How do we do that?

Save us the embarrassment. One day, it is in newspapers and another day -(Interruption)

MS NYAKECHO: The information I would like to give my colleague is related to the other forehead; the Tororo- Mbale road, which I did not see reflected in this report.

Madam Minister, I do not know whether you are aware that this road is supposed to be under construction because it is incomplete. However, for now, work has stalled. What are you doing about the corruption levels in your ministry?

We need a status report on the issue of corruption in your ministry. Why do you start up a road, a major high way like the Malaba-Mbale High Way, which connects -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you start using, “why” “because,” it is no longer information. It is now a debate. Are you now debating?

MS NYAKECHO: Sorry and thank you for the correction. I withdraw the two words, “because” and “why”. The Mbale-Kumi high way is a major road that connects to South Sudan. Work has stalled for more than five years. I want added that information so that you arm yourself better.

MR OBOTH: Thank you for that very useful information. The Tororo, Mbale road was built in 1952. It lasted for very many years until Dott Services came to try to repair it. They actually spoilt it. The one from Tororo to Soroti was spoilt as well.  We need that road to be restored to the former glory where tarmac was real tarmac. 

Madam Minister, the attrition rate in this House is greatly painful. However, sometimes, they say that politicians are liars; this is because sometimes a road appears on the list to do and you get excited and tell you voters and then, later it disappears. Please, bear with us.

We have made the appropriations here. Do you want us also to turn our backs and turn where there is no bed? Will it be good for the Ministry of Works? You are giving us what other people call air. We are not children to play with balloons. We need real things and we need the roads. I thank you, Mr Speaker. I take the information from the honourable minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have finished, hon. Oboth.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to inform my colleague that after Dott Services spoilt the Tororo Mbale road, they have been given Tororo-Soroti and Nakalama Tirinyi to Mbale road, which they have also spoilt.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, information will be endless. Somebody should listen to us, the representatives. Minister of Works, Kumi has the same information going towards Soroti. (Interjections) I receive the information. (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give is that Dott Services has really spoilt the roads beyond any imagination. The road that runs from Iganga to Mbale has bridges that are incomplete. The road has become more dangerous than before. I remember somebody saying that that company was blacklisted and yet, they are coming back for work.

This time, mzee is saying this “kisanja hakuna mchezo.” We shall not allow that kind of work. Thank you.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember in the Ninth Parliament, Dott Services company Ltd was blacklisted and after that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Blacklisted by whom?

MR GILBERT OLANYA: It was a recommendation from Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it was not blacklisted. Do you have confirmation that it was blacklisted?

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Yes, Mr Speaker. Parliament recommended that Dott Services Company Ltd should be blacklisted. It looks as if Government did not take action and up to now, they continue to give contracts to this company.

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Government to continue awarding contracts to a company that Parliament recommended for blacklisting?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, with the exception of a few constitutional resolutions passed by this House, the rest of the resolutions are advisory. I wish you had information to the effect that this company was actually blacklisted but you do not have it. So, I am unable to guide on that. 

MR OBOTH: And even if Dott Services was to be blacklisted, it is a dot service; you can blacklist one dot and leave the rest. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, it is painful we can laugh over this matter; infrastructural development defines the level of development in any country.

We have enough money; people who are swindling money in this country go for projects where they can get kickbacks. We are accountable to the people. The President of this country is accountable to people; we get embarrassed sometimes when people say they cannot vote him, they cannot vote NRM, they cannot vote Oboth because he lied to them.

The new minister should help us; if it was procedurally allowed, I would kneel - and I am kneeling in my heart even when I am standing tall. Thank you, very much. 

5.25
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Government and most especially the minister of Works for the statement he has given. I would like to thank them for the feasibility study that has been made on upgrading the Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Acholi Bur from Masindi Road that has been long overdue and we pray it takes shape. 

I would like to thank them for the road from Lira to Kamdini, which was one of the roads that were worked on by Dott Services. 

It is hardly three years but the road is no more, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring to your attention the Apak Bridge, in Lira District. We do not have any Apak Bridge in Lira District; that particular bridge is in Otuke- (Interruption)

MS SILVIA AKELLO: Thank you, very much for giving me the opportunity. I would like to give information that the name is appearing in Lira because this contract was awarded when Apak was still under Lira District, around 2007 to 2008.

To date it is no yet finished; there was another road, which was constructed due to the issue of insecurity which is not even due for work now, meaning Otuke as a district is about to be a landlocked district within a landlocked country. (Laughter) Please, I would like to request the minister to do us a favour because if - God forbid - any El Nino comes, that means Otuke will not be passable. Secondly-

THE DEPUTY SEPAKER: Are you still giving information, honourable member? (Laughter) I was about to give you the opportunity to debate. 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much. The minister has learnt that Apak Bridge does not exist in Lira District; it is in Otuke. But Madam Minister I would like to bring to your attention the bridges that are in Lira and that are really very important. Construction work has begun on some of the bridges but it is over ten years. One of them is Agwa Bridge that connects Lira District to Omoro District the Deputy Speaker’s constituency. That bridge has been there for the last ten years. I do not know why it is not captured in the data of the Ministry of works. 

Another very important bridge is Kaguta bridge that was a presidential pledge. They had started working on it and what is lacking now is slabbing. However, the contractors have disappeared from the site. I do not know what became of it; it is five years down the road, that bridge has never been completed. 

The President gave that pledge on purpose, because over 300 people of Barlonyo were killed because of lack of roads. Another bridge is Aswa that connects Lira to Pader District. 

That is a very important road but now the people of Pader are passing through a very small road and are breaking the district roads that have been constructed. 

The Ministry of Works should act on this very fast. This is a major road that connects Lira to Pader up to Kitgum; over one year the bridge broke down and nobody is taking action. I feel Aswa Bridge, Kaguta Bridge and Agwa Bridge should be included in the list of the bridges that are supposed to be completed. Thank you very much. 

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement but to inform you that a very important stretch on this batch of roads that are under procurement - the civil works for upgrading Bumbobi-Lwakhakha is supposed to have Bubulo-Bududa but Bududa has been omitted.

This is a crucial portion of the road because of Bududa Hospital. In anticipation of making Bududa Hospital dust free it was included on that stretch to be tarmacked but it has been left out either by commission or omission. 

In the pipeline, you have Bududa-Bulucheke to be tarmacked; will vehicles just summersault from Bubulo to Bududa then to Bulucheke? These are questions that flood my mind. But I request that you do more homework on these to rectify these anomalies. 

5.33
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have looked at the statement by the minister. I would like to thank you for this update.

Last year while the President was campaigning in Kisoro, he promised that the tourism roads would be tarmacked. He went ahead and included that in the State of the Nation Address and one of the roads to be tarmacked was Kisoro-Mgahinga National Park, a very important road knowing the importance of tourism to this nation.
 
For your information, honourable minister, this road leads to the famous gorillas. I noticed that it is nowhere in your list; it is not even thought of. Do you mean to say that it was a typographical error, some other omission or something else? Thank you very much.

5.35
MR NOAH OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for this constructive and good statement. 
However, I have one concern; last year, when His Excellency the President was campaigning; he told the people of Yumbe that the road from Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo would be tarmacked. 

I would be comfortable if the minister had mentioned something about that road. I am not seeing it anywhere and it is not even appearing under design. What is the fate of that road, Madam Minister? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just been doing a survey of the country to see whether the statements are the same; that there are roads that are not contained in the minister’s statement that should have been there. That means the statement is incomplete. (Lt Col Byekwaso rose_) Let me hear from UPDF.

LT COL BYEKWASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of clarification from an observation I have made. When you look at most of these roads – I do not know the magic behind the three years and I do not know if you have noted that most of roads are given time schedule of three years. A road of 110 kilometres is three years, a road of 65 kilometres is three years, a road of 37 kilometres is three years and a road of 107 kilometres is three years. They are all three years. 

I am just wondering if you are going to do 65 or 57 kilometres of roads in three years yet you are also doing 100 kilometres in three years; what is it with three years? Are you not losing more money? There are factors like inflation, changes in dollar rates; wouldn’t it be better if you made it a shorter period? I am seeking that clarification. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mbale Municipality - which region have I not covered - Mityana, Kyenjojo? I just want to get a feel of this debate. The indication is that the list is not comprehensive, in which case we will have to make some requests after we hear from Mbale, Kyenjojo and Mityana.

5.39 
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  While answering questions on this Floor, the Prime Minister once told us that they were constructing roads according to economic viability and how those roads were going to contribute towards the economy of this country.

I come from a coffee growing area and for that matter, the best coffee in the world. Arabica, Bugisu AAA, is the best coffee in the world. However, when I hear roads being mentioned and some list has been given about those roads in the pipeline, I do not see the road which the President promised the people of Budadiri, Namagumba to be constructed.

Mr Speaker, that part of Uganda makes this country stand. When you look at the export of this country today -(Interruption)

MR WOBOYA: I am the Member of Parliament for Budadiri East where that road hon. Wamanga Wamai is talking about is located. 

First of all, there is a colleague who talked about tourism. Apart from coffee, this road leads us to Mountain Elgon tourism area. However, for several financial years, it is either under design, under procurement and we do not know which is which.

Mr Speaker, as we talk now, it is completely impassable because of the rains. Therefore, why this deliberate move to frustrate our farmers? That is the information I wanted to give. Thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much. If I was in Government, I would go to those areas and win the hearts of those people. The President promised to work on the road from Nalugugu-Mutufu-Budadiri-Buwalasi-Namagumba. That is on the political side.

However, on the economic side, we contribute a great deal to this nation. Why have you forgotten us? Shall we now send our coffee through Kenya?  Shall we smuggle it through Kenya? We want coffee to reach Mbale.

Mr Speaker, in that part of the world, when you enter a taxi, they ask you “are you going to push”? If you are a lady and you are a weak person, you do not board the taxi because the roads are impassable. They keep pushing the cars. But the most important thing is that we contribute to the economy of this country the best coffee. That is almost the only export we are sending out. The fish is not there, the cotton is not there, it is only a little bit of tea and the coffee from Bugisu. So, if you forget Bugisu, then the economy of this country will go down. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not a debate. We are cataloguing information to the minister, which she did not contain in her statement. It is not a debate.  Honourable minister, your statement is incapable of debate because it does not cover the areas represented in this House. Are we going to go on cataloguing or are we going to ask the minister to come with a complete and proper list that covers everyone so that we can - (Applause). Not a single member has risen and debated. We have all just supplied information that this is missing, this was there and it has disappeared. It is not a debate. How do we proceed, honourable minister?

5.46
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to admit an error about Kanungu and I would like to confirm to Members that that road is going to be done. After very many administrative reviews, procurement was cancelled but it has been reinitiated -(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. I appreciate the minister’s efforts. However, Mr Speaker, I pray that you direct the minister, like you said, that road be brought in a written statement, we can have it documented so that our people can believe that what she is talking about is real but not mere words as usual.  Thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have asked you - from what I have gathered from the Members and from what I have suggested, would you like to pick it from there and do something or you think your response can be sufficient enough to deal with everything?

MS NTEGE: Mr Speaker, I wish to add that the plans are regularly reviewed to ensure that they are responsive to the prevailing needs and Government priorities. I have also said that the implementation is well coordinated and that it will ensure the public gets value for money - (Interruption)

MR KAFUUZI: Mr Speaker, Members have been telling us about roads for which money was procured and set aside. Now, the minister is telling us that plans are reviewed depending on the circumstances. Is it in order for roads, for which money has been appropriated and approved by this House, to be reviewed as the minister is saying? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This House can only know that money that has been appropriated has not been utilised properly when we have reports from the Public Accounts Committee. We have no other way of knowing. Even with the minister’s statement alone for now, we cannot say that she has now said money was not used to do the roads because we have no way of crosschecking that. Unless the Auditor-General submits a report to this House that the money you appropriated was not used for the purpose for which it was intended, we are unable to make that judgment at this time. So, I am unable to make that ruling at this time on the point of order.

Honourable minister, I am going to ask again and this time, I would like you to read my lips- (Laughter)- Do you think the answer you are going to give now will satisfy and plug in all the gaps that are being raised by the Members? If not, how do you intend to proceed in a way that will make the House properly briefed?

MS NTEGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise counsel. I am requesting for more time and this time not just one week, so that I come back with an answer because the questions are many.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, even when the President is giving statements, you can see the catalogue of the list that he presents. We gave the minister one week to bring these things and the time was not sufficient. She has asked that we give her more time so that we look at the list where we can all have a say. 

Now, the whole thing will come back with the list and then, we can ask about what happened and how far because it would all be catalogued. We will understand it better than this particular one. Any member who has risen to speak has spoken about what is missing in the list.

So, can we give the minister time to do this again so that when she comes back, we are able to do it properly? Thank you.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. She has conceded that there were gaps and she is going to compile and bring a comprehensive detail of the status of the roads and the bridges. We are sorry that we gave her only one week, but it is not appropriate to leave it just like that. Why don’t we give it a timeline and say two weeks or one month so that-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how much time would you need?

MS NTEGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The questions are many. There are roads, which are supposed to be on the list and they are not. There are roads that have been omitted by mistake. There are roads that have been pledged and they have not been mentioned.

I need to consult; so, I request to be given two months. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is what is acceptable. Go do your best and whatever you have done, come back in three weeks. If you are not ready, come and ask for more time. If you are ready, you will proceed but come back after three weeks and update the House on what you have done. Is that fair? 

MS NTEGE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. May I also request the Members to submit to me all these pledges because it has been rather difficult for me to-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The presidential pledges might not be within the knowledge of the minister. Honourable Members, if you have statements to this effect, let us see how to circulate them and they are all put together so that it is comprehensive. Is that okay? That includes Adjumani. Thank you. It is coming to 6 O’clock and we normally rise at that time.

What is the state of the other matter that was deferred? Is the copy of the motion circulated?

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL UNDER ARTICLE 94(4)(b) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when this matter came, copies of the motion were not available. Are the copies of the motion available? 

Honourable Members, this is how I would guide on the best way to handle this matter. Let us receive the motion and defer debate. The motion that is on the Order Paper is seeking leave for a Private Member to bring a Bill. Therefore, the member is seeking the permission of the House so that he can be allowed to bring a Private Member’s Bill. That is what the motion is about.

Can we allow him present the motion, we defer debate and if we are ready to debate it tomorrow, we can do that whether we are going to give him leave or not. Can we receive the motion?

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Wouldn’t it  be procedurally right, now that we have received copies of this motion that we go, sleep over the matter and tomorrow, the Member brings the motion and we discuss it when we have his words fresh in our minds? It is because, as you see right now, most Members have already gone.

MR KAFEERO: Mr Speaker, whereas the suggestion of my sister, hon. Nambooze, is good, the motion is not on record of Parliament. Honourable Members just have hard copies which have not been put on record. 

I hereby pray that I put the motion on record by moving it here and then, the Members can be allowed to debate tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that would have also been my understanding because we do not have a motion. What are we now deferring? Let him present the motion; he may not even speak to it but receive it as the House and defer all other matters to tomorrow or next week. There is no harm. Then, you take a decision on whether to accept it or not during the debate.

Can we do that? He is going to do that in about five minutes only.

MR KAFEERO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling-(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I know so well that you are a very good lawyer, and also one of those who believe in Constitutionalism.

Mr Speaker, the matter we are talking about is amendment of the Constitution. The procedural issue I am raising; wouldn’t it be better, as Parliament, to put the Public on notice that we would like to amend the Constitution so that anybody who has views, brings them to Parliament? If we go on now, because we only want one article or two, and tomorrow, I also come with another Article; what are we going to do? This Constitution was made to stay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought it was procedure.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it was made to stay but not to be amended every now and then that we think about it. Mr Speaker, I recall last year in October-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me just say this. That is the debate you want to have on the motion. Not so? That we cannot give this Member permission to do this because of the following reasons; that would be the debate on whether or not we should give him the Bill. Is that not the point? 

Right now, the procedural point you are moving is on nothing. The argument you are making should be made for rejecting the motion. That is my opinion because right now there is nothing we are talking about.

If he had presented the motion, those would be the strong arguments you use, like you have articulated. That no, we cannot give him leave for the following reasons. However, in my opinion, we cannot use this House to block the right of Members to express themselves. (Applause) Therefore, we can receive the motion and when we are debating it, bring all those arguments, “That we will not give you leave for the following reasons: Let a comprehensive proposal for the amendment of the Constitution come; an undertaking was made to the House and let us have – so, we will not give you leave to attempt to amend the Constitution.” That would be, in my opinion, the right way to handle this.

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: Just with your indulgence, Mr Speaker, I have institutional memory. Hon. Dr Lulume brought here a transitional motion and I recall, it was blocked even to be laid at the Table. I would love you to continue leading us as you have been. We are all interested in amending the Constitution. The issue, which our colleague is raising now was debated. What has made him change his mind, within six months, yet he was in the House? We would plead with you, Mr Speaker, to have a very good amendment. If you blocked Dr Lulume, why can’t you block engineer Hon. Ssekitoleko who is good at engineering both papers and motions?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are just separating the issues. Please, take it from the chair. The issue is whether this Member is entitled to seek leave of the House not whether the Bill that he will present will be passed by this House. It is whether he has a right to request the House to present a private Members’ Bill. As to whether, what he is going to bring can succeed is another matter altogether. 

However, does he have a right to request the House? If you want to stop him even from requesting the House, I do not know how it augurs to the spirit of the House.

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I am a non-apologetic defender of anybody’s rights to speak about any matters they believe are legitimate. However, at the same time, I am aware of the fact that no Member has a right to move Parliament in circles. The matter at hand was debated less than six months ago and rejected. It is the same matter that the Member is bringing on the Floor of Parliament to simply congest the Order Paper.

From the onset, the Members should have been guided that Parliament debated this matter. At the end of the debate, the Minister for Constitutional Affairs who is here and was a minister then promised Parliament to come back with comprehensive reforms. The Member has no right to short circuiting commitment by a Government minister who is still in the same docket to bring reforms and instead engage us in pastel reforms that are going to move Parliament in circles. Therefore, is the member-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are debating a motion that is not before us. That is my problem –(Interjections)- No, it is not information that is debating the motion now. The motion is not before us. Those arguments are for blocking the Member from being given permission to present the Bill. I thought that is it? All the arguments being presented are to say, “We will not give you permission” - leave is permission to present it.

However, he has not presented and requested you –(Laughter)- Therefore, are we debating the motion before it is there? That is what it is now. The submission of hon. Nandala-Mafabi of Budadiri is that this Member should not be given leave. The submission from hon. Mpuuga is that he should not be given leave. He has not yet requested the leave. Circulation of the motion does not mean he has presented it. Let me guide the House. We are not proceeding properly by attempting to debate a motion that is not yet before us.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I was elected as a Member of Parliament for Kikinzi East like all my colleagues were to come to this House. When we were swearing in, we were given the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Rules of Procedure, which we have read. Both documents clearly give a back bench Member of Parliament a right to move a Private Member’s Bill.

I have my own views on the motion. I will not support it but it would be wrong to block a back bench Member from moving a Private Member’s Bill, which right is given by the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure. 

Therefore, is it procedurally correct for us, Members of Parliament, to undermine our own rights, which are clearly spelt out in the Constitution that as back bench Members of Parliament we can move Private Member’s Bills but the House reserves the right to vote on those Bills?

We can vote against that but the right of the Member should not be shot down by us who are elected to be in this House. I wanted to get procedural guidance from you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. However, you have even taken it beyond what I was saying, for you are saying that his rights should be given. I am saying this House reserves the right to give him. However, the right that cannot be taken away from him is to request the House that honourable members and colleagues, I am seeking your permission to bring a Private Member’s Bill. Then the House can say, “No, we will not give you permission.” The House reserves that right to deny permission or grant leave to bring the Bill and the reasons are clear as articulated by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Mpuuga. 

That would be to understand, but to say, “No, do not even ask us” –(Laughter)- would be irregular.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, with due respect to your guidance and due sensitivity to this motion that seeks to - which the Member may be entitled to as of right, and it would be unbecoming of us to reject one’s right if we are defenders of people’s rights. A right to be heard is a fundamental right; I would be the last person to stand here and say one does not have that right, but be it as it may, my humble procedural point I would like you to guide this House about is that since this requires a fresh presentation, the Member should speak for it and then, it is debated afresh. 

So, my humble appeal would be that this presentation should be made tomorrow. He makes his presentation and we debate other than calling him the next day to give a justification. My humble view is that it goes to tomorrow and we debate it and the presentation takes place tomorrow not today. I would beg to submit. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was a procedural point. You want to rule on it?

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate your indulgence and your magnanimity is not unrecognisable. If my memory serves me right, this House not necessarily the Tenth Parliament, I remember well agreeing to the establishment of a Constitutional Review Commission and when I saw this matter on the Order Paper, I was surprised. I thought that the Member would have been guided by either the Clerk to Parliament or the Legal Department that there is a saved agreement by the Parliament then -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, honourable with all the respect I have for you, that is the argument to stop him from being given leave.

MR KARUHANGA: I would like to conclude, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is where my problem is as presiding officer. Those are the arguments you are going to advance to deny the Member leave, but not to stop him even from asking the House. He has already presented a motion; at this stage, all he wants is to ask the House, “Please, give me permission.”

Now, you want to say, “Do not even ask us for permission.” That is irregular. What would be proper is for him to ask us to give him permission and then we say, “No, for the following reasons, there was an undertaking like you are articulating, we will not give you leave. We will vote against your request and it will stop there.” But to say that, “Do not even ask” we will not be proceeding well. 

We now need to reach an arrangement that when we resume, he will present his motion; we will debate it, reject it or approve it. That will be our mandate because the time has now passed for us to continue. We need to go when we know that tomorrow, we will be coming to receive the motion, debate it, approve it or reject it. Would that be proper?
 
So, honourable member, you will be presenting your motion tomorrow; the House will either accept it or reject it.

MR KAFEERO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for ably guiding the House and I will be ready to present it tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us leave this matter. If we are going to receive the motion tomorrow and debate it, it is up to us. If we reject it, we say, “Let the bigger process handle this.”  The House is adjourned to tomorrow 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.12 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 August 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
