


Thursday, 4 August 2022

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and also congratulate some of you who keep time. (Applause)

I am in receipt of a letter dated 2nd of August from the Leader of the Opposition, appointing Hon. Katabaazi as the Shadow Minister for East African Community Affairs. This is pursuant to Rule 14(2) of the Rules of Procedure. Take note of that communication. I wish you well.

We will shorten our communication because we have matters of national importance. Thank you. We have Hon. Asinansi Nyakato –(Member rose_) Yes, procedure?

2.03
MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE (independent, isingiro west county, isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a procedural matter under Rule 44(4). On 11 November 2021, I presented a matter of national importance in this Parliament. Nine months down the road, I have never got any response. 

On 14 July 2022, it was –

THE SPEAKER: Under Rule 44, I do not see subrule (4).

MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE: It is Rule 45(4).
 
THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE: On 14 July 2022, it was on the Order Paper. However, I am not seeing it on the Order Paper or business to follow. It was about land grabbing and destruction of people's trees in Namanve. At the time I presented it, there were no structures. Right now, in that forest reserve, there are over 10 structures, including shopping malls.
 
Madam Speaker, my prayer is that I get my reply on the matter I presented. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your question was under Questions for Oral Answer. Not so?

MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It was actually an urgent question, not a question for an oral answer. If it were for oral answer, it should have been responded to there and then.

MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE: Madam Speaker, at that time, the minister in charge was not around. They promised that they were going to contact them and give me a response. You know that justice delayed is justice denied. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister?

2.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague for the follow-up question on this important matter. I will follow it up with the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development together with the one for investment - and ourselves - to attend to this matter and get in touch with the Member. If need be, we will come and update the House on how far we have gone.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Could we have that on Tuesday?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we will.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. Since morning, I have been getting a lot of messages on my phone on the state of Science teachers versus Arts teachers as well as the deputy headteachers and headteachers who are scientists. It is now known that Science teachers have got their Shs 4 million. 

However, the headteachers and deputy headteachers who are also scientists have been left out. What is trending in the public domain is that the deputy headteachers want to be demoted to classroom teachers so that they get the money.

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we get the Minister of Public Service and the Minister of Education and Sports to come and explain this discrepancy? Parliament pronounced itself on equal and equitable payment for teachers. It is the children who are going to suffer. Teachers will be at the schools, but teaching is not going to be done. We should not hide our heads in the sand. 

As I conclude on the procedural matter, teachers are saying they are not going to mark PLE, O’ Level and A’ Level exams. They said they are not going to apply for marking. 

Therefore, isn’t it procedurally right that Parliament does something as fast as possible? Nobody is against Science teachers, but the discrepancy is going to kill some children. The results will display each and everything, but the sufferer will be the parent who has paid his or her taxes.

You heard what the Prime Minister said here yesterday. When you go to Public Service, they say they are going to pay teachers in 2026 - those who have not got. However, I have been talking to some minister who said “no, it is going to be in a phased manner.” Yet, it attracts retirement benefits, whereas others are not going to get the same. 

Madam Speaker, I would pray that if it is procedurally right, we get the Minister of Education and Sports and the Minister of Public Service to explain this matter clearly – whether they are ready to demote Science headteachers and their deputies to go back and teach rather than head schools. Otherwise -

THE SPEAKER: When you talk about an immediate thing that the House should do, suggest a resolution.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, you gave the guidance and what we agreed upon here is paying equitably. However, it is evident that the pay for scientists has skyrocketed against others, but their immediate supervisors - the headteachers, who are even scientists - have not been catered for. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the minister? You have taken too long, saying the same thing.

MR SSEWUNGU: It is painful, Madam Speaker – and I cannot hesitate saying -

THE SPEAKER: Please, sit. The minister has understood.

2.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): What we understand from Hon. Ssewungu is that we all agree that we are starting with the scientists and we will enhance salaries in a phased manner. However, the question you are asking and the information you got is that there is a discrepancy between the science teachers and headteachers. 

I would like to inform you that the Ministry of Public Service – as you have realised, the July salaries have delayed. The reason was that there has been harmonisation and reconciliation of that particular issue. Therefore, the Minister for Public Service will make a statement on Tuesday regarding that issue. Thank you.

MR MACHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the point of clarification – (Hon. Ssewungu rose_)  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, your colleague is talking.

MR MACHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stood on a point of clarification to the minister; that we have heard the Minister of Public Service on many forums giving different statements concerning the salaries that Hon. Ssewungu talked about. 

I am seeking clarification from you and from the Prime Minister, whether you know that that policy has killed the morale of teachers in schools. Do you know that there is no teaching taking place in Government schools? I would like to know whether you know that the policy that you are trying to implement will totally kill the education standards of this country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I advise this way? Can we have the Ministers of Public Service and Education and Sports in the House so that we have this issue resolved once and for all? 

We are talking to Hon. Bahati, but he is not the Minister of Public Service. We need this resolved. Can we have the Minister of Public Service?

MR NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am standing on a matter of procedure. We have suffered as a country of drought. Where I come from and across the country, many farmers had failed crops. Normally, the Government gives out seeds around this time to these farmers. Unfortunately, much of the money that was to be given out to farmers was relocated to the Parish Development Model. 

Now, there are a lot of challenges with the Parish Development Model. Today, I heard from a press conference by UBOS that they have been able to collect only one per cent of the data that is required to start the implementation of the Parish Development Model. 

Madam Speaker, given the fact that crops failed, the farmers in this country really needed support from the Government with the seeds to plant for the next season now that the rains have started. 

As a House, will we proceed very well when our farmers - the people we represent are suffering?  The rains have come, but they do not have seeds to plant –(Interruption)

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue that has been raised by the honourable is very important. From the time these rains started just a few days ago, I have received over 100 calls of people asking for seeds. This is a very serious matter that we should consider as a quick intervention. How I wish in your prayers you requested that that component of seeds be pulled out from PDM as a quick intervention as a short term measure. Thank you. 

MR NSAMBA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for the information. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Prime Minister should give us a quick solution to this problem. This is because initially, they thought they will give farmers seeds through PDM. PDM is a nonstarter for now yet, the rains have started. Madam Speaker, the farmers need our response to this. 

THE SPEAKER: I like the way you smuggle in your matters. (Laughter)

2.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nsamba has raised a matter and largely responded to it. He has eased my job.

Beginning this financial year, we pooled resources for seedlings and inputs under NAADS and consolidated everything into the Parish Development Model. The Parish Development Model is not a non-starter. I wish to inform this House that we are starting the Parish Development Model and the farmers will be able to access the funds through the parish SACCOs.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you aware that farming is done in seasons?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, we are cognisant of that and that is why our plan is to release Shs 50 million this quarter. In the quarter of January, we will release another Shs 50 million making a total of Shs 100 million per parish.

THE SPEAKER: When do you release the Shs 50 million? We are already in the month of August. Honourable minister, this is already the time for planting. When are you releasing the money for seedlings?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, for the SAACOs that are ready, we have the funds available.

THE SPEAKER: I am not saying that you do not have the funds available. I am asking when you are releasing the money.

MR MUSASIZI: May be, what I need to inform the House is that for the Parish Development Model, we are sending money directly to the SACCO. 

THE SPEAKER: Have you sent it? 

MR MUSASIZI: For those that are ready, we are about to start sending the money. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had told the minister to give us the status of the Parish Development Model on Tuesday. We want the status; we want to know which SACCOs have got the money. Where have you put the money that you have removed from all the other - because you have cut everybody's money. We want to know how much money, as of now, you have for the Parish Development Model. Honourable minister, stop speaking Rukiga there. (Laughter) I am talking to you. I want that on Tuesday.

Honourable members, I have already given an order. Let him bring it and then we debate it when he has brought the statement.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for that guidance. However, that does not answer the question I raised. 

Madam Speaker, as you guide, you should also ask the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come here and tell us the immediate intervention. The truth is, across the country, crops failed and that is a fact. The farmers are stuck. They do not know what to do. That is the little we want you to appreciate, Honourable Minister.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, yesterday you directed me to bring a statement here on Tuesday. We are working towards that. It will be comprehensive enough to give the House the required information. 

I would like to ask that further questions in regard to the Parish Development Model be put to me on Tuesday after I have presented the statement. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, let us have everything on the Parish Development Model on Tuesday. We need to understand how much money was allocated for agriculture. If it was allocated for agriculture - most of our people are farmers. How much is allocated for agriculture? How much is for the other sectors. In addition, how do you plan to have them get that money? The time wasted will make our people fail to benefit from that money. Therefore, you need to look at it. Let us hear from Hon. Nyakato.

2.20
MS ASINANSI NYAKATO (FDC, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the woman Member of Parliament for Hoima City, and the Shadow Minister for Energy and Mineral Development. 

Madam Speaker, next week on Tuesday, our neighbor, Kenya is going to have general elections. As a country, we import 80 per cent -

THE SPEAKER: Finance, what have they said? Next week on Tuesday, Kenya is going to have general elections; this is also coming to you.

MS ASINANSI NYAKATO: Thank you, for the intervention, Madam Speaker. Uganda imports 80 per cent of its petroleum products through Kenya. Owing to the experience of 2007 general elections in Kenya, that resulted into post-election violence, as a country we should always be prepared to stock enough fuel in case of any crisis. It is just few days to that election; it is happening next week on Tuesday. 

I would like the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to update the House and Ugandans at large, about the steps that Government has taken to prepare in terms of emergency responses in case there is a fuel shortage arising from any form of post-election violence in Kenya that could affect cargo movement - (Interruption)

MR MACHO: Thank you, my colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, as a Member of Parliament from the border –(Interjection)– I would like the Member of Parliament from Hoima to withdraw the statement that I am a smuggler. (Laughter) The people of Busia are not smugglers -

THE SPEAKER: That is an innuendo. 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform him and other colleagues that we are cross-border traders, but not smugglers at all. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: That is just an innuendo, honourable member.

MR MACHO: Yes, but we are only cross-border traders and not smugglers. Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for being one of the people in this country who support the East African integration and cross-border trade. 

I stood on the point of information to the submission of my colleague to say that truly, I left Busia two days ago and I can attest to the fact that the Kenyan Government is doing deployment and some Kenyans are crossing with their families to Uganda. However, on our side, there is nothing taking place at all and there is no preparedness. 

Therefore, I support her when she says that the Government of Uganda should tell us how prepared it is because when Kenya coughs, Uganda always sneezes. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.23
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, as a country, we are prepared. We have some stock, but we are also talking to some traders to use the Tanzanian route in case the Kenyan side is not passable.

MS ASINANSI NYAKATO: I would like to seek clarification from the Prime Minister, Madam Speaker. Two weeks ago, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development read a statement, which said that they were still in negotiations with Tanzania over the route; they did not tell us that they had harmonised on whether they would be able to use Tanzania or not. So, is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: You know, some of these things are classified. However, when the Prime Minister says that Government is ready, all we need to do is to do our oversight role by checking on how ready the country is. (Interjection) I am also talking as a person who knows what is happening. I am talking as a person who has been pushing and telling Government that “we have gone through this, can we have fuel?” We have done it and checked. Therefore, what we can do is have our committee of selected people go and verify how ready we are. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, and of course with immense respect to the Prime Minister, or the person sitting in for the Prime Minister - 

THE SPEAKER: Who was sitting in -

MR SSEGGONA: Oh, this is one of the Prime Ministers. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, when the question is raised as to how and you are talking about an issue of quantity, civilised governments across the globe tell you in terms of quantities. Rt hon. Prime Minister, I mean that statement and I will explain it. 

We had our reserves stored in Jinja. However, we all know that those reserves are simply dilapidated tanks. The issue of how much fuel we have, not for security, but for the survival of the nation, is an issue of quantities. It is not a matter where we say, “Oh! If we tell you how much we have in our reserves, the country is on fire.” 

Talking from the experience of how much we have been caught unawares; with our reserves empty; and with the tanks dilapidated, would it not be procedurally right that you direct the Government to tell us - if fuel is not in those reserves, where is it? 

In addition, and this is for the benefit of the Prime Minister who exclaimed when I said, “civilised governments across the globe,” I am suffering the temptation that ours is one of them. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: How much fuel is in the reserves? What are the other alternative routes for fuel to come into the country? 

2.28
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I believe my sister had given you the answer. However, what I can assure the country, in front of this camera, is that the NRM Government has the reserves to make this country run.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, Government - I would like to copy from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that the Government is ready, but not the party. The Government is ready to sustain Ugandans. It has fuel in place and has alternative routes to bring in fuel. Can we now hear from hon. Najjuma Sarah?

2.29
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I rise on a matter of national importance. The Government pays annual ex-gratia to LC 1 and 2 in appreciation of their work, which is worth Shs 120,000. 

However, in my district, the LCs have received Shs 80,000, while some have received Shs 100,000 and a few have received Shs 120,000; these LCs are gazetted. 

My Chief Administrative Officer has written several letters to the Minister of Finance without any response.

Since the Minister of Finance is here, I need clarification from him. 

First of all, the money is very little and it does not reach the district. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.


2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, it is true we pay ex-gratia to LC ones of Shs 10,000 per month and if there is any disparity, we shall take it on with the district authorities. Otherwise, from our side, we sent 100 per cent.

MS NAJJUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am on ground and I know what I am talking about. They have paid people between Shs 80,000 and Shs 100,000. When I contacted the CAO, he said that he’s been writing to the Minister of Finance without any response. Honourable minister, maybe I need to bring you copies. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let the Prime Minister respond.

2.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): The issue of the LC chairpersons getting their ex-gratia is very important. Therefore, I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, that I institute an investigative arm of the Government, that is the Auditor-General, to go and audit and find out what is happening in Nakaseke. There could be an issue of thuggery and we shall not allow these people to steal people’s money; we shall investigate this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it may not be in Nakaseke alone. Let them investigate that amount. We are going to ask the Auditor-General, who is a staff of Parliament, to have that investigated. Clerk, take note of that and give feedback. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am beseeching the Prime Minister and the ministers, that our issues here are not about winning a war on the Floor of Parliament.

The honourable member from Nakaseke has stated that she has letters written by the accounting officer of the district; the CAO, to the ministry. That is enough evidence. 

I am the Vice Chairman of the Committee on Government Assurances. We met the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development together with the contracted company that deals with fuel reserves. However, when you hear what the minister is saying - We have reserves, but our committee is investigating the same matter and we shall give a report here on how they do not have fuel in the reserves. Even the contracted company does not have fuel plus the – 

THE SPEAKER: You have gone back to fuel.

MR SSEWUNGU: I am raising a procedural matter – 
 
THE SPEAKER: No, I am asking you. Have you gone back to the issue of fuel? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Look here, I would like to refer you to Rule 71 on close of debate of a particular item. We closed the debate on that. Now, we are on the issue of the LCs. I have ruled that I want the Auditor-General to have that audited, not specifically Nakaseke, but all districts and they give us a report to that effect.

MR SSEWUNGU: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. However, are we here to win wars or to give evidence? 

THE SPEAKE: Which wars? Are we on wars? Why don’t you leave your Leader of the Opposition to talk? 

Honourable members, we are not on any wars here; we are serving the local people. (Applause) Let us not look at the cameras there because we want to be captured by the cameras. I am not going to allow that. (Applause)

MR MEDARD SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the guidance I am seeking from you is, the minister has informed the House that as far as they are concerned in the Ministry of Finance, they have paid all the money, 100 per cent.

Would it not be procedurally right that you direct the minister to bring that evidence, first and foremost, of the transfers as a starting point, as the audit goes on? What would be the problem that a few kilometres away, which have been reduced by technology, the ministry has sent the money, which should be in Nakaseke in a microsecond and Nakaseke has not received the money. 

I am not allowed to legislate or even debate in anticipation and with mischief in suspicion. If we are outside, I would say that there is something mischievous in this. Would it not be proper for the minister, first, to table evidence of those transfers of 100 per cent?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sseggona, I received that documentary evidence in my office and I wanted to sanction the audit on this Floor, not only in Nakaseke, but including my district. Several districts have the same problem and we need that done. I have all the documentary evidence and since that evidence is available, and the Auditor-General being the staff of Parliament, I wanted to give them an order on the Floor. Thank you. Hon. Andrew Oulanyah?

2.37
MR ANDREW OJOK OULANYAH (NRM, Omoro County, Omoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden submission. (Applause)

Allow me to start by commiserating with the august House on the loss of the Speaker and in the same vein, also to congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker, for your ascension to the roles. Congratulations. (Applause) 

I would also like to thank each and every one of you here for the support that you continued to render, especially through the Education Fund. You have given us hope and we know that where there is hope, there is life. I would like to thank each one of you here very much. (Applause) 

I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the plight of the victims of nodding disease in Omoro, but also in regard to the food security situation in Omoro District. I am aware that the honourable Member of Parliament for Kitgum District in the 10th Parliament raised a comprehensive motion, regarding the need for the Government to prioritise interventions into the nodding disease syndrome in northern Uganda, but to-date, we are yet to receive those short term interventions. 

We have 184 households affected by nodding disease syndrome. Those are about 220 patients who are affected with 24 severe cases and the main issue is malnutrition. This cuts into the issue of food security in Omoro. So, I would like to lump these two into one prayer with four points. 

The four points of prayer are:

    1. We need to provide food relief items to 17,020 households. This includes the 184 households that are affected by nodding disease syndrome. 

    2. There is also a prayer to request for nutrition support to prevent and treat child malnutrition. 

    3. Strengthening farming and agricultural support as submitted by my two honourable colleagues here. 

    4. Strengthening the local government capacity to manage crop pests and diseases. This has been the main cause of the failed crops, in addition to disasters like hailstorms. 

In principle, those are my four prayer requests to you. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Andrew. 

2.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all congratulate my son, Hon. Ojok for joining this august House and I would like to appreciate the issue that he has raised. 

Madam Speaker, it is true a resolution was passed here on the nodding disease and the directives were given. I would like to assure the honourable member that as a ministry, we are working out to have, per the directive; the mid-term, short-term and long-term interventions. Our technical people have embarked on that. So, we shall come back here and report on that.

His other prayer was on nutrition. I would  to commit that we are going to look at that and take action. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that I am given time as the technical team concludes. I will come back and report on what action we are going to take. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: How much time should we give you?

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, for the short-term – because it is comprehensive. And, as you are aware, I am sure that as a team – and our senior colleague - two to three weeks -

THE SPEAKER: They need food: is that what you are going to provide in two to three weeks? 

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, now that it is food – the Leader of Government – I cannot commit myself. I am sure she is prepared. Through you, and with respect, she should take up on that. Thank you. 

2.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, a week ago, there was an organisation by Archbishop Odama. He invited us to Kitgum and I was represented by my sister, Rt Hon. Nakadama, to contribute towards the same. 

We also appreciate that those children need food. So, through the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees – she is here - let us look for food and take it to Gulu -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anyakun, are you hearing? 

MS NABBANJA: We are going to get food and take it there. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Anyakun, when are you taking the food? Tomorrow?

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for giving us guidance. 

We are just receiving food right now in the stores. Two months ago, I sent food to Kitgum to cater for the nodding disease cases. 

About Omoro, I had also received a letter from the Woman Member of Parliament and I think we shall combine the consignment for the district. So, they can give us one or two weeks from now because we know what they are going through. 

THE SPEAKER: The Rt hon. Prime Minister is saying two days, you are saying two weeks. 

MS ANYAKUN: Madam Speaker, I am just from my department. The food is just arriving and you know the process is not easy. We can take it after two days once everything is in the store. 

THE SPEAKER: Two days. Hon. Ojok, give us feedback. In two days’ time, we want food in your constituency (Laughter). On Tuesday, I want to hear from you that the food has arrived. 

MR OJOK: Much obliged. I have the letter from the CAO, in addition to the list of the 184 households – if I could lay them on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: You give the letter to the minister. The minister is here. 

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my brother, Hon. Ojok, for raising this issue. I also thank the Prime Minister for sending her colleague, Hon. Nakadama, when Archbishop Odama actually called for an action.

It is true there is interest to revive some of the shelters that had been closed. I think you went to Kitgum – to one of the shelters. However, what Hon. Ojok is also talking about – there was a shelter that was built in Odek in Omoro, which was looking after these children – rehabilitating them. We got stories of how these children were rehabilitated and they went back and started living well. 

Now, Archbishop Odama’s appeal is for Government to give not only food, but also medicine and to make those facilities operational. 

So, the response I would like from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is on how prepared Government is in terms of taking a holistic approach towards this nodding syndrome – not just the food. Holistic involves therapy, feeding and medication. This is the assistance that the Archbishop is looking out for from Government and anyone else.

This is the information I thought I needed to give the House. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MS ALUM SANTA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I thank Hon. Andrew Ojok Oulanyah for raising this very important matter. I also want to thank the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees for accepting to take food to these nodding disease victims. 

This issue is not only in the districts of Kitgum and Omoro. There are many other districts affected. I pray that the Prime Minister – warming to get up now – addresses this issue, not only about food and shelter, but everything, including the minds of the people who are looking after these vulnerable children. They are indeed vulnerable. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what are you going to do to these others districts, including Oyam, Erute and Lira? 

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I thank colleagues for the concern. Like I stated, the Archbishop had written to me personally and even invited me. It is only that I was not able to go. 

The Minister of Health has been here. We are also trying to rehabilitate these children through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. It is going to be a multi-sectoral approach where we are also going to have the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development getting involved. 

Colleagues, I appeal to you to accept our submission in good faith that we are equally concerned. The issue of nodding disease has been in this Parliament for quite a long time. We promise that, this time round, we are going to handle. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

2.49
MR FRANCIS ADOME (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the escalating situation in Karamoja – I know we have talked a lot about the famine situation. 

I would like to begin by thanking Government, first of all, for the intervention that was geared towards restoring hope in Karamoja region. 

However, yesterday, the Prime Minister acknowledged that they had received so far Shs 20 billion not necessarily for Karamoja, but for addressing issues concerning the entire country. 

Madam Speaker, if you remember well, the President gave a directive to the Minister of Finance to release about Shs 135 billion to curb the situation in Karamoja for the next three months, which was a short-term intervention. 

I believe that was supposed to be regarded as a quick intervention, but to our surprise, it is almost one month and we have not got any information. So, we do not know how we are going to survive for these three months. Because what I have heard is, Finance is only looking at the long-term intervention, which means the issue of the tractors, seeds and so forth. 

We need a clarification from Finance, to give us assurance. When are we going to have this money released? This is a matter of emergency. If we talk of emergency and we have to wait for the next one to three months, what happens? We are all aware of the information that about 216 people died, right from the time that money was released. It is our prayer that Finance takes this seriously so that we are able to rescue the lives of those that are still surviving. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.51
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSSINESS: (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, you will appreciate that Government had not budgeted for the food of Karamoja, it was a comprehensive budget. Like I told you yesterday, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has facilitated us with Shs 20 billion so far. I did not say that they will not give us more money.

I would like to assure my brother that we are aware of the conditions our brothers and sisters are going through in Karamoja and that is why he started by thanking us. 

We shall not relent; we shall move together with our colleagues because we have been moving together as a team until these problems of Karamoja are solved.

Through short-term and long-term interventions - when we talk of tractors, I would like him to appreciate because that is a long-term intervention. We have to look for solutions so that these people can also cater for themselves. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the issue of disaster should be sorted and Government should ensure that they get money, much as they say it was not budgeted for. One would ask, where are you getting the Shs 20 billion from? From what vote? If it is from the contingency fund, then you should make sure they get all the money that they require. It is about life and death.

2.53
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance.

Just like other areas in this country are struggling and receiving a lot of rain, Iganga District received heavy rains on 30th July, which had heavy hailstorms that destroyed two schools. In Nakalama Secondary School in Nakalama Subcounty, a four-classroom block was destroyed.

As we talk, students are just loitering in the compound and we are in the rainy season. Some are studying under trees. When the rain comes, they just leave school and go home. It is the same case with the Bulomera Primary School in Nawanyingi Subcounty. 

A three-classroom block was blown off and pupils are just languishing and loitering in the compound. It is my humble prayer to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Minister for Education to offer an interim measure by providing shelter to these students and pupils to complete this term, but also to come up with a permanent solution to help these two schools resume next term. I rest my case. Thank you, very much.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Member for raising the issue that has affected the people of Iganga District. Colleagues, we need to appreciate that the rains are affecting every part of this country right now, but the procedure is, use your CAOs to raise the concern. 

They can quantify how many people and schools are affected so that we are able to plan, but as for our ministry, we promise to be in position to provide iron sheets for those schools, with requests from the CAOs. I beg to submit.

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the Minister for the response. All these processes have been done, the CAO, the District Education Officer has done the assessment and we are just requesting that you respond accordingly because children are suffering. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we need to have an interim measure such that you are able to put up the structures because children are about to go for holidays.

2.56
MS CHRISTINE AKELLO (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning Barlonyo Museum and monument in Lira District. On behalf of Lira District and Erute North constituency as per Rule 59 (f) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, amendment of motion for the reference of a Bill entitled; “Museums and monuments Bill, 2022.” 

Madam Speaker, I rise that the committee considers the following;

    i. Barlonyo is located in Lira District, the committee amends the Lords Resistance Army mass grave-

THE SPEAKER: Which committee?

MS CHRISTINE AKELLO: The Committee on Tourism. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you submit a memorandum to the committee and it will be brought up during the amendment of the Bill.

MS CHRISTINE AKELLO: I have issues concerning that, of course, according to the Bill, they are saying Abia is located in Lira District.

THE SPEAKER:  You take that to the committee during the consideration of the Bill. 

MS CHRISTINE AKELLO: Madam Speaker, allow me to raise our prayers because we have issues with the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife concerning Barlonyo.

Our prayers are; the Minister should actively engage the leadership of the community of Barlonyo and Local Government in planning and budgeting, implementation and monitoring of activities relevant to the war memorial site. 

As we speak now, the local leaders are not aware of what is happening about the budget and implementation concerning the budget allocation. According to what is happening, the ministry has a site attendant who was sent from the ministry to maintain the site, but the way the money is being channeled, nobody knows. Even the district is not aware yet, we have 15 committee members who are supposed to manage that site. 

They pray that the site attendant sent from the ministry be transferred and they recruit people locally who know the history of the place. They also pray that the ministry gazettes February 21st as a public holiday because that is the day when we always commemorate the massacre of the people at Barlonyo Memorial Site.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Christine Akello, please, take that matter to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry.

MS CHRISTINE AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. However, I also have another issue concerning – (Interjections) - thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise –

THE SPEAKER: May be, raise one for today, honourable member. You can raise the other tomorrow. Please, bring the other one on Tuesday.

MS CHRISTINE AKELLO: Madam Speaker, this matter is long overdue. Procedurally, since 21 July, I have not been given an opportunity to lay the document –

THE SPEAKER: What document do you want to lay?

MS CHRISTINE AKELLO: I would like to lay documents regarding nodding disease in my subcounty in Lira District. Concerning what my honourable colleague – I supported on the 20th, but I did not lay the documents. 

Our prayers are:

    1. A rehabilitation centre be constructed in Aromo. We have given two acres of land to the Government. (Applause)

    2. A research be carried out in the two parishes in Aromo, where we have 52 victims of nodding disease and epilepsy along Aswa River. We wrote to the ministry.

    3.  The Minister of Health should recruit vector control officers to manage the situation. The ministry should recruit the vector control officers who are experts in vector control.

    4. Food relief and financial support should be given to the families because out of the 52 victims, we have lost seven due to food shortage. The food and financial support should be given to the families and; 

    5. When we wrote to the Minister of Health, she complained that there is no money. We are requesting the Ministry of Finance to support the Ministry of Health so that they implement the activity. 

I have the documents to lay - I have the list of people - I beg to lay the letter from the area Member of Parliament and the honourable minister, who is willing to support the situation, but because of lack of finances, they cannot do much. 

I also beg to lay a resolution from the councils of Aromo and Ayami on the Table, and the letter of response from the honourable minister. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Christine Akello, you will give those letters to the specific ministers. What you lay on the Table is not that. You will give those to the ministers and remember that that motion was already moved and passed. You should have brought those names that day, but for now, I refer you to take the list and letters to the minister.

Minister of Finance, can you give the health ministry money? Give them to the Minister of Finance. 

3.03
MR FADIL TWALLA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, concerning land grabbing in Sebei Subregion. (Interjection)

Madam Speaker, the issue of land grabbing has been there since the 1960’s, as a result of insecurity that was caused by cattle rustlers who are known to us. The Sabiny escaped to the safer side to the upper belt of Sebei Sub region, leaving their ancestral land unsecured. 

As security stabilised, some few greedy people decided to survey and sell the land, claiming that it did not have legal occupants. This matter came to the attention of His Excellency, the President.

On 29 June 2009, the President met a delegation of elders from Sebei, who highlighted the issue to him and in his wisdom, the President directed the then Minister for Lands and Urban Development, hon. Daniel Omara Otubo, to suspend surveys, caveats, investigate and cancel titles of land, which had been illegally sold and occupied in these areas and report to him within three months. 

The minister went ahead as directed by the President. He formed a committee that was headed by the former Deputy Inspector General of Police, Mr Julius Odwee. However, it is unfortunate that the report has never been implemented and now, Sebei land claimants have been moving from office to office seeking justice from responsible authorities, but nothing has been done. 

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that this report be implemented. This will help us to even aid the issues of disasters relating to landslides in Sebei Subregion; issues of encroachment on the forests will end including saving lives of Ugandans. 

I have a copy of a letter written by the President with me here in addition to a copy of the report that came out after the investigations. I would like to lay them, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Where did you get that report from?

MR TWALLA: I got the copy of the report from the elders in Sebei Subregion; they also have other copies.

THE SPEAKER: What is the title of the report?

MR TWALLA: The report is titled Odwee’s Report.

THE SPEAKER: What is it? What is the title?

MR TWALLA: The title of the report is “Verification Committee on Land Conflicts in Bunambutye, Sironko District.”

THE SPEAKER: Signed by who?

MR TWALLA: It is signed by the late Rt hon. Al Hajji. Kivejinja –(Interjections) - it is not Sironko; I know what I am talking about. Honourable minister, maybe you are even part of the people who stole our land.

THE SPEAKER: You are talking to me; do not start attacking people. (Laughter) 

MR TWALLA: You see, when I am talking, I do not want anyone to disturb me. (Laughter) This is a very contentious issue and it has been an issue since –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, this issue needs to end. I would like to lay this report so that this House goes through it because we want immediate interventions from the Government. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Twalla, you do not need to finish your annoyance here because these are not the people who stole the land. (Laughter) These people are actually here to help you. Now, can you lay that? (Laughter)

Yes, Rt hon. Prime Minister - by the way, it is his maiden speech. So, do not – (Laughter) – yes, Prime Minister? 

MR MEDARD SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order with maximum restraint and pain.

THE SPEAKER: Who are you raising a point of order to; on hon. Twalla?

MR MEDARD SSEGGONA: On the Prime Minister herself –(Interjections) - yes. I have been here and I know some minimal application of the rules. So, I am raising a point of order with pain and restraint. I have seen the Prime Minister of this republic at various functions, including in Parliament. The way she dresses surely – (Interjections) - Yes, I know the rules. Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister of any Republic – (Interruption) A point of order on order? Now you can see why I am complaining. Madam Speaker, if only I can be protected to raise my point because this is a place where Members -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sseggona, as far as I see the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, she is more smartly dressed than everybody else in this House. (Applause)

MR MEDARD SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, if you are satisfied, we shall suffer the embarrassment together. Thank you. (Interjections)(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you sit? 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPRECIATE HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION TO PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 7 JUNE 2022

THE SPEAKER: I like the way you make noise as if this is the National Theatre. There is a very important item coming up. Hon. Jesca, if you want, you will debate on it. 

Honourable members, you will recall that on this motion, which was moved yesterday, the Leader of the Opposition delivered his response to the President's Address on the State of the Nation pursuant to Rule 53(1) of the Rules of Procedure. I deferred the debate until today. I am now opening the Floor and the debate will take only 30 minutes. I want people who have never talked.

3.11
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have talked many times, but thank you for the opportunity. For record purposes, I wanted to put that properly. 

I thank His Excellency the President for his State-of-the-Nation Address. Mainly concerning agriculture, as a representative of the fishing community, the President identifies fish and fish farming as one of the key areas to be addressed by the Parish Development Model. 

However, you find that as a fishing community, if enabled –

THE SPEAKER: Two minutes each.

MR OKEYOH: If enabled and given support, fish can bring in this country much more money only second to coffee. Therefore, I would like to implore the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to look deep into the fishing subsector, give it the required funding and then, reap from this sector. 

Secondly, the President, in his speech, clearly marks the development in secondary schools and seed secondary schools. As a representative of the islanders, there are some subcounties that do not have seed secondary schools. Therefore, I would like to call upon the Government to look at Lulu Subcounty and Bukana Subcounty in Bukooli Islands in Namayingo to address education challenges. 

Otherwise, I support the presentation of the President in –(Member timed out.)

3.15
MR JORAM TIBASIIMWA (NRM, Older Persons, Western Uganda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to thank His Excellency the President for building Government on hard work and a hard rock through patriotism, Pan-Africanism, socio-economic transformation and democracy. This enabled him –(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, is it in order – I am in charge of this side – for Hon. Atkins to cross the Floor while in session?

THE SPEAKER: It is free sitting.

MR KIVUMBI: No, he is a shadow minister. I would like him seated properly where he belongs.

MR TIBASIIMWA: Madam Speaker –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Joram, can you finish? I am resolving the issue you people are rising on. To me, an attack on a woman is an attack on all of us. (Applause)  That is resolved. Do not start making noise. Honourable members, if you are shouting, get out and we continue with the debate. Hon. Joram, can you speak?

MR TIBASIIMIWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate that His Excellency the President has instituted procedures to encourage commercial agriculture. I would like to appreciate that over 150 solar pumps are being imported so that they can ease agricultural irrigation. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Can you people listen to Hon. Joram?

MR TIBASIIMWA: Madam Speaker, the President encourages industries created on agriculture and I would like to thank him for the banana factory in Bushenyi.

Madam Speaker, last year, before we came in, as Members of Parliament from Bushenyi, Prof. Muranga invited and showed us the factory. We realised that there was some little money still required to complete the factory so that it can add value to our bananas. 

My prayer here is that the Government releases money to complete the construction of the factory. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.20
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the President for the clear Address on the State of the Nation, but I have a few observations. 

The first is about the dairy exports in this country. The dairy exports should be bringing us a lot of money, but the extension work in the field is not there in the dairy sector and in many other sectors of agriculture. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at the prices of veterinary drugs, they cannot enable us to reach the desirable levels of export in dairy products. When you look at fake drugs on the market, actually, one would think that - of course, I know that we have a very strong Government. However, one would think that people are working without a Government because these fake drugs are clearly on the market. They have created resistance, especially for ticks. The people have resorted to other measures that are not palatable with the good practices in agriculture. 

Therefore, I implore the Ministry of Agriculture to do a lot to see that these fake drugs are off the market. 

The other issue the President raised is the export of raw materials. He talked a lot about it – that for 600 years, we have been exporting raw materials. We seem to be moving at a very slow pace in value addition such that we continue - even after 600 years - exporting a lot of raw materials. 

When we talk about labour export - those days it was for slaves. Even today, we see our children suffering outside like slaves. It is modern slavery –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery, this afternoon, we have a delegation of students, led by their professor, from the University of Southern California, United States of America. (Applause) They are here to follow up on our youth health literacy in the communities. 

The university partnered with the Parliament of Uganda to establish the parliamentary gym in 2010. (Applause) They have interacted with the Committee on Health and will be engaging over other health-related initiatives with various Government institutions. 

Join me in welcoming them. You are most welcome. (Applause) Thank you for coming to Uganda. 

3.23
MR FREDERICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much. Asante Sana, Madam Speaker. Nataka kushukuru wewe kyaleo kunipatia yi fasi kuongeya kyayile maneno enye enahusu raisi wa Uganda haile maneno ambao alijitaja kwesiku ya nation address - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Angura, as much as you know Kiswahili, for now, the parliamentary language is English. (Laughter)  We are yet to learn Kiswahili.

MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Kiswahili is one of the languages we should use in the House. I felt - like it has already been declared - when you get to the neighbouring states, they are blaming us for being behind. We are moving ahead in the integration, but in the common language that puts us together – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you responding to the President’s address? 

MR ANGURA: I am responding to the President’s State-of-the-Nation Address. The President emphasised a way forward as far as integration is concerned. On that note, we should move forward and learn Kiswahili.
 
I would like to thank the President for the concerns he raised, especially on the Parish Development Model. We should come out as Members of Parliament to support this, as it is going to be a game-changer in the socio-economic transformation of our communities.

Madam Speaker, you will recall that the President talked about irrigation and the mitigation measures as far as solving the problems of rain-fed agriculture is concerned. Here, we have heard concerns from our colleagues and these concerns cut across the country – concerns of food shortages. I would like to thank the President for encouraging irrigation. 

The other issue that the President raised was the issue of fertilisers. The President talked about fertilisers. In Tororo, we had one factory that had been set up to produce fertilisers. Unfortunately, due to some people who were wise enough – who fleeced the Chinese – the fertiliser factory was not able to take off. The President talked of looking for funds to help us with the factory in order to move. 

My prayer is that if this House could help support our development partners and mobilise resources for this fertiliser factory to take off, it would help us mitigate the challenges that we are facing with agriculture and increase our productivity, as we also move towards value addition. 

The LOP spoke about many things and I would like to appreciate what he said, but he also forgot one thing: the NRM’s slogan of “Securing the Future.” He did not mention it. He mentioned for other parties, but not the one of securing –(Member timed out.) 

3.26
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the State-of-the-Nation Address, as presented by the President, to the country. The Address on the State of the Nation was well-thought out and precisely presented to the country. 

I would like to look at the area of agriculture, especially extensive agriculture in production of poultry, dairy, fish and irrigation. I have noticed that the President makes an Address on the State of the Nation very clearly, but then we do not move to match it with a budget that would support exactly what the President talked about. 

I believe this is what we should begin to look at when we are presenting the budget. For example, I went to the Ministry of Water and Environment to ask - I come from Kwania where there is Lake Kwania and my constituency runs along the lakeshore. I asked if there is a programme for pumping water upland for farmers to tap the same water to irrigate their crops. The report I got is that there is no budget for that and there is no money, yet, we are here praising the President with a lot of hope on irrigation. On the ground, there is no action going to take place. 

This also goes along with value addition, the silos –(Member timed out.)  

3.28
MR WILSON KAJWENGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to appreciate the President for the State-of-the-Nation Address. 

Article 101 imposes the responsibility on the President to deliver the State-of-the-Nation Address. I would like to say that the President delivered the Address on the State of the Nation very well. He touched me particularly and the rest of Ugandans. 

I will address myself to the dairy sector, which has a direct bearing on the people of Nyabushozi that I proudly represent in this august House. It contributes Shs 388 billion to the national economy.

We produce 2.8 billion litres of milk per annum. However, Madam Speaker, we would be getting much more value for this and more money to get to the farmers if we vaccinated regularly and eliminated FMD and SGP that affect the productivity and the value of our milk.  In providing a way forward for this, the President says farmers could be given a chance to import vaccines to do regular vaccination. I wonder why the Government has stopped farmers from importing - or other organisations that have capacity to import. The Minister of Agriculture can actually do what the Government does best to regulate. Algeria itself has a market of $1.2 billion ready for us; Ethiopia has a market of $13 million provided we do regular biannual vaccination. The President has guided. I would wish that we follow his guidance. 

Permit me to add, Madam Speaker, that the President talked about regional integration in the Address on the State of the Nation as the answer, survival and transformation of the African race amidst the cutthroat competition that we see. 

The East African Community - and I am happy the Minister is seated right here - that now strides for – (Member timed out.) 

3.31
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me the opportunity. I rise to support the motion on the Address on the State of the Nation by the President. 

I would like to address my mind to the issue of value addition. On this note, I really want to thank the President for his national and visionary outlook for this country. Many of our people in this country are farmers; unless we take the direction of value addition, they will remain outside the money economy. In order for them to have some disposable income in their hands, they need to add value to what they are producing. 

However, Madam Speaker, this must be well matched with the following: Many of our rural area subcounties do not have electricity. Therefore, unless electricity is supplied to all the rural areas, it will be very difficult for our people to do value addition. 

When I talk about electricity, in West Nile, we are in a blackout. Therefore, for us to partake of that, the supply of electricity to all areas should be fast-tracked so that we become part of the national economy. Not only electricity, but also good roads for farmers to reach different markets within the districts and outside the district; again, there has to be regional balance in this matter. 

As this country may be aware - and I would like to implore Members of Parliament to move out of here – just a minute Madam Speaker.

We do not have tarmac roads. We shall have difficulties accessing the market. 

The other area I would like to address is the environment. We are now receiving rain, but just two months ago, we were experiencing drought. I would like to encourage Government to go into harvesting water during the times we have rain so that our animals and our crops can be watered. In every region, there should be a harvest centre, whereby, during difficult times, we can resort to that. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

3.34
MS PEGGY WAAKO (NRM, Older Persons Representative, Female): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to thank the President for the Address on the State of the Nation. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to appreciate the President's programme of the Parish Development Model. As you are all aware, most of our old persons are found in rural areas. 

With involvement in the Parish Development Model programme whose result is to tap the production capacity of the seven million houses in agriculture, the old persons will greatly benefit from the Parish Development Model. 

The President's plan to intensify the efforts in regard to irrigation is going to benefit not only the economy, but also to improve the welfare of old persons. 

According to the state of old persons in Uganda Situation Analysis Report, September 2020, 85 per cent of the active old persons are engaged in crop farming. Therefore, as old persons, we support the President's idea of irrigation. 

If I could use an example of Ethiopia, it is now leading in producing wheat in Africa, as opposed to the past where it depended on Western wheat aid. This boost in wheat production is due to the technological input in farming, including irrigation. 

The President talked about corruption as another danger to our rapid socio economic transformation. The battle against corruption requires combined efforts from various stakeholders; let us all work together to fight this vice. 

Lastly, I strongly support and agree with the Leader of the Opposition in his response on objective number seven, concerning protection of the aged, that is number 36, 37 and 38. I would like to strongly support that whatever he has mentioned is the real truth –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You do not need to have a prayer; you are supporting the State-of-the-Nation Address. 

3.38
MS ANNET KATUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand before this august House to appreciate His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni on the Address on the State of the Nation. 

I would like to reemphasise value addition because it will boost the economic development of our country and create market, employment and also increase foreign earnings for our country. 

Madam Speaker, of recent, we visited Export Processing Zones Authority (EPZ) in Nairobi as we exercised our oversight role, but to our dismay, the tea that is taken to EPZ is rebranded and repacked. When it is exported, it is called Kenya Tea. You cannot find the word, “Uganda” anywhere. 

I would suggest and pray that Uganda, especially the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, develops the national tea policy. Further, let us get an investor here to process, package and brand our tea from here for us to export it ourselves. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to add my voice to thank His Excellency, the President for allocating the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID) in the Greater Bushenyi, which is a renowned hub for bananas –(Member timed out.)

3.40
MS JANE AWICH (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you. Okay, I thank the President for the Address on the State of the Nation. He talked about value addition, but I have something to add on. For us in Teso, we have very poor coverage of electricity, particularly in Kaberamaido District, where almost the whole constituency has no power. The few areas that have poles do not have power. Value addition can only be possible when there is power. Our people are farmers, they want to grind maize; they want to mill their rice, but there is no power. I would like to urge the ministry concerned to help and extend power to Kaberamaido District, particularly in Ochero.

I also want to thank the President for the breakdowns he made. We have been having a lot of pressure from the constituency on the issues of prices being very high, food shortage, drought and insecurity. However, from the time he delivered the Address on the State of the Nation, people have calmed down a bit; people have come to understand the challenges better. I thank you very much, for this opportunity.

3.42
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to appreciate His Excellency, the President.

I would like to add my voice to thank the President for taking an initiative to engage foreign bodies, and making an attempt to let Ugandans know the causes of the current high prices of commodities in the country. 

When you look at the details in the Address on the State of the Nation whose copy I have, you realise the President has made an effort to meet the foreign leaders.

The Address by the President has made people understand the causes of the high prices. However, Madam Speaker, it remains a challenge in the country and because he is the Head of State, if that was left out, Ugandans would worry a lot. 

On page 10 of the Address, the President made a hint on the importance of irrigation and mentioned that Teso, Bukedi and Lango have misused wetlands. 

Madam Speaker, I now rise to make a statement that despite the fact that Teso Subregion has a number of wetlands, it equally needs more irrigation schemes. You are aware that as the country is crying about the alarming famine, Teso Subregion is one of the most affected. 

Allow me to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for sparing some tonnes of maize flour and beans, to support Teso Subregion.  However, I would like to make a plea through you, Madam Speaker, that Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as a mother of this country, you have a very big role to play and Teso is still looking at you, for additional relief, as we pray for the rains not to cause –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal Goli? No, I want only those Members who have never spoken. (Laughter)

3.44
MR OGWAL GOLI (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

I stand to support the motion, to appreciate the Address on the State of the Nation delivered by the President.

I would like to make my presentation by citing the details on the successes in the agriculture sector, which the President has been talking about. I would like to mention that in Dokolo, we managed to support 517 farmers under the ACDP Project in agriculture, particularly for cassava growing.

Madam Speaker, on cassava growing, I would like to report that we have managed to increase the produce, which will be able to help in the fight against hunger. What I noted in the process is the challenge of rain as the President mentioned. Thirty per cent of the cassava we planted could not survive due to insufficient water arising from limited rainfall. So, that emphasises the President’s call on the need for irrigation.

On our side, we would think that apart from giving aid as everybody is asking, for Dokolo, we are asking for more seeds, particularly for beans so that we can survive on our own rather than dwelling so much on aid. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Soroti East.

3.47
MR HERBERT ARIKO (NRM, Soroti East Division, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you honourable colleagues, for welcoming me to the House. (Applause)  

Madam Speaker, I stand to second the motion for the House to applaud His Excellency, the President, for a well articulated Address on the State of the Nation. 

I come from a constituency, where people rely largely on small-scale businesses to survive. The President’s emphasis on the issue of the Parish Development Model is one of the antidotes that is going to turn around the business community of Soroti. 

Madam Speaker, people who engage in businesses have one fundamental problem; that is access to cheap credit. For us there, we look at the Parish Development Model as one of the key elements that will ensure that the small scale businesses in Soroti will access money to support their small businesses. 

So, on the aspect of the PDM, as Member of Parliament for Soroti City East, I would like to applaud His Excellency, the President for that.  (Interjections) Madam Speaker, I know that Hon. Isaias Ssasaga is aware of the principal of this House -

THE SPEAKER: What a maiden speech. (Laughter)

MR ARIKO: Madam Speaker, the second issue that I would like to comment on is agriculture as a means of socio-economic transformation. As people who dwell in urban areas, we want to urge Government that a number of agro-business interventions such as fish farming, horticulture, amongst others, need to be supported so that even the people in urban areas such as Soroti who do not have sufficient areas for large-scale agriculture can be able to become economically engaged and, therefore, make some money for the livelihood of their families. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you. 

3.50
MS JOANNE ANIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to second the motion appreciating the President for the Address on the State of the Nation. A good leader is able to identify the problems that people face and to provide solutions and this Address on the State of the Nation does just that. 

In the Address on the State of the Nation, the President identifies four sectors for wealth creation and job creation. I will address myself to the sector of industry. The Government has plans to set up several industries in the different regions of Uganda. We want to thank Parliament for the appropriation of Shs 6.5 billion, which has been given to secure and fence the land for the industrial parks. Now, we need to rely on the support of Parliament to actually provide money to build these parks. So, we want to appreciate the President for that innovation.

The second thing I would like to appreciate the President for in this Address is actually going to the point of identifying strategies for wealth creation in commercial agriculture. He gives several models; there is the four-acre model for those who have four acres and for those who have plantations, there is also a strategy which is well defined. 

I take this opportunity to appreciate the President for his Address on the State of the Nation and I encourage other Members to support and second this motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.52
MR ERIC MUSANA (Independent, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support this motion and more specifically I would like to interest myself on the issue of value addition, which the President ably raised and excited many of us. 

The issue of value addition affects everyone. We are talking about job creation, small-scale industries or projects and people who are supposed to benefit from this. 

Madam Speaker, there is a very big issue we are facing in this country, which is implementation and the President has really articulated very well and outlined everything. What actually goes to us especially the Executive is implementation. We are talking about value addition to a number of crops: coffee, cassava, maize and other grains. We need real action taken and if we can move, this can be a better alternative. 

Madam Speaker, I also got a lot of excitement when the President talked about irrigation. Of recent, we have had a lot of sunshine and drought. The President talked about 150 solar-powered irrigation systems and this is very good –(Member timed out.)

3.53
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (Independent, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to appreciate the President for his speech to the nation. 

I am the Chairperson Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children and I have an area of concern and interest when it comes to food security because we are aware that as a country, when we do not have enough food, the people who suffer first are children. We still have cases of malnutrition in the country and we are the food basket in the region. Being the pearl of Africa, we have all reasons to have enough food. 

I appreciate the President for coming up with the idea of giving parishes money for the Parish Development Model, which can help our farmers. However, Madam Speaker, I have a concern that even if this money is going to our parishes, the water for agriculture for irrigation - and also when you talk of poultry, piggery, among others, as he is telling us to tell the small-scale farmers to be involved in some of these activities, they all depend on water if they are to succeed. 

Therefore, I would like to encourage us that come next year, when we are coming up with the Budget, let us put some good money on the sector of water so that we can provide water for irrigation across the country. It is not good for us to keep lacking food as we are seeing the situation right now when we have lakes around us. Like in Namayingo, we are surrounded by water, but we are not making use of it. So – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fred.

3.56
MR FRED KAYONDO (DP, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was almost tempted to appreciate the speech. Unfortunately when I had a second thought, I had to change my mind. 

Madam Speaker, you cannot talk about Jesus and God and you do not talk about the Bible. If you are talking about trade and farming and you do not talk about -

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, were you there when the speech was delivered? 

MR KAYONDO: Madam Speaker, I was following because these days we are following on media. So, I was following 100 per cent. I was on zoom when it was taking place because it is accepted. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, when you talk about farming and trade and you do not talk about the source of capital, there is a point lost there. We used to have cooperative banks and commercial banks where our traders would access loans at low interest rates. Those were abolished and today, we are left to the hands of commercial banks, which are robbing Ugandans day and night, and they are robbing them naked or in terms of high interest rates and unfair penalties. 

The Bank of Uganda, which is our central bank, does not have a clear mandate on how to regulate these commercial banks. They are robbing Ugandans naked. They are robbing Ugandans with high interest rates, with unfair penalties, with a lot of exploitation, Madam Speaker, how I – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Melsa. 

3.58
MS MELSA AVAKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I join my honourable colleagues to thank His Excellency the President of Uganda for the good Address on the State of the Nation on 7 June 2022. 

In the Address on the State of the Nation, His Excellency the President stated and I quote, “We intend to use the water of the Kagera River to support irrigation in Isingiro, the water of Lake Kyoga to support irrigation in Nakasongola District and the water of the Nile to support irrigation in West Nile districts such as Pakwach, Nebbi, Madi-Okollo and Obongi. 

Madam Speaker, I thank His Excellency for that, but it would be prudent and important that this irrigation scheme is extended to cut across all districts in West Nile, especially Yumbe District, to boost agriculture. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, as you are aware, Prime Minister's Time is at 4.00 p.m. The Leader of the Opposition gave a response. 

Members, it is in the Rules of Procedure that at 4.00 p.m., the Prime Minister will always answer questions. 

I now put the question that this House records appreciation for the clear and precise Address on the State of the Nation delivered by the President on the 7th of June.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sseggona, do you have something to say? 

4.01
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, it is true I have something to say.

Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister and I are very good friends and for a long time. We have had discussions, understood each other and understood why both of us are dressed the way we are and concluded that we are both very smart. (Laughter) We had an opportunity to hug and hand-shake. For the trauma and inconvenience, I am sorry. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Sseggona, I know you as a very decent person. Thank you for the apology. Hon. Nabbanja, sorry for whatever happened. Maybe you can also say a word.

4.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I have known my brother-in-law, Hon. Sseggona, since the Ninth Parliament. We have been good friends since that time. When I am dressed like this, I am dressed like an African woman. (Applause)

I took trouble to call my brother and I told him, “Can't you see how I am dressed?” (Laughter) We appreciated the style and fashion. (Applause) 

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. Life continues. (Applause)

An attack on a woman is an attack on your mother. (Applause) An attack on a woman is an attack on the Speaker. (Applause) An attack on a woman is an attack on his wife. (Applause) Therefore, I would like to appreciate what he has said. Life continues – in good faith.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK, 9TH TO 11TH AUGUST, 2022

4.03
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, here is a statement for the business of the proceeding week by the Leader of Government Business moved under Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure that requires me, as Leader of Government Business, to make a statement in the House regarding Government Business for the succeeding week. 

I am, therefore, submitting the following business for next week, 9th to 11th August 2022: 

    1. The Companies (Amendment) Bill 2022
    2. The Insolvency (Amendment) Bill, 2022 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Prime Minister, can we also have the other Bills that are in committees brought to the House? We are running out of time. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

TREASURY MEMORANDUM ON THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2020

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, Section 53 of the Public Finance Management Act requires that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall submit a Treasury Memorandum to the Parliament within six months from the date Parliament considers the report on the Auditor-General’s report, in accordance with Article 163(5) of the Constitution.

The Treasury Memorandum shall indicate the measures taken by each Vote to implement the recommendations of Parliament in respect to the report from Auditor-General of the preceding financial year of the Vote.

Section 13(f) of the National Audit Act, 2008 requires the Auditor-General to audit Treasury Memoranda as one of the final stages of the completion of the budget cycle. Today, we have the Treasury Memorandum brought into the House, which shall be referred to the Auditor-General. 

I, therefore, invite the Minister of Finance to lay on Table the Treasury Memorandum.

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay the Treasury Memorandum on the report of the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-General for the financial year ended 30th June 2020.

THE SPEAKER: That is referred to the Auditor-General.

PRIME MINISTER'S QUESTION TIME

4.07
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, Hon. Gorreth Namugga, Member of Parliament Mawogola South, gave a narrative that over the last two months, prolonged drought hit Mawogola County in Ssembabule District and that a total of five villages were badly affected. These include Matete Town council, Kasaana Ward, Kikalakata, Bulamayile, Nakatooke and Kabulasoke villages. Primary schools of Kasaana Muslim Primary School, Kasaana Herman Primary School and Akaya Junior Academy were grossly affected. Extending safe and piped water has been in the work plans and budgeted for by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation for a couple of years.

Her prayer was: can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister cause immediate and urgent provision of water, as a basic need of life to the people of Mawogola because school-going children are now being used to fetch water from long distances, hence missing classes?

My response is that the Ministry of Water and Environment, through National Water and Sewerage Corporation, in 2016 conceived the Service Coverage Acceleration Project (SCAP 100), aimed at covering all villages in towns operated by National Water. 

Under this project, pipe network was extended to Ssembabule Town Council and the surrounding locations in the constituencies of Mawogola North, Mawogola South and Mawogola West.


National Water operations in Ssembabule cover the towns of Ssembabule, Ntusi, Nabirizi, Matete, Mitete, Kyabi, Rutunga, Lugusulu and Rwebitakuli. The first conventional water supply system for Ssembabule was designed to cover the central part of Ssembabule Town.

Ssembabule Town has a water supply system whose source of water is Kyojja River, with the rest of the schemes served from borehole sources. The system was originally designed to produce 300,000 litres per day. The rapid population growth has, however, resulted into increased demand for water in Ssembabule Town and the surrounding areas.

In order to provide a longer-term solution to the water supply challenges in Ssembabule District, the corporation undertook a project aimed at increasing the water production capacity from 300,000 litres per day to three million litres per day. Since the commissioning of the Ssembabule project in September 2021, a number of villages that now have access to water are summarised below.

    1. A reservoir tank with a capacity of l75, 000 litres erected at Kyabakaga, Mitete Subcounty and a booster at Katimba village. This has enhanced access to clean water in the surrounding villages of Katimba A and B, Kasirye LC, Manyama A and B, Nsangala A and B, Mitete A and B, Nabiyagi A and B, Kalukungu A and B, Kiju A and B, and Kyabakaga LC.

    2. Another reservoir tank with a capacity of 100,000 litres was erected of Rwebitakuli Town Centre, serving the villages of Kigundu Zone, Rwebitakuli Town Centre, Masjid Zone Rwebitakuli Rural, Kalinzi Zone, Ntete Town Council, Katoogo Town and Ndaiga Town.

    3. A total of 78.6 kilometres of water distribution mains have been laid. That is:

        i) 26.6 kilometres in Mawogola South;
        ii) 24 kilometres in Mawogola West; and
        iii) 28 kilometres in Mawogola North.

Assessment of requirements to extend water to the mentioned locations in Matete Town Council, Kasaana Ward, Kikalakata, Bulamayile, Nakatooke and Kabulasoke villages was undertaken and duly provided for in the budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023. The National Water team has already met the local leadership to discuss the implementation framework and strategy.

The mentioned schools of Kasaana Muslim Primary School, Kasaana Herman Primary School and Akaya Junior Academy, among others, will benefit from the eminent interventions. The Ministry of Water and Environment has taken note of the affected areas and will address the water challenges, as soon as that project starts. 

Secondly, Hon. Isaias Ssasaga, Member of Parliament, Budadiri East, says that Mt Elgon Forest Reserve was re-gazzeted to create Mt Elgon National Park and boundaries, altered by l993 from the established forest reserve boundaries of 1962 and 1968 respectively.

The families living in those affected areas of Zesui, Masaba, Bugitimwa, Legenya, Namagulu and Bamasifwa were to be compensated, but to date, they have never been compensated, and this has led to continuous conflicts between the communities in these areas and Uganda Wildlife Authority -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Akol, I am going to ask you to shift away from Hon. Oguzu Lee. Let us give her some respect.

MS NABBANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The questions were: 

    a. When will these communities, whose land was taken by Government, be compensated?

    b. Why should the ministry not restrain Uganda Wildlife Authority from killing citizens along the affected areas, in what they call “encroachment on UWA land”, yet it is still under encumbrances?

My response, Madam Speaker, is that Government previously undertook extensive assessment of the encroachment extent and magnitude around Mt Elgon National Park. The Office of the Prime Minister is currently coordinating efforts to verify genuine claimants and conclusively address matters of encroachment and illegal settlements around the national parks.

In the interim, though claims for land ownership in Bugisu within Mt Elgon National Park are not genuine, with the exception of Zesui, where 48 families have been documented and verified by Government. Government has temporarily settled them at Amanang in Bukwo and Kizito in Kween, plus the Benet area. The communities in Masaba, Bugitimwa and Legenya are encroachers in the national park. For the case of communities in Bamasifwa, court ruled in favour of the communities and they will be compensated. 

Therefore, once the due process is concluded, Government, through my office, will compensate the genuine claimants.

Madam Speaker, the claims of UWA officers killing people are unsubstantiated. Any cases of killing should be reported to police for further investigations. 

Hon. Geoffrey Charles Okello, Member of Parliament for Nwoya stated that the Uganda Wildlife Act, Note (24) provides for compensation of a person that suffers bodily harm or injury or is killed or suffers damage to his or her property - However, that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has never had a compensation policy nor guidelines to effect the law. 

Before the Committee on Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, the ministry assured Members that this statutory instrument would be put in place by February 2022. Consequently, the ministry commissioners were tasked to have this done as a matter of urgency. His constituency is right now suffering a lot of destruction caused by almost daily incursions by elephants in the communities leading loss of crops. 

Then he asked me: “Can you update this august House on the progress made to finalise the statutory instrument to enable communities get protection for the attendant legal provisions.” 

Madam Speaker, the Wildlife Act, 2019, Note (24), as mentioned by the Member, provides for compensation for loss of life, property and injury caused by wildlife. Furthermore, Section 86(2)(k) provides for the formulation of regulations to operationalise and guide the effective implementation of the wildlife compensation scheme. 

I am glad to report that on 18 May 2022, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities signed the Wildlife Compensation Regulations to operationalise the scheme.  

Hon. Caroline Kamusiime, District Woman MP for Rukiga said that the labour export programme seems not to be well coordinated, especially the issue of young girls that left families distressed and unaware of the fate of their children. 

Her question was: can the Prime Minister give an update to the House on this programme with attention to the case of a one Barbara Nyakaisiki from Muhanga Town Council, in Rukiga district? 

Madam Speaker, it is not true that labour export in Uganda is uncoordinated. There are systems for the externalization of labour under the mandate of Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Similarly, there are mechanisms for follow up of the migrant workers in distress, through our Missions in destination countries and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

The honourable member raised an issue regarding the young girls. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development clears only girls above 21 years of age to travel abroad for work. Under our laws, anyone above 18 is an adult with the right to self-determination. There are some young mothers who end up as migrant workers, but the majority of these are single mothers who are seeing opportunities to provide for their children. 

On the case of Ms Barbara Nyakaisiki, who is reported to have been at a deportation centre for four months, her presence at the deportation centre is an indication of the process of repatriation. Migrant workers are held up at deportation centres due to lack of travel documents like exit visas and passports. Our missions always come in to issue emergency travel documents where necessary. This particular case is being handled and the processing of repatriation documents is on-going. 

Government has taken a number of measures to protect migrant workers through licensing and placement procedures. The measures taken include:

    1. The revision of the law - that is, the Recruitment of Uganda Migrant Workers Regulations, 2022;

    2. Government has signed bilateral labour agreements with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. There was a meeting yesterday between the ministry officials and the representatives of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia – (Interjections) - the one of Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan was suspended in order to address certain gaps for its implementation. 

	The agreement between Uganda and the United Arab Emirates has not yet taken effect because UAE has not named its representatives on the technical committee, which is a condition in the agreement. The ministry is still engaging UAE Government to have it effected;

    3.  Verification and vetting of company directors by Joint Intelligence Committees. Companies whose directors are foreigners and or have adverse records, are not granted licenses; and

    4. The online system for the management of external employment - this online system has digitized all document processing, including license, application and issuance as well as clearance of migrant workers. This allows real time transmission of information to the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control and Uganda’s Missions abroad. The system has been upgraded to allow distressed migrant workers to digitally report complaints to the line ministry and Ugandan missions using their phones.

Madam Speaker, we appeal to Ugandans to go through licensed companies whose details and clearances are done on the external Employment Management Information System (EMIS) managed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We have agreed to gazette those licensed companies. 

Hon. Wilson Twinomugisha Kajwengye, Member of Parliament for Nyabushozi, Kiruhura District asked a question: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is a concern of tsetse fly infestation of the Western Cattle Corridor that has resulted in the loss of lives of people, animals and livelihoods. His prayer is to update this House on the tsetse fly infestation on the Western Cattle Corridor. 

The Government, through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, dispatched a team of entomologists to ascertain and quantify the tsetse fly challenge in the areas mentioned by conducting a tsetse fly survey. 

The survey indicated the presence of tsetse flies in the de-gazetted villages of Kiruhura District. 

The survey traps were deployed in 26 villages in the Nshara area. The traps caught tsetse flies and other biting flies, which are also mechanical vectors of Animal Trypanosomiasis (Nagana). The survey showed that the tsetse fly apparent densities were highest in the areas close to the park and around the lake areas as high as 10 flies per trap per day. The tsetse fly densities reduced as one goes away from the park. 

Integrated control interventions were applied in 2019 with use of Vectoclor (insecticide/acaricide) for live bait as a major tool to suppress tsetse flies. 

Another tsetse fly survey was conducted in Kiruhura and the apparent tsetse fly density had significantly reduced. 

Government provided and will continue to provide products like Vectoclor-acaricides that are effective in killing the tsetse vector leading to a suppression of the tsetse flies and trypanosomiasis (Nagana) outbreaks.

Hon. Richard Wanda, Member of Parliament, Bungokho Central asked about the rampant road carnage along the Bugisu–Bumageni section of the Tororo–Mbale Road and the urgent need for the Ministry of Works and Transport to install the requisite road furniture to stem road accidents. 

His prayer is that Government should respond and urgently install requisite road furniture to stem road accidents on this section of the road. 

My response is as follows: 

After reported accidents on that section of the rood, the Minister of State for Works and Transport, Hon. Fred Byamukama, conducted a fact-finding field visit to that section of the road together with local leaders. 

The honourable minister was accompanied by a team of engineers and officers from the Ministry of Works and Transport, UNRA, Mbale District Local Government, RDC, LCV Chairmen, CAOs, area Members of Parliament and the DPC and OC Traffic Mbale. The following recommendations were made and some have since been effected: 

    a) To install adequate road signage 

    b) To align delineators

    c) Chevrons 

    d) Reflective road studs at curve locations to enhance curve visibility mostly at night. 

    e) The pedestrian crossing facilities and speed control measures in urban and built-up areas. 

    f) Clear the rood reserves of all illegal structures to enhance visibility. 

    g) Enhance road-user education campaigns to all relevant stakeholders. 

    h) UNRA has also installed humps, rumble strips and signage at two locations. Currently, there is on-going works at the third location around Manafwa Bridge. 

    i) The Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA have continued to carry out road user education and sensitisation programmes.

Madam Speaker, we got another question from Hon. Benard Kirya Sekyanzi, Budyepo County, Nakasongola District. He asked: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to know why Nakasongola District, Budyepo County cannot benefit from the water bulky project for domestic use as well as irrigation scheme project for farming since the above project is a Government project and the people of Budyepo County are good farmers who experience drought every year yet they are surrounded by Lake Kyoga, which is the same source for the domestic water bulky project, which is on-going now and it can even serve farmers in terms of irrigation where Government can generate more revenue. 

My response is: 

The Cabinet recently took a decision to integrate water for agricultural production infrastructure to holistically support irrigation, aquaculture, livestock industry and domestic use. 

A number of water harvesting and storage facilities are being constructed to promote year-round availability of water for agricultural production and other related uses. 

The Government has taken an initiative to abstract water from lakes and rivers to support both agriculture and other domestic uses. 

For the case of Nakasongola District, the Government has been constructing many water harvesting and storage facilities in the district from Lake Kyoga. This has    suppressed the high demand of water mostly for livestock, despite the prolonged drought. 

The Government has also abstracted water from River Kagera to supply the districts of Isingiro, Rakai and the surrounding areas. 

The Ministry of Water and Environment provides water up to the gate and the Ministry of Agriculture takes it to the farm.

The Ministries of Water and Environment and Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries have been coordinated by my office to work together to make sure that this is effected.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. The questions have been answered. We will now allow a few supplementary questions.

4.38
DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 28 April 2020, the Parliament of Uganda approved 15 cities, including Masaka, Mbarara and Lira. Since that time, these cities have never received guidelines on sharing property.

The mother districts have insisted that they own the property within the city boundaries and they continue to occupy them. This has heavily affected service delivery within these cities. 

I am aware that the Attorney-General guided on this matter. However, we are failing to get the final guidance from the Ministry of Local Government. I would like to ask that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister prevails and ensures that we get these guidelines as fast as possible. 

Lastly, when are the five remaining cities going to be operationalised? They were approved by Parliament on the recommendation of the Cabinet. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, now that I have the minister for local government here, I request that you allow me, through her, to give the answer to my brother. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister?

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Rusoke Busingye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The guidelines for sharing are being worked on. Some districts, together with the cities, have come to an agreement through the guidance of the ministry. We have met and they have amicably shared. However, for those with complications, we are still working out the guidelines, helped by the office of the Attorney-General.

On the operationalisation of the five remaining cities, the Cabinet passed and Parliament approved that there is no more creation of new constituencies. Those that were passed will be operationalised after the next national elections – that is 2026. That is the status at the moment.

About the structures – a question came last week. The structures are being operationalised. Today, they are completing the validation exercise to appoint the staff of the 10 cities. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am not sure that the first question was answered. The first question was talking about the assets and liabilities of the previous municipalities. 

If you look at Soroti Municipality, it was divided into Soroti East and Soroti West. Now, the issue is on the assets: where do they belong. Do they belong to the district? Do they belong to Soroti West or Soroti East? That is what I think Dr Abed was asking - Additional information on the same?

4.42
MR MEDARD SSEGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, for the benefit of my colleague, the minister, this issue of subdivision of local governments is even more problematic when it comes to money.

In the Public Accounts Committee, for example, we have been investigating some issues relating to remittance of taxes. You find an entity that tells you, “We did not remit the taxes to the local governments because we were not sure where to send this money”.

You also find with the local governments that when a subcounty, for example, is subdivided and a town council is created, there is property which remains in this geographical location and the two entities are haggling over ownership – of course, not forgetting that the residents of both entities contributed to the establishment. Now, you end up creating a local government that basically houses itself under a tree.

The ministry or the Government has not come up with a clear policy on the sharing arrangement, both for property and money.

At some point, we almost wound up Masaka District Local Government and the reason was over pension. Because payment of pension had been decentralised, the persons who served under what was called Masaka District Local Government, as it was in the wider sense – the burden had been left to Masaka District Local Government, yet, at the time of serving, some were serving in Ssembabule, Kalungu, etc.

I think it is a matter of interest that the ministry in particular and the Government in general ought to take interest in before we make all these subdivisions and to guide those local governments. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you may not need to answer now. Go back and get all the information that is required and then come back and present it in the House. You may not have all the facts as of now. 

4.44
MS JOVANICE TWINOBUSINGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. My concern is on tarmacking of Kashwa-Kashongi-Ruhumba Road. This road is considered under NDP III. 

The road serves the whole district and connects to the districts of Mbarara and Ibanda. It goes through Kashongi Constituency.  It is a 33-kilometre road and it is our main road – it is the one that we use for our business. 

Madam Speaker, we have continued to lose lives on that road. Actually, now that it is going to start raining, it is a worry. This road is no longer being maintained, thinking that it is being considered for tarmacking. 

It is my prayer that I know the progress of Kashwa-Kashongi-Ruhumba Road, Madam Speaker. Thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I will get reports from the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA and come and report accordingly.

4.46
MS MARGARET AYEBARE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the responses she has given to the different questions that were put forward by honourable colleagues. 

My issue follows what Hon. Namugga had presented here about water in her area. When the Prime Minister was responding, the solution was rotating around national water, which is mostly supplied in urban centres. Most of us here represent rural areas where the National Water and Sewerage Corporation does not reach. 

As the rains have started, the water is still not good for people's consumption. It is my prayer, through your office, Rt hon. Prime Minister, that primary and secondary schools are provided with water tanks to harvest rainwater so that these children get good drinking water and they stop going to fetch water during class time. I beg to submit

THE SPEAKER: By the way, there is rural water provided by National Water and Sewerage Corporation. I do not know if you are aware of it. That is what we use in our area, provided by National Water and Sewerage Corporation. 

MS RWEBYAMBU: It is not anywhere in Mbarara District.

4.48
MR MEDARD SSEGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, on that very note, you notice that the Government has a policy literally on everything. For example, in every parish, there is a health centre. On another occasion, I will raise the issue of the quality of service provision in those health centres. 

The policy on education, for example, that in every subcounty we need a secondary school. But we have not had a policy on water, especially in those areas that are not serviced by National Water and Sewerage Corporation. We used to have a project called “small towns water project”, but even that one, was limited and restricted to townships.
 
Now, should what has been stated from the Prime Minister’s statement be a basic need? Why can’t we have a policy on the provision of water to each and every village so that at another occasion when we are discussing the budget on water, we know how much it costs the country to have water in every village? 

Now, the policy is simple: for example, where there are boreholes, they are serviced by Members of Parliament. When it breaks down, they call the Member of Parliament. It stretches us; not only stretching us as an honourable Member mentioned, but also sometimes children do not go to school because they have to spend three hours looking for water.

At some occasion, we had a meeting with the then Minister of Water and Environment, Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu. He said something and it sounded comical then, but I reflected on it and thought it made a lot of sense. When they were extending water in Wakiso Town Council, he said: “We are extending water because we want the citizens to use their heads to do better things. That head which was given to a human being, is not for carrying water, it is for thinking and developing the country.” 

So, I would love to see a day when Government comes up with a policy to allow people use their heads for better things than carrying water. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Lubega Sseggona.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, the President through Cabinet in January this year, directed that we should have a well-designed policy so that we can have a water source in every village. Madam Speaker, we are doing exactly that and I promise, on behalf of the Government, that we shall provide water in every village -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am aware that policy is there - The one of the beneficiaries of water in every village, maybe it is just a matter of rollout. When I talk about Bukedea, it has water in every village; there is gravity water and then is it rural water - something of the sort. That water is there, but what we need is to roll out to the whole country. How it came to my place, I do not even know: it did not come because of my position. No.

4.51
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, water is a basic a need - that is, it ought not to be a one-off: you are spot on; in Bukedea, rural water is in every village. 

In strategic planning, if Government is going to roll out a secondary school in every subcounty, the question is, what other contending environment and community issues can you address with that secondary school? 

THE SPEAKER: Of power and water. Okay.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Like now you have a subcounty; if you are going to have a subcounty headquarters and you have many subcounties, what other community contending issues can you address with the building of a subcounty? 

So is every primary school, if you are going to build every primary school, you have many buildings, where in one rainy season, you are going to harvest much water, which we donate to Egypt for free. So, the thinking around Government should comprehensively be out of the box not just about seeking these bondholders. 

Our thinking is that you should go all the way. And this to me cuts across - not just on water. I have seen a programme on tourism; people speak about tourism and lions, among others, but the world has moved from going to see lions; the things that attract tourists are now different; it is not about baboons. 

So, what else do you build? People are going to Dubai; are there baboons? Okay? People are going to these other countries – We want Government in this era to hype their thinking around solving community issues and solutions all over. 

We have got countries like Thailand; they have provided and addressed some of these issues in a comprehensive way. Maybe, the Cabinet and other Members need to benchmark and know how countries have gone around solving these issues. You do not need to reinvent the wheel. Sometimes, you just need to walk around, copy and apply.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. If I could borrow a statement from the Prime Minister; the Minister of Water and Environment, through National Water and Sewerage Corporation in 2016, conceived the service coverage acceleration project that is SCAP 100, aimed at covering all villages in towns being operated by National Water and Sewerage Corporation. The idea is there, everything is there; it is just the phase over. 

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, Government is not only looking at water for consumption; we are also looking at water for production. 

Like you heard in my statement, we have agreed that wherever we have bulk water production, the Ministry of Water and Environment together with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; wildlife for animal consumption and also irrigation - colleagues, you have an avenue as Members of Parliament, to come and help. We are all in Government so we need to put our ideas together and make this country better. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: We have only three minutes and we have a report.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, in the Prime Minister’s statement, the one on wildlife where I find – 

THE SPEAKER: You are covering the three minutes so that we go to the report. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: Remember the rules are very clear - one hour.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, Madam Speaker, and I will be very precise. The Prime Minister, while talking about people killed in wildlife parks, said that they are unsubstantiated and, therefore, urges citizens to go and report to police for investigation. 

The Government has the machinery, once an issue has been brought up, to do comprehensive investigation. This is about extrajudicial killing. Madam Speaker, I find that answer fairly inadequate: that you should have taken a little more care to move the machinery of Government to ascertain the truth. 

A Member of Parliament has brought to the attention of Government that people are being killed - this is about life. A person killed has a mother or is a son, or a daughter of another person. So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I find your answer not satisfactory. I am not going to speak a lot.

The other issue that I need to react on is the one of - please Government, we want to urge you, next time you want to create constituencies, let it be comprehensive. The country is going to go for a national census; do not bring the national census towards election so that the results of it do not inform the demarcation of constituencies. We need equal representation for equal number of people. Others for affirmative action, yes, that needs to be addressed, but we need equal representation. 

Hon. Sseggona here represents over one million people. Hon. Ssenyonyi - and when you look at my constituency, it is fairly small. So, we want equal representation for equal number of people. That is when democracy will have a meaning. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Thank you for answering the questions ably, and we also want to thank you for answering the supplementary questions. Next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES) ON THE REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE UGANDA LAND COMMISSION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. On what matter do you stand? 

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: You are standing on what? Are you the chairperson? Are you standing on procedure? 

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate your leadership, and thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I rise on a procedural issue in regard to the directive that you gave to Government when I raised the issue of your people in Kasese that entirely depend upon the border market. Mpondwe Market is not the only border market in Uganda; we have so many or multiple of them across the country. 
Madam Speaker, I did raise here on the Floor that Mpondwe-Lhubiriha border market remains the only border market that is still closed, yet it is the only source of livelihood especially for the community. I think it is inhumane in that it borders on economic terrorism for Government to close a source of livelihood without putting an alternative. 

Madam Speaker, I also was moved when I heard and presented before this Parliament that while other communities are allowed to sell or trade in fish, the same fish is impounded when it comes to Kasese. 

Madam Speaker, now that we have the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in the House, would it not be procedurally right for the Prime Minister to direct, like she has always done, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to ensure that the border market, which is the only source of livelihood, is opened just like Government has done to the rest of the border posts, and also to ensure that the fish that is allowed to be sold in other markets and the rest of the country, the same is done to this community because these people are really hurting. They are losing property as a result of selling their houses and land, and also the kids are not going to school, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I just need small help here; I am the acting Leader of the Opposition. I would strongly, going forward, urge my side especially when you have a report to be presented, for Members of our side to restrain themselves so that we can make a good case for a report they have produced. And I would restrain especially the shadow cabinet to behave. 

THE SPEAKER: That is leadership. Thank you. 

He was raising the issue of the border market being closed, the fish being impounded, and the border, so he wants you to direct the minister responsible to do something. 

MS ROBINAH NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I have been following up this matter. And my brother is aware that I was supposed to go to Mpondwe Market sometime back in March, but I did not go because I was doing something else though I sent a representative. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - I remember I was represented by Hon. Bright Rwamirama - the Attorney-General, and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives have been on site. 

Madam Speaker, we are handling the matter and a conclusive report will be brought. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Honourable members, Article 163(5) requires Parliament to consider and pronounce itself on the Report of the Auditor-General, which was duly presented and laid on table six months back. On their submission regarding the particular report, I wish to guide as follows: this report is only on Uganda Land Commission, which is just one out of 121 entities under review by the COSASE. 

Whereas I welcome the report, I urge the committee to exercise  greater efficiency and effectiveness in consideration of the reports that have been presented to them by the Auditor-General, putting in mind the constitutional requirement of six months. If the report passes the six months, then we automatically adopt it in this House.

Ordinarily, I would not tolerate this fragmentation of the Auditor-General’s report, but for today, we will receive your report. However, I am giving you three weeks to report on all the other entities that are before you, and we need those reports in the House; please take it as a priority.

In the meantime, pursuant to Rule 181(5) of the Rules of Procedure, I invite the Chairperson of Public Accounts Committee (COSASE), to present the report; we debate it and then, we either adopt or not. Please, Chairperson.
 
5.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (COSASE) (Mr Joel Ssenyonyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do take your guidance. I would like to appreciate you because I saw the letter that was written by yourself to the Auditor-General when we complained, that instead of the reports coming in December, they came this year around April. So, we did not have adequate time to start, but I am glad you are giving us support to see to it that the Auditor-General avails those reports early enough so that we start because when the reports are not here, we are unable to start. I thank you. 

I rise to present the report of the Public Accounts Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) on the report of the Auditor-General on the Uganda Land Commission for Financial Year 2020/2021. 

Before I start, I beg to lay on the Table the original copy of the report. I also beg to lay on the Table minutes of different committee meetings regarding this report. 

THE SPEAKER: Please lay.

MR SSENYONYI: As you guided me, I will not read the entire report due to time. We shared it with colleagues and I will be skipping a couple of things.

I would like to begin with the methodology. The introduction is clear there. We held meetings with a couple of officials who are listed on pages 4 and 5 of the main report as Members will be following. We reviewed a couple of documents; we looked at the budget performance of Uganda Land Commission and that is indicated on pages 6 and 7 of the report for Members. 

Committee findings: Prior matters not adjusted, the Auditor- General noted that Shs 15 billion in relation to overstated payables and unrecognised receivables of Shs 3.96 billion in the previous financial statements were not adjusted as advised in the previous audit report. There was a response from management - I will urge Members to look at that. 

Observations: 

    (i) The failure to adjust the financial statements implies that they are erroneous, inaccurate and misleading. 

    (ii) There was an intention to commit fraud by overstating figures by Shs 15 billion. 

    (iii)  The overpayment of Shs 3.966 billion tantamount to embezzlement. 

    (a) We recommend that Ms Barbara Imaryo, the then Accounting Officer and Mr Isabirye Siraje, head of accounts should be prosecuted for attempted fraud of Shs 15 billion.

    (b) The then Accounting Officer and Mr Isabirye Siraje, the Head of Accounts should be prosecuted for embezzlement of Shs 3.966 billion and the amount should be recovered from them. 

    (c) The current Accounting Officer should make the relevant adjustments to the financial statements to reflect the correct position. 

Supplementary expenditure of Shs 21.25 billion 

The committee also learned that Uganda Land Commission got a supplementary of Shs 21.25 billion, consisting of Shs 2.3 billion and Shs 18.9 billion and paid it to Church of Uganda. 

The Shs 18.9 billion was not part of the obligation to Uganda Land Commission. The committee was informed that it was reportedly as a result of a request by Church of Uganda to the President to help them clear an outstanding bank loan with Equity Bank. The money was channeled through Uganda Land Commission and there is an attached letter to the main report. 

Our observations: 

The supplementary that paid the loan of Church of Uganda was not requested for by Uganda Land Commission (ULC). The said money has subsequently affected the budgetary releases of ULC. 

So, whenever they ask for more money they say, “But we already gave you this amount.” ULC was used as a conduit to transfer funds to Church of Uganda. ULC disbursed money which was not meant for them and this was procedurally improper. 

Recommendations: 

(i) 	The accounting officer should institute measures to ensure strict adherence to accounting standards and the Public Finance Management Act.

(ii) 	Whenever the President or Government chooses to donate to anyone or any entity, it should be clear which vote it is to come from to avoid budgetary mixes.

Unsupported payables of Shs 169 billion 

According to notes 24 of the statement of financial position, management indicated payables worth Shs 169 billion. However, these variables were not fully supported. 

The files presented were not complete as they lacked documents such as survey reports, submitted titles, among others. 

In addition, the amounts had not been certified by the Internal Auditor. Management explained that the commission is building a database to enable capturing accurate arrears of payables and revenue for previous years going forward. 

I will quickly run to observations. The committee noted that there were no supporting documents for the payables which posed a risk of potential financial loss arising from fictitious payables. 

The lack of a comprehensive database is attributable to the mess encountered in the payables system. 

    (a) We recommend that the accounting officer should expedite the setup of the database and also have the payables verified and certified, which should be settled to avoid litigation. 

    (b) Outstanding payables should be halted for payments until all the supporting documents are provided. These supporting documents are what justify what you are paying for otherwise, it becomes fictitious.

    (c) The Office of the Auditor-General should carry out a special audit on payables within one month after the adoption of this report. 

Madam Speaker, it is a lot of money we are talking about; Shs 169 billion. So for it not to be justified - We think that there should be a special audit; a quick one, to save taxpayers’ money.

Prior unrecognised payables during the year of the audit: 

A review of the payment records revealed that Shs 1.2 billion was paid for outstanding arrears that related to the prior year, but were not recognised in the prior year financial statements as payables.

The current year's financial statements were misstated as a result of understanding payables in the previous year by the same amount. 

What this means is, the payables for the previous year, which were meant to be taken care of - For the year when they paid this money, they introduced these amounts yet they were not part of the previous payables, which was problematic and so it was queried.

We were informed that the beneficiaries included Mr Pius Bigirimana, payment for compensation of Bulemezi County, Nakabito and Nakigoza village, a total of Shs 304 million; Kafeero and Company Advocates, payment for arrears for legal costs, Shs 397 million; Mr Pius Bigirimana again, another payment of Shs 191 million; Kafeero and Company Advocates Shs 367 million and another to Kafeero and Company Advocates Shs 22 million.

Observations 

ULC paid money irregularly purporting it to be part of the previous year's payables whereas it was not. ULC till now has failed to adjust the financial statements as recommended by the Auditor-General. 

We recommend that a special audit, which we earlier on recommended, should cover this query as well; the Shs 169 billion and then also this Shs 1.2 billion. 

Key audit matters 

Absorption of funds, I will refer Members to page No. 13 of the main report to look at including quantification of outputs and activities. I will also ask Members to refer to the committee findings in the main report. 

Unsupported domestic areas payments worth Shs 14 billion 

It was noted that Shs 14 billion expenditure lacked the necessary documents to support the completeness of the payment transactions.

There was a risk of possible financial loss through fictitious payment due to lack of supporting documents. Further scrutiny of the expenditure revealed that 27 persons were paid Shs 6.7 billion, but they were not on the validated list of domestic arrears. 

Furthermore, nine persons were paid a total of Shs 1.15 billion whose claims had been rejected by the Internal Auditor-General and there is a management response on page 16 of the main report. 

Our observations 

ULC did not provide supporting documents for these payments, which were made.

Our recommendations: 

    1. The then accounting officer and the commissioners should be held responsible for the unsupported domestic arrears payments of Shs 14 billion.

    2. The Shs 14 billion should be recovered from the then accounting officer, Ms Barbara Imaryo, and the then head of finance, Mr Siraje Isabirye.

    3. The accounting officer – the current one – should always ensure that payments are supported with the requisite documentation. Otherwise, then, it is fraud because if money has been paid legally, the documents should be available to justify.

I quickly move to doubtful payments to beneficiaries worth Shs 5,215,000,000. A review of the payment file, in regard to domestic arrears, revealed that a sum of Shs 5.2 billion was paid to various claimants for the same pieces of land for the same amount. 

In some instances, different pieces of land for different claimants compensated lacked description of the plot numbers. In addition, there were no authorisation minutes on files clearing the payments, contrary to commission guidelines. 

We observed that there is a risk that inaccurate payments were made for ineligible claims. In addition, the payables ledger balances may be inaccurately stated. 

Recommendations

    1. The then accounting officer and the commissioners should be held responsible for the unsupported domestic arrears payments of Shs 5.2 billion.

    2. The Shs 5.2 billion should be recovered from the then accounting officer, Ms Barbara Imaryo, and the then head of finance, Mr Siraje Isabirye. These two were operating together, Madam Speaker.

I will move quickly to confirmation of payables, revenue and non-produced asset account balances. I request Members to refer to pages 17 and 18 of the main report so that I can run quickly. Let me move to irregular award of supplementary budget worth Shs 10.62 billion.

The process of the initiation of the request of the Shs 10.6 billion supplementary budget for land compensation was canvassed by the parliamentary Ad Hoc Committee on Land Compensation. The ad hoc committee noted that contrary to the provisions of Section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act, the supplementary expenditure schedule under review was initiated by the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, that is, Hon. Beti Kamya at the time - with no input whatsoever of the spending entity: ULC.

The accounting officer, under the Public Finance Management Act, is responsible for the initiation of the supplementary expenditure. Accordingly, the finance minister may, upon request by the accounting officer, approve a supplementary budget of up to 10 per cent of the Contingency Fund. 

I would like to quickly run to the submissions, Madam Speaker, that were made by the different people we interfaced with regarding this amount, beginning with Uganda Land Commission.

Management admitted that although the Shs 10.62 billion supplementary was received and spent by ULC, the commission did not request for the said money. Parliament had authorised and approved the award of the expenditure, according to the table there. 

Allow me to quickly move to the second person we met: Hon. Beatrice Byenkya Nyakaisiki, the ULC chairperson, regarding this matter - the supplementary of Shs 10.6 billion. 

She informed the committee that as chairperson of the commission, she was not consulted at all regarding the request for the supplementary budget and neither was the commission.

She informed the committee that the commission had several pending claims, some of low amounts and others that had remained unpaid over the years. She stated that although ULC needed the money to pay claimants, it should have been paid to the claimants that were high on the priority list.

The ULC chairperson further informed the committee that Hon. Beti Olive Namisango Kamya, the then Minister of lands, Housing and Urban Development, requested for a supplementary of Shs 12 billion, but was only given Shs 10.6 billion.

Now, according to the chairperson of ULC, Ms Barbara Imaryo, the ULC Secretary paid, without the authority and approval of the commission, the following people:

    1. Kosiya Rwabukurukuru family and she states that some parts of the said land had already been disposed of and vested in third parties.

    2. Julius Busuulwa, the absentee land owner who had already been compensated.

    3. Natalia Namuli who was non-existent.

According to her, the only genuine claimant was Stephen Peter Nagenda, arising from a court order. 

The commission members, in their interaction with the committee, also stated that they did not approve the said supplementary.

I will move now to Hon. Beti Olive Kamya, who was the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development at the time. She informed the committee that she did not initiate the supplementary, but wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide funds to ULC to settle compensation for some land acquired by Government, to ease tension between land owners and claimants.

When the matter was discussed, the chairperson of ULC protested vehemently and the House appointed an ad hoc committee to investigate the matter. Based on the committee’s report, Parliament approved the funds. 

She also said that she considered the six claimants because they were the ones who appealed to her, while one was through a presidential directive and one through a court order.

The other is a bit of a breakdown of those figures. Allow me, Madam Speaker, to move to number four: Hon. Matia Kasaija, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who also came before the committee.

In a letter dated 12 March 2021, the then Minister for Lands, Hon. Beti Kamya, noted the outstanding presidential directive to settle various claims for land compensation. She, therefore, requested the ministry for finance to provide funds amounting to Shs 12 billion to Uganda Land Commission to clear the claims. The letter is attached as Annex 4. 

The finance minister stated that he never saw a copy of the presidential directive, but went ahead to submit a supplementary, out of trust for Hon. Beti Kamya. He told the committee that with hindsight he never should have proceeded without, first, seeing a copy of the presidential directive.

In line with the request of Hon. Beti Kamya, a supplementary funding of Shs 12 billion was eventually included and submitted to Parliament for consideration. 

With your permission, Madam Speaker, I will quickly move to Mr Keith Muhakanizi, who also interfaced with the committee. He was the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury at the time this happened. 

He informed the committee that he was out of office on sick leave at the time the supplementary was handled. His deputy, Mr Patrick Ocailap, was the one in charge at the time. However, he said that he was still the Secretary to Treasury at the time and admitted that he takes overall responsibility of whatever happened, but not personal responsibility. 

Madam Speaker, allow me, now, to move to Mr Patrick Ocailap, the Deputy PS/ST, who was in office – he was the one holding fort at the time when his superior was away on sick leave. He told the committee that to avoid challenges for ULC, the right procedure should have been for the supplementary request to be initiated by the commission, not the lands minister. 

He also conceded before the committee that he never saw the presidential directive which was mentioned by Hon. Beti Kamya and that he should have insisted to, first, get a copy of the directive before proceeding.

We also interfaced with Mr Lawrence Ssemakula, the Accountant-General and he explained a couple of things. I would like to skip that, with your permission, Madam Speaker, and move to inquiry on the validity of the claims and status of the beneficiaries.

Whereas Parliament had recommended and approved the payment of Shs 10.62 billion to the selected beneficiaries, the committee deemed it prudent to ascertain whether the money was paid to the rightful claimants.

The first claimant, Ms Natalia Namuli, was a claimant in respect of land located at Kyamukama, Buyaga County, Kibaale District, measuring 516 hectares. The land was first registered in the names of Antwane Kalete. It was transferred in the names of the claimant as an administrator of the estate of the late Antwane Kalete. 

The said land was valued at Shs 2,039,000,000. The claimant was purportedly paid Shs 450 million as the first installment, through her lawyer, Lubega and Buzibira Company Advocates, on 23 November and the balance of Shs 1.58 billion was paid on 10 June 2021.

Mr Geoffrey Mugisa was also cleared. He stated he was a legitimate claimant who had sold his land to ULC at Shs 1.5 billion.

I will move to the late Kosiya Rwabukurukuru family. This claim was presented by the children of the late Rwabukurukuru family whose estate administrators are: Kajwasya Catherine, Annette Kasimbazi, Rwabukuru Benon and Peninah Kensheka. 

This land located at Kiyungu-Sheema is comprised of three plots; one valued at Shs 1.9 billion, the other at three billion shillings and the other at Shs 4.3 billion. The total claim for the three plots was Shs 9.43 billion. 

There was another - Mr Stephen Peter Nagenda, whose claim was initially Shs 600 million. He was paid Shs 140 million and there was a balance of Shs 460 million. This money delayed to be paid so he went to court. 

Incidentally, ULC did not put up defence in this matter. This gentleman who was meant to be paid Shs 460 million was eventually given awards and costs by court of Shs 1,062,000,000. Even after that, ULC did not bother to appeal, which we found problematic. 

Our findings on the disbursement of this money

    a) A proper scrutiny of the payment of Natalia Namuli, whose money was passed through the law firm of Lubega, Buzibira and Co. Advocates revealed the following irregularities:

    i) The purported Natalia Namuli possessed letters of administration for the estate of the late Kalete Antwane issued by Masindi High Court under that administrative cause purportedly signed by Justice Ochan Raphael dated 18 March 2015.

    ii) Investigations established that the letters of administration were forged. The case number quoted therein instead belongs to someone else, a one Lutaro Francis Xavier as an administrator for the estate of Lutaro John Mary. Annexure six is a letter we attach from Masindi Court disowning that court document - the letters of administration. 

    iii) The name of the judge purported to have signed the said letters of administration did not and does not exist in the record of judicial officers at the level of a judge or any other rank that worked in Masindi at the time. 

    iv) Whereas this document intended to quote the name of the judge that ever worked in Masindi as Ralph Ochan, his name was misspelled as Ochan Raphael. The committee verified from Justice Ralph Ochan, who ably revealed that the letters of administration were not signed by him and categorically identified the signature thereon as forged. 

	We have attached a letter, which was written by the judge to the committee indicating he did not sign those documents as is purported. Even the signature that was on the documents was forged. He shared with us a specimen of his true signature. 

    v) Justice Ralph Ochan further asserted that at the time of the purported signing of the letters of administration in 2015, he had retired from the Judicial Service in 2013. He was actively working as Chairperson of the Public Service Commission and, therefore, could not have signed such a document because he had retired already. He further stated - this was very interesting - that throughout his judicial career, he had never signed any letters of administration.

    vi) It was further established that until June 2022, there had not been any persons claiming to be administrators of this estate.

    vii) Further, that the forged letters of administration were used by Natalia Namuli to possess a special certificate of title for that land.

    viii) The application for special title was gazetted - these are details, which I will not be able to run through. I will read, perhaps, this part.

    ix) The statement recorded from Denis Kahabura, who was the Registrar of Kibaale that he personally never met Natalia Namuli and, therefore, could not recognise the person who physically applied for the special certificate of title. He, however, stated that he vividly remembered that the special certificate of title was signed off by the secretary of the then chairperson of Kibaale District, a one Amara Peter, following a phone call from the said Amara Peter instructing him to pass the special certificate of title to his secretary.

    b) It was established that the application for compensation of Natalia Namuli’s land was purportedly done on 18 April 2015 on an application form, which on clear scrutiny shows that it had no serial number. 

	The application form from ULC does not have any proof of receipt. Neither does the form indicate the address of the registered land owner. 

	There was no photocopy of the land title attached to the application form and no proof of family resolution, authorising the administrator to sell the beneficiaries’ land to the Government. 

	Further, the claimants’ application form did not have an introductory letter from the local council as required by the procedure, which is well laid on the application form. Surprisingly, the claimants’ application form that was found on her original compensation file has hitherto not been signed by the secretary to the commission, and thus rendering the subsequent payment irregular.

    c) The investigation established that owing to the application of Natalia Namuli, the Commission paid Shs 450 million to an account of Lubega, Buzibira and Company Advocates. 

	The investigation established that Lubega and Buzibira received this money owing to the fact that they had earlier got irrevocable powers of attorney from Natalia Namuli, the purported administrator of the estate of the late Antwane Kalete. The above powers entailed, among others, to sell, claim and receive the proceeds of the said land from ULC.
 
    d) In a settlement recorded down, Natalia Namuli categorically stated that she was brought to the firm of Lubega, Buzibira and Company Advocates in Kampala by her son-in-law, Amara Peter, who was the Chairperson of Kibaale. He took her to various offices, making her sign documents that she had no knowledge about. Her narrative was confirmed by Buzibira Richard, who stated that Natalia Namuli was brought to his office by Amara Peter and was made to sign the irrevocable powers of attorney as well as the purported agreement for sale of the compensation claim to a one, Warren Mwesigye.

    e) It was established that the claimant had received a special title registered in the name, Natalia Namuli as an administrator of the estates of the late Antwane Kalete. Surprisingly, the day that the registration was done was the same day that the title was picked. On that same day, the purported proprietor travelled to Kampala and used it to issue powers of attorney. It was on the same day, again, that the lawyers did the title search from Kibaale. 

	The committee was informed by Counsel Richard Buzibira of Lubega, Bizibira and Company Advocates that his client, Natalia Namuli was on the same day paid Shs 318 million by Warren Mwesigye who apparently purchased her claim with ULC. All these movements and transactions supposedly took place when the country was under total lockdown. Neither cars nor people were allowed to move, but somehow, these people were able to move and transact apparently.
 
    f) During the physical interaction and interview with Natalia Namuli, the purported administrator of the estate of the late Antwane Kalete, who was met at her home in Nyakasozi village Isunga Parish, Kagadi Subcounty in Kagadi District on 21 June 2022, Natalia Namuli categorically stated that she had never received any money as compensation for the sale of any land and further asserted that she was not aware of the family of Antwane Kalete or the land in question. 

    g) Following the above fraudulent compensation process involving lawyers in connivance with some ULC officials, Shs 1.58 billion was paid in addition to the other Shs 450 million and released in tranches of Shs 500 million, Shs 800 million and Shs 288 million.

I would like to quickly move to our observations. The committee observed as follows:

    1. We noted with concern that the supplementary expenditure process kicked off after a letter by the then Minister of Lands - the Hon. Beti Kamya - with no input whatsoever of the Commission or its accounting officer.

    2. The chairperson wrote to Parliament and the Ministry of Finance contesting these payments because she stated that some of them were ghost claimants.

    3. The Commission did not follow up to ascertain that the money was paid to legitimate claimants.

    4. The procedure to ensure due diligence and internal controls including having a commission resolution prior to effecting payment was ignored.

    5. Miss Barbara Imaryo, the then accounting officer and Mr Isabirye Siraje, the then head of accounts violated payment procedures and deviated from the normal procedure to effect payment.

    6. There is a governance problem in ULC given that instructions are given at different levels without a proper chain of command.

    7. There was no request by the accounting officer of ULC for the supplementary. Section 25(3) of the Public Finance Management Act provides that the Finance Minister, may upon request, by the accounting officer, issue a supplementary. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Hon. Matia Kasaija, admitted to the committee that the right procedure was not followed and that his staff should not have entertained the supplementary. 

    8. Whereas the Hon. Beti Kamya, the then Minister of Lands, Housing, and Urban Development, quoted a presidential directive in her request for the funds, she never availed a copy of the directive, even after being accorded time to avail it. However, she attached a letter written to her by the President's PPS requiring a compensation follow up for the family of the late Kosiya Rwabukurukuru.

    9. The then Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development fast-tracked payment of a few claimants, ignoring others who had been in the system much earlier and with smaller amounts. These were more recent billions of shillings yet there are other people that have been in the system for a long time; with Shs 50 million, 30 million; these have been ignored.  

    10. The then Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development Hon. Beti Kamya, did not do due diligence on the claimants whom she submitted for payment after they appealed to her for payment. As a result of there being no due diligence, some of the people who were paid were not genuine. Some of the people who were eventually paid were ghost claimants; they should never have been paid.

Recommendations 

    1. Hon. Beti Kamya, former Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should be investigated in respect to her participation in the commencement of the Shs 10.6 billion payment.
 
    2. Hon. Matia Kasaija, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Mr Patrick Ocailap, (the Deputy PS/ST should be) investigated for their role in the Shs 10.6 billion supplementary process. 

    3. Ms Barbara Imaryo, the then Accounting Officer, and Mr Isabirye Siraje, the then Head of Accounts, should be prosecuted in regard to the ghost payments in the supplementary. The Uganda Police should work alongside Interpol to have Barbara Imaryo brought back into the country to face prosecution. Barbara Imaryo fled the country soon after we started the inquiry, perhaps for obvious reasons.  

    4. Ms Natalia Namuli and her accomplices like Mr Amara Peter should be prosecuted for forgery and uttering of forged documents to wit the Letters of Administration. 

    5. The lawyers from Lubega, Buzibira and Company Advocates should be prosecuted for aiding the fraudulent transactions that led to the illegal payment of Shs 2.039 billion to Ms Natalia Namuli. 

    6. The money in (4) above paid to the account of Lubega, Buzibira and Company Advocates should immediately be recovered and returned to the Government, owing to the fact that it was fraudulently acquired. 

    7. The Uganda Law Council should take action against Lubega, Buzibira and Company Advocates; 

    8. Disciplinary action should be taken against Mr Denis Kahabura, the Registrar of Kibaale, for issuing a title based on forged documents.

    9. The special title that was granted to Ms Natalia Namuli should be cancelled by the Commissioner, Land Registration, considering it was based on forged documents; and 

    10. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should always follow the procedures and the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, regarding supplementary budgets.

General observations and recommendations 

There is a leadership crisis at ULC. Our recommendation is that there should be a complete overhaul of the current commissioners to enhance performance. People are always fighting. Work is not moving. They are not doing diligence and so, we feel that once they are out of the way, perhaps a new team could do things better. 

There is also a challenge with the human resource structure. There are some particular offices that are not filled, for example, the legal department. They have left it vacant yet they are dealing with legal matters. 

We recommend as follows: 

    1. There should be deliberate efforts to recruit staff to fill up the staff structure; and

    2. The top management positions should be filled substantively. Many of the people in top management are in acting capacity and then there is a high turn-over. 

Lack of a Government land inventory

This is a system that enables them to know how much land we have, leases etc. It is not in place. 

Recommendations 

    1. ULC should, as a matter of urgency, develop a land inventory to enable it execute its mandate efficaciously. This land inventory should be regularly updated; and
 
    2. ULC should digitalise the land inventory to improve efficiency.

Untitled Government land 

A lot of Government land is not titled so it is easy for it to be stolen and for all this fraud to happen.

We recommend that all land under ULC should be surveyed and titled in the name of ULC/visa agency by the next audit. 

Unbudgeted stock of arrears 

We also recommend that ULC should compile an aged analysis of all arrears with the view of informing their budgeting process. 

Lack of updated land records/register

We recommend that ULC should update data on the properties to make it easy to ascertain the current status of Government properties, which enables the mobilisation of revenue accruing from leases.

Delay to create the land fund 

We recommend that the accounts of the Fund should be separated from the accounts of the Commission, as per Regulation 6 of the Land Fund Regulations. 

Usage of the Uganda National Land Information System 

The Uganda National Land Information System is not being used. Hence, causing so many problems. 

Conclusion 

The objectives of the Uganda Land Commission have largely not been met as elucidated in the general observations above. The committee notes that the absence of a comprehensive inventory of land makes it difficult to prioritise settlement of arrears based on age of the claim. In the year under review, the committee witnessed cases where recent claims were settled within a year before others, which had been outstanding for more than five years. The committee notes that the lack of adequate funding has also hampered the operations of this entity.

Uganda Land Commission has got a huge mandate, which largely is not being executed due to the challenges we have mentioned above. ULC should be empowered to execute its mandate under the law without undue influence from other entities and political actors. The committee notes that once these recommendations are acted upon, ULC will deliver on what is expected of the entity.

Madam Speaker, I thank you and I beg to move. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, honourable members. Thank you, chairperson, for that very good report. I am just trying to understand; who would investigate the IGG? That is what I am trying to understand. Counsel, can we – 

MR SSENYONYI: Madam Speaker, with your permission, our thinking is that the Director of Public Prosecutions should prosecute those to be prosecuted and also to investigate –

THE SPEAKER: Can we say that a forensic audit be done on that disbursement and report back to the House, in terms of a treasury memorandum? I am trying to understand this. Let us do something that is practicable.

MR SSENYONYI: Madam Speaker, we talked about a special audit for a number of these areas, but then there is where it is blatant and the evidence is glaring. The forensic audit, one – the Auditor-General tells us that -  

THE SPEAKER: First of all, there was a mistake; a minister cannot seek for a supplementary in another institution. It should be the accounting officer. That would be the starting point for the auditor to do a forensic audit. I am not saying “no”, but I just want to understand this. 

5.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you. Madam Speaker, you are right. First of all, allow me to thank the committee for a good job. (Applause) I was listening in and at first I thought it was a judgment. I did not know it was a committee report. (Laughter) Yes, I thought it was a good job done though it was like a judgment; the way the evidence was analysed and evaluated was good. 

However, I believe the chairperson was shy when it came to the IGG. You said, “She should be investigated.” You really know the complication of the investigation. If you knew it was the ODPP, you should have said it; you cannot amend your own report before we start debating it.
 
Therefore, I would have loved that we go with the guidance, because the person who does postmortem analysis of financial matters is the Auditor-General. I think the guidance of the Speaker would be helpful so that they can apportion blame on who initiated what. 

Otherwise, the office of - (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way -

THE SPEAKER: Put on your mask. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the honourable minister, a senior counsel, for giving way. Let us address ourselves to the Inspector-General of Government Act. The IGG can pave way for her own investigation. In case a recommendation is passed, she excuses herself out of office briefly so that investigations take place. As a counsel, don’t you think that can happen? We should address ourselves to the Inspector General of Government Act because I think all of these are provided for. 

MR OBOTH: Do we want to see the success of the recommendation of this report to be carried? I hope you know the previous recommendations that this House has made and the decisions the court has taken on them. 

I think not to water down the recommendations, there can be two ways; Auditor-General or the appointing authority can also investigate. However, we cannot be specific as if we have pre planned or predetermined that kind of recommendation maybe from the secretariat in your committee. You were guided not to go into that area.

THE SPEAKER: This was an Auditor-General's report so we cannot send it back to him. It was his report and those are their findings. Therefore, we cannot send it back to the Auditor-General, we can only ask for an investigation. The police and the DPP are the only ones who can do it.  

MR SSEWUNGU: What I was saying and asking the minister - He knows it since he is a counsel. In the Inspector General of Government Act, there are provisions on how the IGG can leave office. That is what you should specifically look at, but again, it will come after we have made our recommendations and passing the report. 

However, I do not think that we can look for who is supposed to implicate her. As long as there is any misconduct on her, which can happen by the way as the report is trying to reveal now because she is still -

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, whereas he is referring to the Inspector General of Government Act, the person mentioned in the report was not investigated or will not be investigated as IGG. She was in a different portfolio as a Minister of Lands. 

Therefore, the Inspector General of Government Act does not come into the issue. However, she is only lucky now that she is the IGG. 

In view of that, I think the secretariat and the lawyer in that committee must have advised and agreed that the word “investigated” should be left like that in case the appointing authority or police takes it up or something like that.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Right Honourable Speaker, sometimes certain types of food like porridge are not chewed, but you just swallow. I think this report is so eloquent and speaks for itself. What is left for this House is to adopt it in its entirety. 

May I, therefore, move-

THE SPEAKER: And we wait for a treasury memorandum -

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: And we wait for the treasury memorandum. Therefore, I beg your indulgence that you put the vote.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Public Accounts Committee (COSASE) on the report of Auditor-General on Uganda Land Commission for the Financial Year 2020/2021 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

THE SPEAKER: The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2 o’clock.
 
(The House rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 9 August 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)


