

Thursday, 11 August 2016

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. As agreed yesterday, we shall be mainly concentrating on the State of the Nation Address but today being a Thursday, our Rules of Procedure give precedence to some private Member’s business. There are some four Members who have issues to raise: Hon. Connie Galiwango, hon. Bitangaro Kwizera, hon. Tonny Muhindo  and hon. Noah Mutebi; you have two minutes each.

2.50
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. Last week, I travelled to Mombasa to attend my daughter’s wedding. We travelled in our car which was cleared, insured but every other time we met policemen, they would stop us and ask for money. If you didn’t give them money they would hold you for a very long time and we reached Nairobi very late yet we had to stop over before we could continue to Mombasa. 

Even when we continued, they kept stopping us but unfortunately, the stopovers were majorly for the Ugandan cars; others would pass. When they saw our car, they stopped us and demanded for a lot of money.

On our way back from Mombasa on Sunday, we had trouble. When we reached Machakos, they told us that they were going to arrest us because we had no more money to give.

Madam Speaker, I do not see how the East African Community (EAC) is helping us. The people across there enjoy a lot of liberty in Uganda and when they come, they are pampered. We give them priority but when we are in their country, they mistreat us.

It is very unfortunate but something has to be done; our leaders have to come together and try to address this issue, otherwise, we have a big problem. We know we are brothers but they treat us differently and harshly. Thank you.

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I married from the border and that is in Tororo and my in-laws are in either side of the border but I would like to confirm what hon. Galiwango is saying.

A week ago, I drove to Bungoma. To make matters worse, I had an identity card of Parliament which is even expired. At the border post, of course, our Ugandan policemen knew that I was a Member of Parliament. I told them I was going across to visit some of my relatives.

When I began my journey to Bungoma, at the first check point, the Kenyan traffic police asked me to introduce myself, asked for the traveling documents, driving permit. I said, “But we are in the EAC.” I thought they could release me but they openly demanded for money.

It is not like us here in Uganda where somehow there is some fear. They said in Kiswahili “huyu mtu atupe pesa” I asked for what reason? I asked what wrong I had committed. I argued with them and they allowed me to go to the next check point. I could not cross - I think they just made a communication to the check point near at Bungoma.

When I reached there, they told me that I should either give them money or turn back to Uganda or they would arrest me. I said, “It is okay you can arrest me but I cannot give you money. I have not committed any crime; I know the laws of your country here. We are in the East African Federation.”

Honestly, we need to request the Minister of East African Affairs to come and tell us the status under which we are operating in the EAC. When our friends are here, they are at large but when we go across the border, it is a problem. So, that is the information I wanted to give hon. Connie Galiwango. (Applause)

MS GALIWANGO: Madam Speaker, when they arrested us we had to bail ourselves out with Kshs 10,000; unfortunately, because we had refused to pay them Kshs 1,000.

At first they had demanded for Kshs 400, which we said we did not have - my relatives were very bitter because they had done it all along from the border to Mombasa; now again on our way back, we were facing the same thing. But we had to part with Kshs 10,000 to bail ourselves out -(Member timed out.)

2.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Galiwango and Commissioner Peter Ogwang. Uganda is quite ahead of other East African countries in our move to federate with our colleagues. It is unfortunate that we do not receive the treatment we give to our brothers and sisters when they come. 

I think this matter is very serious and I would direct the Minister of East African Affairs to cause a note verbale in objecting this kind of treatment.

I request my colleagues to put it in writing so that the minister will be able to respond appropriately and I think once this is presented something will be done. This is just a few of the many cases that happen to Ugandans.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is not only limited to the EAC because we get these humiliations even in the Pan African arrangement. Last month, I was flying back from South Africa where I had taken my niece for an operation. At that time, our colleague, hon. Nambooze was in South Africa. We came back with her though we used different routes. I crossed the immigration offices first.

Madam Speaker, I got a call from hon. Nambooze saying “I am in a problem”. She was given medication, which she was supposed to continue taking even while on the plane. The immigration officers at Tambo Airport confiscated the medicine of hon. Nambooze at the immigration point.  She tried to give them her medical form showing the prescription and the requirement for her to take the medicine but they refused to listen to her. Hon. Nambooze had to board the plane without the medication and it was difficult for us to reach here with her because she was uncomfortable in the plane. We had to take care of her yet this was just a simple thing. They only needed to read the medical prescription, the medical form and address this matter which they refused to listen to, arguing that anything above fifty mill litres should be confiscated. Madam Speaker, this was medicine which she was supposed to take at the prescribed time intervals, which ended up being confiscated.  

I raised this matter with the former Speaker of the Gauteng Province hon. Lindiwe Maseko, who is my friend and also the Chairperson of Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA). He promised that he was going to follow up the matter but up to now, we have not yet got any communication to that effect. 

Madam Speaker, these are the challenges we face from our colleagues in the continent. Maybe at one time, we must reciprocate the hard way. (Interjections) I would like to give you an example of how the Nigerians behave. 

When the Nigerians flew to South Africa, they were denied everything and not allowed to get out of the plane because they did not have yellow fever vaccination cards with them; whether they had diplomatic passport or not, they were asked to go back to Nigeria. When they returned, they reported the matter to the Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs. When South African Airways flew to Nigeria, they also retaliated and requested all South Africans not to get out unless they produced HIV test results. (Laughter) Without that, they were not allowed to get out and they had no option but to fly back to their country. The following week, they had to go back for negotiations and they no longer require visa for each other.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have not been very good on reciprocity but the Nigerians are very serious and the Rwandese are also very serious. You harass one citizen, you get it. 

Honourable members, if you read your passport, it says, “This is to require in the name of the President of Uganda, that you allow this person to move.” So, if they are objecting to our movements, this is an insult to the President of the Republic of Uganda.  That passport is issued in his name. It is very serious. (Applause)

Honourable members, we are directing the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to issue a diplomatic note immediately to the Government of Kenya. (Applause)  We cannot go on like this.

On the South African issue, we had one success. You remember last time we complained here about the transit visa; you are going to Lesotho, they ask you to get a South African visa even if you are just at the airport. Now, they have stopped because we complained on the Floor of Parliament. The officials should reciprocate and we must enforce it because we cannot go on like this. (Applause)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, Parliament elected me to be a representative of Ugandan Parliament in the Pan-African Parliament. The issue that is at our desk is free movement of people in the African Continent.

Right now, there is a programme, which is going on for issuing the Pan-African passport, which can allow you to have access anywhere in Africa. So, we want free movement. We want one continent and one voice.

Honourable members, I promise we are going to represent you –(Interruption) 

MR ALERO: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Recently, when there was war in South Sudan, the Executive Director of URA directed that all vehicles bearing Sudaneses’ number plates should not be disturbed. These vehicles have been moving freely in the entire West Nile region simply because we are hospitable and very receptive to visitors and we do not disturb any vehicle that is bearing South Sudanese number plates in our area. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government Chief Whip, please, ensure that the diplomatic note is issued today before the close of business.

Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have NRM leaders from Kiboga represented by hon. Ruth Nankabirwa and her colleagues. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have students from Sir Apollo Kaggwa Primary Nakasero, the most disciplined of the pupils in that school. You are welcome. They are represented by hon. Nsereko and hon. Nabilah.

We also have pupils of Banyatereza Golden Jubilee Memorial Primary School in Fort Portal represented by hon. Sylvia Rwabwogo and hon. Alex Ruhunda. (Applause) They are welcome. There is another group here; when I get their names, I will let you know.

Honourable members, there is going to be a Cancer run next week. We normally participate. I am inviting all of you to come to the South Wing lobby at 9.00 a.m so that we can handover our contribution to the Cancer Awareness Campaign. The run is on Sunday 28 August 2016. So, organise your legs and go and participate. I had asked hon. Bitangaro, Muhindo and Mutebi.

3.04
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I rise on a matter of national importance. I would like to add my voice to that of His Excellency, the President, and other national leaders who have complained about the performance of NAADS. The performance of NAADS is very poor, inept and outright incompetent.

I would like to voice the concerns of potato farmers from my constituency. NAADS leased land from individual farmers in 2014. They leased their land; they had the labour and even transport to transport fertilisers with the view that they would pay them within a short time. This land was hired to do seed multiplication to give to farmers in the district.

Unfortunately, when this seed got ready, NAADS refused to pay the farmers and yet, these people had borrowed money from SACCOS and banks.  They are under siege now. They are in problems, the banks are on their necks and they are in danger of having their property sold.

Madam Speaker, in February this year, NAADS promised to pay these people within two weeks from the date of the meeting. However, up to now, they have been tossed from office to office and they are running up and down and NAADS has renegaded on their promise to pay them -(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR BATANGARO: Madam Speaker, these are poor farmers. They are owed over Shs 200 million. Honestly, what is this NAADS? If they cannot be restructured, why don’t they scrap it? How do you have poor farmers owed Shs 200 million? How do you allow their properties to be sold? I am imploring you, Madam Speaker, to order -(Interruption)

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Bitangaro for giving way. The information I would like to raise is that even the Prime Minister engaged the farmers together with the NAADS leadership and they gave an ultimatum that by June, they would have paid them. I am surprised that up to now, they have not paid those farmers.

It is not only Bufumbira but the Kabale demonstration gardens are almost dying because NAADS are not taking up their responsibility.  Yesterday but one, the farmers of Kabale gathered at the police and the RDC was calling all over; it is the same thing in Kanungu.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether NAADs intends to kill Prosperity-For-All and Operation Wealth Creation under the guise of this complacency. 

The Prime Minister directed and the money was dispatched to the NAADS account. Up to now, what is their motive of stifling the poor farmers who are promoting the Wealth Creation Operation and Hakuna Mchezo? Do they intend to sabotage -

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for the information. Have you finished? Please, conclude, hon. Bitangaro.

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The world’s demand at the moment for organic food stands at $192 billion per annum and the leading producers of organic food in the world is India, followed by Uganda. However, Uganda exports close to nothing in this organic food structure.

Therefore, anything to frustrate farmers from production shall hinder our economy. The biggest thing we have, comparatively, is our weather and fertile soils plus the ability of our people to indulge in agriculture.

The information I would like to give hon. Bitangaro is that Government has appropriated over a trillion shillings to NAADS in the last five years but there is no productivity at all. Therefore, anything that frustrates farmers shall lead to a low side in this economy.

I would like to urge every person involved in encouraging farmers to produce more to do so immediately. We have given a lot of funds to NAADS and they should not plead lack of money. They should pay immediately. Thank you. (Members rose.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, close hon. Bitangaro. Let us close that one. We have to move to other things.

MR BITANGARO: I thank my colleagues for the very valid information given. I was about to conclude by saying, unless this money is paid to our farmers, Government driven projects are likely to be shunned.

Secondly, if the money is not given, they are going to sell their properties. I implore you, Madam Speaker, to direct the ministry concerned to ensure that NAADS pays the farmers from Kisoro. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, where is the Minister of Agriculture?

3.12
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Bitangaro has concluded his remarks by requesting you to direct the minister concerned to make sure this problem is quickly solved.

I beg to take it up and I will call the minister to come and brief the august House on what they have done, probably within two weeks.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if their property is in danger, we should direct the minister and the agency concerned to pay the farmers within the coming next week and report to us not later than Wednesday. They have today up to Wednesday to report that they have paid. (Applause)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I just wanted to get it clearly. Is the directive to pay or come and -

THE SPEAKER: Government has consumed services of the peasants; so, they must pay and we want an answer by next week. The budget was passed long ago and there are no excuses.

3.13
MR TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I have realised we have a significant lethal health problem that is developing in this country. Specifically, in the constituency whose voice I carry, it is significantly hit. Over the weekend, I visited three health centre IIIs and Kagando Hospital. I was astonished to find that over the recent months, out of those who were admitted at the hospital, 167 people had died. However, out of those, 37 had died of anaemia. 

Madam Speaker, I am aware that Government has provided blood bank facilities at the designated regional hospitals. The area they cover is far away from the expectation of optimal service. I have also learnt that the blood stock in the blood bank has run out and yet the people who are sick in the hospitals badly need the blood units for domestic survival. Kagando Hospital in- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: What do you want Government to do? 

MR MUHINDO: Madam Speaker, I would like Government to flex the policy because it is only licenced hospitals that bank the blood. We have other facilities that are willing to do the bleeding and thereafter, handover the blood to the blood banks.

MR FUNGAROO: Information. 

THE SPEAKER: You know it is the Speaker who is supposed to say information, but you know hon. Fungaroo is a smuggler. You will get used to him. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give hon. Muhindo is that when I visited Arua Regional Referral Hospital, particularly, the blood bank, I got the same kind of complaint. Arua Blood Bank serves the whole of West Nile. According to the doctor in charge, they have two vehicles which are equipped for collection of the blood. One is based in Nebbi and another one is in Arua which also caters for Koboko and Moyo districts. The prayer to be added is that there is a shortage of blood bank facilities for collecting blood from those who are even willing to donate from health centre IIIs and IVs.

The Government should liaise with reputable private sector hospitals and not profit making like Lacor and Kibuli among others to ensure that there are many centres from where blood can be collected and stored. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Health is directed to come here and explain to the House the possibilities of decentralising the collection, storage and distribution of blood in the country.

3.18
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance as far as education is concerned in this country.

I would like to appreciate that the Government of Uganda has constructed a number of seed secondary schools and Government aided secondary schools. When you go to those schools, there is a problem. I have traversed many schools in this country – I would like to begin with the one in my constituency.

When you go to Kalongo Seed Secondary School, it has a population of 800 students, 14 teachers on Government pay roll and 15 teachers paid by the parents. This implies that our parents are suffering to pay those teachers who should have been paid by Government.

Madam Speaker, when you go to Buyimba Secondary School in Kyankwanzi, there is a population of 468 students. The Government has posted 14 teachers to this school while parents are footing bills of the 12 teachers.

When you go to Amuge Seed Secondary School in Alebtong District, the school has a population of 520 students with 23 teachers which is not so bad. However, parents are also footing the bills of four teachers.

Kassanda Secondary School in Mubende has 407 students, the Government has sent 13 teachers and six teachers are paid by parents.

In Kidera Secondary School in Buyende District, the school has a population of 818 students and the Government has sent –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute but go to the prayers. What are your prayers?

MR MUTEBI: My prayer is that Government and the Ministry of Education and Sports should interview the teachers who have offered themselves to teach in those schools because they qualify and then employ them. This will relieve the burden on our parents. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Education and Sports is directed to come and inform the House about the possibility of employing qualified teachers who are not on the Government pay roll but are nevertheless teaching in many schools in Uganda. Thank you.

Yesterday, we agreed to fill up the posts in the committees. Let me ask the Government Chief Whip to present her list. For the Independents, I would like to nominate hon. Abdulatif Sebaggala to go to the Sessional Committee on Foreign Affairs.

After the Government Chief Whip, the Opposition Chief Whip will make amendments, if any. 

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO STANDING AND SECTORAL COMMITTEES

3.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

Rule 148 (2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament enjoins the party whip the authority to designate Members on the Standing Committees of Parliament.

Therefore, I wish to take this opportunity to read the following names which I have designated to be Members of different standing committees. 

Committee on Science and Technology

Hon. Denis Sabiiti - Rubanda County West
Hon. Richard Gafabusa - Bwamba County
Hon. Cosmas Elotu - Dakabela County
Hon. Lawrence Onegiu  - Ora County

Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Diseases

Hon. Julius Acom  - Otuke County
Hon. Nelson Lufafa  - Butembe County

Standing Committee on Human Rights 

Hon. Ibrahim Abiriga - Arua Municipality
Hon. David Abala - Ngora County

Standing Committee on National Economy 

Hon. Mariam Naigaga – Namutumba District 
Hon. Michael Ayepa  - Labwor County
Hon. Samson Lokeris - Dodoth County East 
Hon. Aston Kajara  - Mwenge County South
Hon. Andrew Martial - Igara County East

Standing Committee on Public Accounts

Hon. Stephen Kisa  - Luuka County South
Hon. Moses Walyomu - Kagoma County
Hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa - Kasambya County 
Hon. John Baptist Lokii - Matheniko County
Committee on Local Government Accounts
Hon. Godfrey Onzima - Aringa County North
Hon. Angel Mark Dulu  - Adjumani County East 

Committee on Commissions, State Authorities and State Enterprises

Hon. Bonny Okello - Kole County North 
Hon. Margaret Aleper  - Kotido District 
Hon. Stephen Mayende  - Bukooli South

Madam Speaker, these are standing committees and I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the names –

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, we are all aware that in this august House, hon. Abiriga has been nominated to be on the Committee on Human Rights and he refused because he is a known person in Uganda for abusing human rights. (Laughter) He has been in the newspapers and he actually said –

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, this is an august House, which is transacting business live. We are being watched by the whole country and so, this is not a place where we crack jokes, which can be injurious to Members of Parliament.

Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that hon. Abiriga is a habitual human rights abuser without substantiation? He has talked about the newspapers but we very well know that our rules do not allow us to use what appears in the press as evidence. 

Is he in order to deliberately injure the image of the honourable member of Parliament in the names of hon. Abiriga?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, unless you can substantiate his abuse of human rights, you have to withdraw. Can you substantiate?

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I do not have the written information with me right now but I can produce that evidence at an appropriate time –(Interjections)- and since I do not have the evidence now, I can withdraw.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Are you objecting to this?

MR RUTH NANKABIRWA: There was also an issue mentioned by the honourable member that hon. Abiriga declined from being a Member of the Committee on Human Rights. I want to give information that when we went outside, hon. Abiriga changed his mind. (Laughter) He relates with the Government Chief Whip who has the authority to designate. If you fully designate somebody you know very well that I am in touch with the person am designating. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: What is this about? Are you objecting to this? 

MR DULU: Madam Speaker, I want to know from my boss whether it is a redeployment or a mistake because I have already been given two committees and I have been attending meetings. I have been invited by both chairpersons; if it is re-deployment I accept. 

THE SPEAKER: What is your name?

MR DULU: My name is Dulu Angel Mark I represent Adjumani East. I belong to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and Committee on Local Government Accounts. Now this is the third one and that is why I am asking her whether it is re-deployment.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, what I can see is that there were areas that were oversubscribed and there were those that were undersubscribed.
For instance, the Committee on East African community has only 11 people up to now. So, she is removing you from the Committee on Government Assurances and sending you to Local Governments committee.

MR DULU: Removing me from where to where? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: According to this, from Committee on Government Assurances to the Committee on Local Government.

Honourable members, if there are no other objections, I put the question that the Members nominated by the Government Chief Whip be approved to serve on those committees. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Can I have the Opposition Whip?

3.29 
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ssemujju Nganda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I present the following names: 

Hon. Joseph Gonzaga Ssewungu– Committee on Public Accounts
Hon. Musoke Wakayima - Committee on Local Government Accounts
Hon. Florence Namayanja - Committee on Commissions and Statutory Authorities
Hon. Cecilia Ogwal - Committee on Physical Infrastructure

I do not know whether I can mix both standing and sessional committees.

THE SPEAKER: So long as you name the committees.

MR NGANDA: 5. Hon. Elijah Okupa  - Committee on Physical Infrastructure
6. Hon. Franka Akello  - Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Madam Speaker, I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those members presented for the standing committees and the sessional committees named be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we did not have problems with sessional committees.

THE SPEAKER: Wait, honourable members, in the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Bright Grammar Primary School Katikamu Busiro North represented by hon. Ssozi Galabuzi and hon. Sseninde. You are welcome. (Applause) 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I was saying that we did not have much of a problem with sectoral committees because they are many in number and, therefore, they accommodated almost everybody but I have only two members of Parliament who I would like to designate as follows:-Hon. Kaliisa Jovrine - Committee on East African Affairs. Hon. Felix Okot Ogong - Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that those two Members are allowed to work on those committees.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, I had left two colleagues, hon. Robert Centenary - Committee on Budget and hon. Angiro Gutumoi - Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

THE SPEAKER: But I hope you are taking into account the numbers.

MR NGANDA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The question is that those Members be approved to serve on those committees.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, now we move to the State of the Nation Address. Yesterday, I had indicated that I had received some names and the first one is hon. Dulu of Adjumani East.  Three minutes each.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 31 MAY 2016

3.33
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Madam Speaker, allow me to congratulate you as I did not get an opportunity to congratulate you officially.

Madam Speaker, I read the document and internalised it thoroughly. The President talks of reducing the number of days it takes to approve investments from the usual 44 to 28 days. I heard him talking about the need to attract large scale investors to exploit minerals in a coordinated manner, and the need to support and develop solarpowered water pumps for irrigation on which Government is working with some investors.

I would like to draw the attention of the august House to the word “investor” - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see one of the ministers leaving. The debate on the State of the Nation Address concerns all of you. You must be here to capture issues of your sector. (Applause)

MR DULU: Madam Speaker, I wish to draw the attention of the august House to the word “investor”. In my opinion, the word “investor” needs to be redefined.

Two, to protect Ugandans from foreign investors who are engaged in businesses that could be undertaken by our own. Thirdly, by not doing that, Madam Speaker, we shall miss out transfer of technology, transfer of the economy and, therefore, expertise just like the Chinese did it.

Today, when people talk about “development” those countries with which Uganda was at per have now gone beyond because the Chinese made the right choice of investors and they were the American giant investors who transferred technology to china, who transferred the economy to china and who have transferred expertise and that is the reason I say I should draw the attention of the august House so that the word “investor” or “investment” for that matter is redefined. I was wondering why it was like that but quickly -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR DULU: But, when I made research I found out that may be, by that time, the Government will be so concerned about our situation here. It was not easy to attract better investors but, it is 25 years ago, are we saying that from that time to today we do not have any say? If there is any, what are they doing? 

Definitely when you look at the definition of “investment”, it says that an investment is the creation of a new business asset, which includes expansion, restructuring and rehabilitating an existing business enterprise. What I am talking about is when we redefine –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, join me in welcoming Mr Edward Byaruhanga Chairperson LC1 Katunguru in Kasese. I do not know where he is seated. He is also with Mr Hamada Katongole, Chairperson FDC in Katunguru. (Applause) They are represented by hon. Mbaju of Busongora South. You are welcome. 

3.37
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. It is important to note that for Uganda to achieve economic transformation or to develop, it needs to invest heavily in the agricultural sector.

Currently, the agricultural sector has been allocated 3.12 per cent of the national budget. And we realise that it is far much below the recommended target, because the Maputo Declaration targets 10 per cent. This sector, if supported, will increase employment opportunities; it will help reduce poverty and boost our export earnings. 

It is on this note, therefore, that I buy the President’s recommendation to capitalise the Uganda Development Bank (UDB) so that farmers will be able to access low-interest loans to help them boost their production because the sector is going down and the production is low yet we are looking at it as one of the targets that will help us achieve Vision 2040.

Sixty-nine per cent of our households depend on agriculture as their main source of income and it is even subsistence agriculture, which is ideally for home consumption. So, the ministry should work hard to see to it that the budget share is increased to help the large number of Ugandans who are engaged in this sector. Colleagues, I implore you to support this initiative to capitalise UDB so that our farmers can access those loans.

Secondly, I recommend it to the ministry to establish and strengthen the value chain links between production, processing and marketing because some of our farmers are cheated by the middlemen who will only add costs and not value to the products. So, let the ministry look into this as well as the forex element of it. 

Today, we recommended the introduction of silos – our neighbouring countries have silos. They encourage people to have granaries but storage is also a problem. The ministry should also look at this issue in order to boost the sector. 

I would also like to know something about the report from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the progress made about the Operation Wealth Creation programme. The President, on page 15 of his address talks about –(Member timed out.)

3.41
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have gone through the State of the Nation Address and I would like to thank the President for the way Uganda has moved – the democratic path that Uganda has taken. Yesterday, I was listening to my friend trying to demonize the path that the Government of Uganda has taken. 

However, you know some of us were there in the last governments To some of us, the democracy we are enjoying is a matter that should be appreciated by all of us. There was no way, in the past regimes, where the Opposition members could be appointed ministers. That is a sign that the Government is working towards unifying the people of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, it is also clear that we have been going through elections and we are here as products of elections. In some other places, elections may be dictated. But who are we that even at this time we have heard of new terminology like “amicus curiae” as seen in the case where the sitting President was challenged in court and that is automatically a sign that we respect the institutions that were put in place. Where else would you find an elected President taken in court and he accepts only for court to confirm that he has won the case? So that is the democratic path that we have taken.

I also support His Excellency in his speech that “We have been looking into even the diminishing tribes…” as he said - the ones facing extinction. On paragraph 36, His Excellency says that he has brought in even the tribes that were facing extinction; I am a product of that. (Laughter) How could the people of Sigulu Islands, who were previously unheard of here, come and speak on this Floor. (Applause) It is a sign that Parliament is changing; we have to accept that. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I would only request that the laws that are made are implemented. There should be a framework to make sure that the laws that are made work and/or are implemented so that - (Member timed out.)

3.44
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address. On page 4, the President recognises the fact that Uganda is a net importer. And when you move to page 7, he proposes solutions to reverse this trend, including reducing the price of electricity, directing all Government institutions to buy locally made products and capitalise UDB to reduce the cost of capital for agriculture, manufacturing and business. 

On agriculture, the President emphasises his commitment to transform the 68 per cent farmers into the money economy and focuses on three cash crops – coffee, tea and fruits. However, what is lacking is the implementation of these proposals and follow-up of certain areas.

I will draw your attention, Madam Speaker, to the coffee sub-sector, where the President has injected a lot of money. In 2015, the President informed this nation that Uganda had got a serious investor to add value to Uganda’s coffee and this investor would add 50,000 tonnes of Uganda’s coffee, which would bring in Shs 600 million compared to the current Shs 400 million. But up to now, there is nothing that has been done. If we are to attain the middle income status, we need to implement and follow up the promises made by the President. 

On electricity, the President has always told us that they will reduce the price of electricity to 5 US cents for manufacturing industries. However, as I speak, in my constituency many industries and factories have closed down due to the high electricity prices. And you know that industries create jobs for young people. So, we make sure that the promises made are implemented.

Finally, Madam Speaker, when you look at the State of the Nation Address, the President continues to use 1986 as the base year for comparison purposes. Yes, it is good to come and tell us that in 1986, we had 60MW and in 2016, we have such and such amount. But it becomes difficult for us to compare the most recent change. As Parliament, we allocate money on an annual basis. It would be very good for the President to come here, use the previous financial year and tell us the comparisons. This would make it very easy for us to see the change. I beg to move. 

3.48
MAJ GEN. PECOS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I read the State of the Nation Address by the President, on page 16, the President says and I quote, “…this struggle is about pulling the 68 per cent of the subsequent farmers from the money economy and avoiding any further land fragmentation.” 

While the President talked of the 68 per cent subsistence farmers, there is isolation of the means of production from 70 per cent of the population, which is classified as “remote.” What I mean by isolation is that they are not at all involved in production and, therefore, know nothing about it. 

While the President talks about subsistence farmers – I am talking about those people – the youth that we are talking about as not being involved - there is a bigger threat of gambling machines deep in the villages. Ideally, it is a threat to me because we are creating a society of dependants, who are speculators; who expect money from heaven and are stealing money from their parents. In my village, they are even selling their fathers’ cows and can easily kill anybody to get money for gambling. 

The biggest question is: are these machines taxed? In my village, they collect money every single weekend but do these people have licenses to operate gambling machines everywhere? Where is that money they collect every week paid? Someone must answer that. Are they also called investors, honourable colleagues? If they are investors, I would like to know whether they are registered. Do they do any cost analysis benefit? 

If Uganda’s economy is run by money from gambling, at what cost do the real producers, or those who are now being trained and let into -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude. 

MAJ GEN. KUTEESA: The point I was making is that – and this is not the first time I have talked about it; this is the third time. Can this House come up with a solution to this problem? The other day we talked about it and yesterday, the Prime Minister also said they talked about the same issue. Is there any solution in place or is it just a rumour? Thank you. 

3.51
MS VERONICA ISALA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support and appreciate the State of the Nation Address by the President. 
Madam Speaker, the President, in his State of the Nation Address clearly showed the love he has for this country. If you read page by page of his address, you will find his support and direction to which the President is taking this country.

I am only going to concentrate on page 21 which concerns the fishing industry, the fish and the lakes that Uganda is endowed with. On page 21, the President spells out how much further back the fishing industry has grown from and on page 22, he tells us where it currently stands and his vision for it. And at the last page 23, the President talks about what needs to be done, particularly in this coming year. 

He prescribes the problems that we face in the fishing industry such as over-fishing, illegal fishing and so much more. He also goes further to explain that the punishment for illegal fishing and many other things should be arrested and imprisonment of no more than five years. 

Madam Speaker, I come from the lake shores and many of us in this House also come from similar areas. In the President’s speech, he did not say that fishermen or anybody who carries out illegal fishing should be beaten. 

Therefore, I would like to call upon the implementers and this House to stand firm on the mistreatment of the fishermen, who are also our voters. In implementing the laws on illegal fishing, we should try as much as possible to be very faithful to –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MS ISALA: Madam Speaker, the half a minute you have given me is basically to say that we have to be very sensitive. This House should support the President in trying to protect the fish as well as the people. Thank you.

3.55
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the President for delivering this address. On the need to reduce subsistence farming through Operation Wealth Creation - my submission is majorly on Operation Wealth Creation. 

Operation Wealth Creation is a good idea. It is the major tool that Government is trying to use to increase household income. However, the challenge here is that there seems to be no proper coordination between the farmers and the officers in charge of Operation Wealth Creation. This has led to losses. 

Most times, items are supplied without making contact with the farmers and there is no effort made to know the size of seeds that these farmers use. Seeds are taken to the sub county and abandoned because people go, pick what they can and leave the rest. 

To make sure Operation Wealth Creation creates an impact and does not fail, like other programmes, there must be a link established with the farmers. Farmers must be registered. The size of their fields must be known as well as the type and quantity of seeds they use. This is such that when these seeds are got, the farmers are alerted. Otherwise, if it continues as it is operating now, I am sorry it may remain the same old NAADS story. If the decision taken is that the supervision and management can be done better by the army, one officer at the district is not enough. I would, therefore, suggest that for proper supervision, there should be deployment of more officers at the sub-counties such that those officers at that level can make proper follow ups in the various homes to see if these seeds are planted.

Besides, there are no advisory services given to these farmers. When these items are given, whether they are planted the way they are supposed to be, when they are supposed to be pruned and the rest, is information that is not always given to the farmers. So, I feel that there is much to be done in that area. 

And two -(Member timed out.)

3.58
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a submission on the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency, the President, on the 31 May 2016. In particular, mine will be a submission on encouraging all of us that we can meet the goal that he set. 

I would like to start by recommending His Excellency for a fine speech made that day in which he ably gave us a solid vision, guidance, encouragement and hope for a future as a nation. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to focus mainly on the goal that he has set for us and that is to make Uganda a middle income nation by the year 2020. I concur with him that we can achieve this goal and we indeed must go for it.

In particular, I would like to point out that I believe that we have the capacity to do so. Therefore, I would like to encourage us on that point by highlighting some of the achievements that we have done; that we have made since 1996 as a nation; the achievements, which show that indeed we have the capacity. For instance, we have achieved some kind of peace and stability in such quantities and quality as we now export peace and stability to neighbouring African countries like Burundi, DRC, Sudan and Somalia and sometimes to our brothers in Kenya.

When it comes to infrastructure, we have increased the kilometres of tarmac roads from 1200 to 5200, an over 200 per cent increase. 

As far as electricity is concerned, we have come from 60 megawatts to 250 megawatts, with another 1000 megawatts on the way, and right now even in this House, we have a satellite. Surely, Madam Speaker, we have the capacity. 

When it comes to telecom companies, we used to have one yet now we have over seven and ICT backbone that now connects us to the rest of the world as far as ICT is concerned, it is being improved upon every day. Surely, we have the capacity. In lieu of the above achievements, I am very proud to know that His Excellency noted that our nation’s GDP has risen from Shs 6 trillion to over Shs 74 trillion right now. Some of us are saying that we are indebted, yes we are indebted but so is every other nation in the world. 

However, what we need to focus on is that our debt: GDP ratio is amongst the lowest in the whole world, such that the lower it is, a lot is expected in East Africa and a lot better than some of our more developed brothers like Japan whose debt: GDP ratio is over 100 per cent; ours is only 75 per cent or below.

So, as a way forward, I would like to encourage, request and pray that this august House, along with the nation of Uganda continues pushing forward on the things that we have achieved and those that have taken us where we have reached. We need also to concentrate on some of the solutions that His Excellency recommended in his speech and among –(Member timed out.)

4.01
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the State of the Nation Address with the following comments:

On pages 5 and 6 the President talks about power generation and the excess power during the peak periods. I think if the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development assisted the President to sort out problems downstream during the distribution, this excess power would be utilised.

I will illustrate this with an example on rural electrification and I am fully aware that these problems are elsewhere but I will localise them to suit where I come from. 

Where I come from, Madam Speaker, we have a line from Kabale to Rubuguri near Bwindi impenetrable forest. This line has 31 transformers and out of those, 11 are not functional yet the line was commissioned in 2014.

Coming from an engineering background, I am inclined to believe that a transformer can only fail within a period of one year and a half. Some transformers were removed as far back as October, 2015 and have not been returned.

At the beginning, people were excited because they were lighting and doing all sorts of things, small scale industries had come up in the villages but now, it has become a very big frustration and this is definitely going to demoralise our citizens. 

Therefore, because I come from an engineering background, I really want to find out what the problem is.  Some people said it was as a result of lightening, but surely in this era, we know that there are lightening arresters. If they were not there, these aircrafts would even be dropping. That is how they are protected. Why can’t we protect our transformers?

Some other reasons advanced were that this came about due to the low oils levels but I am also inclined not to believe that too. I think we have a problem in either the procurement that was done or the management of maintenance of those transformers used in the rural electrification project.

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

4.05
MR GERSHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read the State of the Nation Address delivered by the President. On page 24, the President promises to deliver our country to middle income status where upon he also implied that electricity and running water has been distributed to the whole country.

However, Madam Speaker, where I come from, the 68 per cent subsistence farmers, who are the majority of the population of our country, still have no access to running water and electricity. So, I find it difficult to believe that within the next five years, our country can reach a middle income status, when we still use rudimentary technology for farming and when our people are still lining up to access well water; there is no running water in the villages even when we have National Water and Sewerage Corporation.

Madam Speaker, I would, therefore, recommend that a strategic plan be set up to take running water to every household so that people can have access to water for domestic use and irrigation purposes; that we should also set up national food stores so that during the time of plenty, our people can be able to store food to avoid being not hit by food shortage, which is in the news every year. We cannot be a middle income country when people are still suffering from food shortage. 

The infrastructure to improve the welfare of the people of Uganda is the one that will deliver this country to a middle income status. Otherwise, we shall have big GDP figures while the welfare of the people is still very low. Thank you.

4.08
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to join the rest of the colleagues in contributing to the debate on the State of the Nation Address as delivered by the President. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to start with the President’s statement on page 2 on which he seems to be dismissing some circles that are talking of political reforms and saying we have the most advanced reforms.

Personally, I would think that however advanced they could be, they are not enough because there is always room for continuous improvement. Therefore, I would urge that let us continue improving so that we advance to higher and higher levels. But also this would cure the issues and some of the misrepresentations in the same circles. For instance, yesterday when the Leader of the Opposition presented here, they were limiting democracy to only regular free and fair elections. And that they are not comfortable with the issue of the various categories of our societies being represented, which to me is agreeably a broader kind of democracy.

Therefore, the more we add to our reforms the better the package will be and so I would urge that he rethinks that position and provides room for better and more reforms.

Madam Speaker, on page 4 the President again refers to the GDP of Shs 6 trillion as by 1986. I agree with my brother, hon. Baseke who said that it is better to bring comparisons closer to each other than using that wide gap of about 30 years. When you bring them closer people can scrutinise such comparisons and highlight weaknesses to improve because they will be quite close.

I also would like to think that we need to emphasise the broader representation and inclusion in this GDP. If we talk of Shs 74 trillion as of 2014, we need to make sure that all Ugandans are part of such a GDP. 

Therefore, when he talks of expunging corruption, as he stated on page 10, I would really think that this should come to pass. But also the thieves he referred to on page 11 as an endangered species should actually be endangered because the moment these thieves realise that it was just rhetoric and nothing has happened, they will even steal more of –(Member timed out.)

4.11
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to speak about tarmac roads in this country. I would like to applaud the President for the initiative to increase tarmac coverage from 1,200 in 1986, to the current 5,200 kilo metres. Some of the beautiful roads we have are like Arua, Moroto now, Bundibugyo; we are proud of these roads. 

However, I have also noted with concern, as a leader from the Elgon Region, that Bugisu Region seems to have been forgotten in this coverage. You are well aware that most of the Arabica coffee comes from the rural areas of Bugisu. The passion fruits, beans, mention it all, are some of the products from farmers hailing from the mountains of Bugisu who equally need to benefit from this coverage. 

Therefore, I will go straight to the prayers that we have the following roads, which have for several financial years been earmarked for tarmacking but nothing has been done to date. These include – I will start with the ones from my constituency and that is the Namagumba-Nabugogo Road, which connects to Budadiri County in Sironko. If you travel on this road, it is the only tarmac road going to the countryside of Budadiri in Sironko. 

The second one is the Mbale-Wanale Road. Those of you who have been to Mbale must have seen how beautiful Wanale is. We had a tarmac road linking that area made in the regime of Amin. It was since then damaged and there is nothing like a tarmac road there. I would appreciate if an intervention is done on that road. 

The third road, which is very critical also, is the one which links the country to the border with Kenya through Lwakhakha. This is the road from Mbale to Lwakhakha, Madam Speaker. These have all been earmarked to be tarmacked. And so I would like to say that unless these roads are done, the Bugisu Region will remain the only region without coverage of tarmac roads save for those - (Member timed out.)

4.14
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to join the rest of my colleagues to thank His Excellency, the President of this country for delivering the State of the Nation Address. 

I will address myself to the agriculture sector because as you know, it is the backbone for the economic development of this country. First, I would like to thank His Excellency for having given us the commanders of UPDF to play a big role and change the distribution of seeds and other materials under Operation Wealth Creation.

However, I would request this august House that if we are to become a middle-income country, we need to do a lot as far as agriculture is concerned.

In the last budget, I understand we had budgeted for hand hoes and some parts of this country received them. But my prayer would be that if we are to be a middle-income country, we need to mechanise our agriculture. We need to distribute tractors to help the women of this country because we know that production in agriculture is being done by women. 

In addition to that, we have been endowed with many water bodies like rivers and lakes in our country. We need to increase water for production so that we can have production throughout the year not only to wait for rain water.

We have to improve on our methods of irrigation to have production throughout the year. This will also help us supply our output to other neighbouring countries in order to increase our household income.
By doing these we shall help so many people who are lagging behind as far as household income is concerned, and these are the women of this country. 

Recently - (Member timed out.)

4.17
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  During the State of the Nation Address, the President downplayed the need to have a healthy environment and preferred to facilitate investors irrespective of the damage made to the environment.

As a consequence, hon. Samuel Cheptoris, the Minister of Water and Environment, ordered that environmental impact assessment approvals to take two days rather than months. He further castigated the Executive Director of NEMA for disagreeing with him that the approval process cannot be done in two days.

Madam Speaker, this directive is likely to further degrade the environment through express approvals and inadequate scrutiny of the environment impact assessment. Besides, the cost of destroying the environment supersedes cost of loss of investors.

As you may recall, the former Minister of Water and Environment undertook efforts to protect the environment from irresponsible investors by requesting Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to cancel all land titles in wetlands. I beg to lay on Table, the letters written to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and to request through you, Madam Speaker, that a report is made to this House on the progress made in cancelling those land titles.

Lastly, based on the issues raised, can the Minister of Water and Environment brief Parliament about the comparative analysis regarding the procedure, rationale, benefits and implications of reducing the days to do environmental impact assessment approval time to just two days? 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, all the communication made by the former Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Namayanja. Let us have hon. Patrick Nsamba to be followed by hon. Violet Akurut Adome.

4.20
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity.  I stand here to appreciate the President, for this time round, in the State of the Nation Address, he was able to rally Ugandans towards two major important issues; the fight against corruption and the desire to move this country to a middle income status by 2020. I appreciate the President for that.

My opinion on corruption is that we just need commitment. Once the President comes out to say this is kisanja hakuna mchezo, I hope he meant that we are going to receive Auditor-General’s reports, which are cleaner than what we were getting previously.

However, on the issue of moving Ugandans to the middle-income status, many Ugandans have perceived it that by the year 2020, they will be better in terms of welfare. The fact is that GDP is measured on per capita income. You get the national GDP and divide it by the population. Therefore, it is very possible to have one major investment and the GDP will go up. Certainly we are going to invest in the oil pipeline, the standard gauge railway and oil refinery. I am very certain that if we do all these three investments, our GDP will shoot to around $ 39 or 40 billion.

Madam Speaker, we have seen countries - I would like to give an example of Equatorial Guinea, which has a per capita income beyond $ 10,000 but the 78 per cent of its population is below the poverty line. And there are many other middle-income countries where the poverty levels are high. Uganda has achieved a lot under the NRM Government in reducing the poverty levels from 68 per cent –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the half minute you added. The President slightly put it in the State of the Nation Address that 68 per cent of Ugandans are not part of the money economy. Instead of rallying the country towards achieving a middle income status, he would rather rally the country in making sure that majority of Ugandans are part of the deal. Thank you very much. 

4.24
MS VIOLET ADOME (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I had an opportunity of reading through the State of the Nation Address and indeed in fulfillment of his constitutional mandate under Article 101(1), the President delivered the State of the Nation Address to the Members of Parliament.

I would like to commend the President for this effort specifically, for being accountable to the Ugandans but more or so to the people who gave him the mandate. 

I looked at the aspect of democracy, quality and good governance. In these, he cited the marginalised groups like the Ik, Tepeth, Ssese Islanders, and Buvuma Islanders being given constituencies in order to have representation in the Parliament. I would like to commend him for that. I would like to also believe that the voices of these communities have been represented.

Yesterday, the person who represented the Leader of Opposition in delivering the Opposition’s response to the State of the Nation Address mentioned issues of our democracy being marginalised. I think this is not the case because periodically, we have free and fair elections in this country. We have witnessed that those who are not satisfied with the outcome of the elections go to court. This has been facilitated by the judiciary. It is on the basis that I feel that there has been free and fair elections in the country, which is an attribute of the democracy or the rule of law and good governance.

On the issue of the economy, I would like to thank the President for identifying the areas where we have seen that hemorrhage, which is lowering the GDP of the country. He did not only stop at identifying the areas where there is hemorrhage but he went ahead to prescribe solutions to minimise the hemorrhage and also as a bid of boosting our GDP so that by 2020 Uganda becomes a middle-income country.

However, I would like to say that emphasis should be made in skills development and acquisition. If we do not do this - the majority of our population especially the youth do not have the jobs. 

Therefore, I would like to call upon Members to support the President in this because I think it is a step in the right direction. The skills of the youth should be developed so that they can be able to tap into the job market. We are importing mainly finished products: vehicles and computers. Unless we train our communities to be able to tap into this job market, we shall continue importing most of these finished products. 

He also talked of the establishment of an assembly plant here. It would be the right step in the right direction if we have to reduce on the importation of finished products. Indeed, it will create jobs for the youth that are unemployed in our country. 

I am calling upon the honourable members to support this initiative by the President to improve our economy so that by 2020, Uganda becomes a middle-income country.

MR KABERUKA: Order, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Order to the Speaker? Okay. (Laughter) 
 
MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. At the beginning of this sitting, you called on a minister who was going out. We have 80 Members of the Cabinet and we are discussing a very important presentation by the President and this information will inform the ministries on what the public needs to be improved. However, out of the 80 Members of the Cabinet, I can see less than 10. 

Madam Speaker, is it in order for these people to go and leave us here deliberating on the President’s presentation when they are supposed to be here? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am directing the Leader of Government Business to summon all the sector ministers to come back here. They are supposed to be taking notes to address the concerns of the Members on the most important address of the country. I want them here.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, your directive is being followed up.

THE SPEAKER: I want them all back here by 5 O’clock but we shall continue.

4.30
MR RICHARD OTIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join hon. Nsamba to commend the President for his exposition of the Government’s strategic intent to launch the country into a take-off phase to achieve the middle income status by 2020.

I also wish to commend the President for the decision to recapitalise the Uganda Development Bank. I further would like to commend the move to establish various industrial parks.

However, I wish to register some observations that may derail some of the good and noble intentions of Government. The move to attain a middle income status is based on the computation of the Gross Per Capita Income based on the Gross Domestic Product.
 
Madam Speaker, this country is largely driven by foreigners. When you look at the major taxpayers, you realise that most of them are foreign-owned firms. If we go by this, we may achieve the middle income by 2020, but the livelihood of the population may not improve. I, therefore, propose that Government takes a decision that for us to attain a middle-income status, we should use the resources of the nationals. In other words, we should base ourselves on the gross national products: what our citizens produce and not what the foreigners have produced.

Madam Speaker, in that line, I recommend that whereas it is good to recapitalise UDB, this should not be used to bail out a number of these inefficient firms in the country today. Rather, it should be used to indigenise this economy. We should use it to enable indigenous firms to improve and start-up businesses so that they can also contribute substantially to our Gross Domestic Product.

Finally, I would like to suggest that in the process of setting up the industrial parks as proposed by the President, they should be used to ensure that the industries are equitably distributed in all the regions of the country based on their comparative advantages. This will help us know that there is a certain industry that should be established in Mbale, such that if an investor wants to invest in that industry, he knows where to go. If it is Arua, you know what industry has to be there.

We should avoid the tendency of setting up industrial parks which remain idle for a very long time. Industries are not guided by any rational decision on where they are supposed to be located. At the end of the day, most of them end up being located in certain specific regions.

Further still, we should make a decision because if this country has decided on developing industrialisation –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR OTIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you would like to promote a place like Fort Portal as a tourist city, why would you build an industrial park there? These are the irrational decisions and at the end of the day, they only promote polarisation of this country.

Madam Speaker, a decision should be based on equitable distribution of development and resources across all regions of this country.

4.35
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in appreciating the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address. 

The President emphasised the compensation of some big companies who lost their properties in South Sudan and he said he has directed the Government to compensate them. In South Sudan, Ugandan traders lost property worth millions of shilling. Again, when the Government is compensating the companies, we should not forget the individuals who lost their properties too.

Two years ago, we registered over 800,000 Ugandans who were trading in South Sudan and those who lost their properties worth millions of shillings. We should not only look at the companies; let us also look at the individuals who lost their properties as well.

Madam Speaker, at this juncture, allow me thank our UPDF for the good work they did in South Sudan in rescuing our business people, on two occasions. In the most recent, many of our businessmen had lost hope of coming back to the country but the UPDF rescued them and secured their property. I would like to thank the UPDF for that good work.

On Page 3, His Excellency emphasised delivering Uganda for the last three decades. He made mention clearly that the level of democracy in this country had gone quite high. I would like to state that for the last three decades, it is true that we have been in the process of change. 

Now that we have recovered over the last three decades, let the Government start showing the signs of maturity in politics. Here, I am trying to say that we need to restore the presidential term limits. For the last three decades, we have been in recovery and we have recovered. 

As Members of Parliament, we should not accept to manipulate and change the Constitution for the interest of an individual.

What I am emphasising is that let us not change the Constitution at the will of an individual. There are individuals coming up with the proposal of removing the presidential term limit indefinitely from the Constitution. Let us be firm and stand as Members of Parliament –(Interruption)

MS WATONGOLA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I think from the State of the Nation Address, there is nothing like term limits. I am really surprised to see that my colleague is taking us through another subject altogether. Is it in order for the Member to take us through term and age limits when they are not in the State of the Nation Address?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the subjects in the State of the Nation Address was the state of democracy and that is what he is addressing. (Applause)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for that wise ruling. As I conclude, let us try to be tolerant to one another – (Member timed out.)

4.40
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): I thank you, Madam Speaker. For the record, I am the Shadow Minister for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. 

I stand here to respond to the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency, the President. My comments are about the mining sector that he spoke about on page 19. Mindful of the fact that Kasese Municipality and the district at large was one of the most industrialised areas before the NRM regime came into power, it has since lost that glory.

The President talked about mining, having to create over 1.8 million jobs. Today, we have seen many factories like Kasese Cobalt Company closed, we have Tibet Hima investors that came to mine copper in Kasese and they have been around for a very long time but we have not seen anything happening in terms of infrastructural development and mining activities as they follow each other.

What we see today is that even the few employees that Tibet Hima had given jobs have been laid off under a downsizing programme. I understand that they were not really miners and just wanted to subcontract the mining licence to another person.

The Tibet Hima people came with a fleet of Chinese who were earning a salary. On top of the US875 million that the President talked about, I see us donating back to the Chinese. These so called Chinese investors are earning money and yet Ugandans are not benefitting from that project of copper mining in Kilembe.

The President did not mention it here but his statement was non-committal on how to make sure that Kilembe Mines is revived and operational, to start trickling in dollars into the economy of this country.

On page 9, he talked about Uganda being a manufacturing centre for goods with well-organised industrial parks. Aware that –(Member timed out.) 

4.44
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, I was present at the State of Nation Address and I have read the State of the Nation Address and all through where my heart is, I almost see nothing save for when you go to Page 12 where something on health and education is mentioned in brackets.

I believe that the State of the Nation Address is a statement of the aspirations of the President that should be a reflection of the aspirations of the people of Uganda. I know that many of us come from rural constituencies and as somebody who has worked with NGOs and has done a lot of rural appraisals, I know what most of our people think about as their priority  and I can mention three; health, education and income.

To me, if health and education in a State of the Nation Address can be mentioned in passing and even bracketed, my heart really sinks. I think that something should be done.

I imagine if it could not be in the State of the Nation Address, I would like to believe that somewhere, the President is making sure that the issue of health and education are coming out very clearly and if not, I do not know where we are going to be with all the so called infrastructure among other things.

Madam Speaker, some of the old men and women in our communities are just seeing these roads and electric bulbs which have no bearing on them. These old people dig and are okay with it but what they would really want is that whenever they are sick, there is a health centre they can go to and get treated and they can go back to their digging because it is from the digging that they earn income.

For education, these people expect their children to go to school to acquire some meaningful education. 

I know that we are crying over unemployment but we should also know that opportunity comes to people who are prepared. We would rather have these children get educated and know that they will definitely get something to do in future. However, if they are not educated, what happens -(Member timed out.) 

MR ONGIERTHO: This is the first time I am asking for extra time. (Laughter)
 
THE SPEAKER: You are not supposed to negotiate. Okay complete your sentence.

MR ONGIERTHO: I know that some of my colleagues have tried to ask that the President should be comparing recent years other than 1986. I would like to believe that the President is a very smart person and he would rather compare with those years because comparing with the recent years would be comparing what he has done himself and he is safer not doing that.

4.48
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Omolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of the Members to congratulate the President in fulfilling his constitutional mandate by giving the State of the Nation Address.

I read the State of the Nation Address and I have three short comments and these are on pages 4, 5, 9 and 11. The President explained how Uganda is importing a lot and exporting little meaning that we are only producing non-processed goods and, therefore, we cannot export. The President also said that we are generating a lot of electricity and we now have a surplus. What is true is that we are generating a lot but the President is not giving any direction on transmission. 

Yesterday, the Minister for Youth Affairs made a statement on the Floor here and we were all lamenting how our youth are getting spoilt in non-productive activities.     
                 
If we are generating a lot of electricity and if the Government can come up with a clear plan of transmission and during transmission we make sure that what goes to the countryside is not a single phase but three phase electricity; where we can set up cottage industries which can be used for processing our products as value addition and ,therefore, increasing its value that can be used for export.

My other comment is on page 9 where the President talks of investment. It is a good thing to put several industrial parks across the country but I think we should also take this alongside rallying our citizens to engage in joint ventures such that - it has been observed that most of the investors that come up are foreign investors. We should also encourage –(Member timed out.)

4.51
MR JOHN BABTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to appreciate His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address.

What captivated me most in the State of the Nation Address was the issue of haemorrhage. He mentioned a number of factors that are causing the economy to bleed and among them is corruption. In 2015, Transparency International conducted a survey and recently another one was conducted by Ipsos Synovate Infotrack on the corruption perception index; the position of Uganda at 139 out of 169 most corrupt countries indicates that even as we talk, corruption has hit the roof in Uganda.

Much as I was impressed by the President’s exposition on this fact of a haemorrhage in our economy, I was not satisfied because the speech did not articulate the way forward on corruption. As we talk, corruption is not only systemic but endemic. Take the case of Bududa, which is disaster-prone; as we talk, I, together with the district’s administrative officer and the other leadership, including the deputy chairperson, discovered that there is an account for Bududa in use because it is disaster prone. We have good Samaritans who donate huge sums of money on behalf of the vulnerable people of Bududa and both the Red Cross, which is a lead agency and the Office of the Prime Minister are collecting these funds. However, not even a penny is remitted to attend to the plight of the people in Bududa.

This level of corruption is perpetuated by those in leadership, both elected and appointed leaders, and they are at large being massaged. In my view, we should desist from preaching water and drinking wine. 

Madam Speaker, we have organs and institutions that fight corruption. We have had them from time immemorial, but they are the ones that actually perpetuate the corruption. What are the new avenues? Is he going to conduct himself like Magufuli? Recently, you saw what happened at a health centre IV where health officers were sacked, but he has withdrawn and these people are transferring their services. Magufuli conducts arbitrary arrests but our President is a champion of the rule of law and he is not about to degenerate into a Magufuli. So, what are the avenues? (Member timed out) 

4.55
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I was present when the State of the Nation Address was delivered and I have had time to peruse through it. As I join my colleagues to give thanks to His Excellency the President and the Leader of the Opposition for her critique, I have one comment to make. My comment concerns the Constitution (Amendment) Bill 2016. When I perused through it, I did not see much need for a constitutional amendment apart from speculation, which is likely to endanger most of the citizens if not handled well. 

My colleague specifically mentioned the reinstatement of term limits and the debate going around. I have seen some ministers and others presenting petitions for the amendment of the Constitution to remove the age limit. Honourable members, my view is that we must be careful in handling this amendment because it may lead us into a situation that this country may regret. I do not wish to intimidate the House, Madam Speaker, but it is important that when we reach this item, we handle it with care.

Secondly, in the gallery, we have members from my constituency from the lake regions, whose lives are dependent on fishing. It is at this point that I would like to thank the President because he mentioned mechanisms to see how possible it is for the people around the lake regions to survive on fishing. Otherwise, in our lakes, like Lake George and Lake Edward, fish was actually getting depleted. For this reason, I thank the President and also pray that more mechanisms be put forward to ensure that the methods of fishing are improved. Thank you.

4.58
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address. 

I listened carefully to the President’s speech and one of the tools he said would take us to a middle income status was agriculture. Another one was the reduction in donations of our money to foreign countries, specifically in textiles. 

The President emphasised supporting the production of coffee, tea and citrus fruits. Somewhere in the middle of his speech, he also ordered – he used the word “must” – that the police, military and other institutions like UWA must start buying locally made textiles in order to reduce on the donations we make to foreign countries.

I expected the President to support the cotton sector. If there is any sector that has been neglected by this Government, it is the cotton sector. Where shall the textile industries get the cotton to manufacture textiles? Even the implementers of Operation Wealth Creation, the soldiers, are supposed to buy these uniforms but I have never heard about them supplying cotton seedlings. How then do they expect to get these uniforms?

Further, in supporting the production of tea in Rukungiri, we have also embarked on the growing of tea. I have interacted with the people of Buhweju who have vast tea plantations. I actually expected the President to mention some interventions on how he is going to assist local producers to build factories. This is because in Buhweju, which started producing tea ahead of us, tea is actually rotting in collection centres. Therefore, we need some interventions if we are to achieve the President’s vision of improving agriculture. Thank you.

5.01
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. There is a lot I could comment on but because of time, I will limit myself to only one issue. 

I commend the President on the issue of the GDP. He mentioned the reasons that have hindered the growth of our GDP and he mentioned the rate at which we are exporting unprocessed goods. He went ahead and told us that processing our goods is the way to go and if we go industrial, we shall grow our GDP.

Madam Speaker, we know that if we process our produce, we shall improve on the farmers’ income and that of our country. I will give the example of coffee, and I appreciate my colleague who talked about the coffee-processing industry. I come from the Sebei sub-region and like the honourable member from Bugisu told us, we produce a lot of Arabica coffee. However, there is a lot of price fluctuation for this commodity. In 2014, the price of a kilogramme of Arabica coffee beans was at more than Shs 10,000. However, it drastically reduced to Shs 3,000 and yet there was even nobody who was buying. I believe that if we really processed our produce, we would improve the incomes of our people.

The President also talked about the benefit of these industries not only in bringing income to the country and thereby improving on the GDP, but also in providing employment to the youth. Usually, when I go to the east, I bypass factories along the road and both early in the morning and late in the evening, you find many people either getting in or out of these factories. I think this is the way to go. 

Madam Speaker, I also would like to comment on the issue that the President referred to when he said that there is now infrastructure on the ground. I would like to bring it to your notice, honourable members, that I come from an area that is badly hit as far as infrastructure is concerned. We have been talking about the Kapchorwa-Suam Road for some time. We know that this is an area that produces a lot but transport is a problem. 

I was in my constituency over the weekend and I found very many lorries on the road that were bringing Irish potatoes, which are wasted because of poor transport. Madam Speaker, I plead with this House to push for the construction of this road. We have talked about it on several occasions. We were even there the other time with you and that is our major –(Member timed out.)

5.05
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was present during the State of the Nation Address and I have a copy that I have read. 

I have some concerns; for example, on page 5 the President emphasised electricity by showing us that in 1986, we had only 60 megawatts and now we have 850 megawatts. He also said, to his surprise, that we even have surplus electricity, more so during peak hours and off-peak hours. However, in spite of this, we have areas where people lack power because power is not distributed there. 

In my constituency, for example – Yesterday, I asked a question because for over 20 years, we have had power lines going through our area but no transformers. At the same time, we are saying that we have surplus electricity and yet people in rural areas who need power do not have it. Therefore, I think that we need to see to it that all these areas get power and we stop having surplus electricity.

On page 17, the President talked about the upcoming sugarcane factories, more so in Busoga sub-region. I want to appreciate the fact that the President said that we need to implement the policy of a factory every 50 kilometres. I would like to inform this House that when these new factories are constructed, we, the out-growers, will benefit from them. This is because before the construction of these new factories, a tonne was at -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, conclude your sentence. He is telling us about the price of the tonnes. 

MR WALYOMU: Yes, a tonne was at Shs 65 but as per now, it is at Shs 120. This means that my farmers are benefiting. Therefore, we need to come out with a policy so that these out-growers can benefit more. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.09
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to applaud our proud Jjajja for the clear and precise exposition of the Government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address of 31 May 2016. Love him or hate him, I have always admired the way he magically connects with the ordinary people. I respect the way he weaves old adages and biblical phrases to connect with the ordinary people. I can see that he will continue delivering many more state of the nation addresses as others respond. 

The message is clear; it is now kisanja with no mchezo and we want a march towards a middle income status. To the doubting Thomases, I believe that this is achievable if we can all pull in the same direction. 

A great American, Norman Vincent Peale, said, “Shoot for the moon. Even if you miss it you will land among the stars.” Even if we do not achieve a middle income status, we will definitely be somewhere. Therefore, there is every reason for all of us to work for it and no reason to be pessimistic.  I now see that it all rotates around reducing the cost of doing business in Uganda, stimulating agriculture through value addition, peace and security and then responsible public service.

On peace and security, I am sure that the NRM Government scores highly on this point and I think it is unrivalled. However, I think the problem has been with some of the policemen, who have occasionally battled the public. As the NRM, we sometimes make mistakes with the way we have handled Col (Rtd) Dr Kiiza Besigye. We have won sympathy for him and made him a hero. 

As we reflect on how the whole security situation is being handled and as the policemen are being prosecuted, there is another area we need to focus on - the building of infrastructure, especially electricity. We have heard very many promises in my constituency concerning electricity. There are several lines, which appear in the NRM manifesto. There have been promises for many years. Work had even started on some of them but they changed their minds. They even reached an extent of withdrawing the electricity poles that had been taken there.  

The people of Kiboga would also like to move to a middle income status in the country, and this is where we should actually start from. There is sufficient evidence to prove that we have enough power in the country but the problem is how to figure out the distribution - (Member timed out.) 

5.12
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak before this august House. This is my maiden speech. 

I would like to commend His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni for his well-put State of the Nation Address. I was looking at page 12, where he said that the country is peaceful and it will remain so. In my opinion, this is a sign of confidence in the wananchi and the Ugandans out there, but more so we also need to commend the men and women in uniform. 

Honestly speaking, from an experienced point of view, these men and women do a wonderful job; they protect Ugandans, protect our property but most importantly, they make sure development can take place. While talking about development and a middle-income status, we also need to focus on security if we are to progress. Therefore, I thank His Excellency for that comment on the security sector. 

Besides that, Madam Speaker, there is one issue I would have loved my President to speak about, and that is preventive health. We are talking about medicine stock-outs and lack of medical personnel in major health centres. According to reports from the Ministry of Health and the minister herself during the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) meeting, 75 per cent of cases taken to health centres can be prevented in one way or another. Therefore, honourable members, it should be our obligation to make sure that we promote preventive health. 

By preventive health, I mean issues of avoiding over speeding while driving, washing hands after using the toilet, immunisation of our children, immunising adults who are found negative of Hepatitis B, sleeping under a mosquito net and responsible sexual behaviour. There are normal general issues that can help to reduce on the cost of health services in our country, but more so the money that we would - (Member timed out.) 

5.16
MR JOHN BOSCO IKOJO (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is my first time to speak on the Floor of this House. I would like to draw my discussion from page 7 of the State of the Nation Address. 

On page 7, the President talks about a good investment atmosphere. He highlighted a number of issues that would enable us attract investors and he enumerated them. One of them was lowering the cost of electricity, lowering the cost of transport and the timely licensing of investors, and also zero tolerance to corruption, as mentioned.

Madam Speaker, this country has suffered some chronic challenges like unemployment, low export earning, low taxation, to mention a few. I would like to support the motion on the President’s State of the Nation Address. I am well aware that once we, as Members of Parliament, support the President in the direction that is set for this country, we shall be in a position to transport this country to a middle income country. This is in line with the theme of our national budget 2016/2017, which was “Enhanced Productivity for Job Creation”. It is also in line with the themes of the other East African countries and it speaks of the blocks or strategic approach to industrial development. 

I am also quite aware that once we pass the laws that will create an enabling environment for the investors, we shall be in position to increase jobs for our youth. I am aware that our universities produce over 30,000 graduates annually; where shall we employ these graduates if we do not industrialize? I believe that once the industries are put in place, we shall be in a position to increase the tax base of this country and raise the financial resources to finance development projects. (Member timed out)

5.19
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to thank His Excellency for the State of the Nation Address. 

We welcome the economic infrastructure that will spur economic growth and transformation through industrialisation. His Excellency said that we now have power and we actually have excess. However, we do not see this power in our constituencies. Where are the lines of power? Simple supplies like transformers go missing and we report, but they never get replaced. The ministries and the different bodies that are the implementers of this policy should implement his Excellency’s wishes, so that we move into social economic transformation.

If power was abundant in our areas, it would help with youth employment. We would have industries and there would be value addition on our produce, as my colleagues have said. These are simple things that do matter. 

We have an agricultural economy and we are building an industrial park, but one wonders where the inputs for these industries will come from. Yes, we have seen distribution of seeds but we have been crying over the lack of extension workers to advise our farmers and also lack of fertilizers. We have been talking about irrigation as a nation but we really never seem to start. I, therefore, think that since this is “kisanja hakuna mucezo”, we should see words being put into practice.

Cooperatives are making slow progress and yet, we know that they would facilitate a vibrant economy. We still have issues with health; for instance, in Mitooma, there are five subcounties that do not have health centres III. I do not have time to mention them here, but they are there. Government still needs to come out and give grant aid to some of our schools so that students have quality education. (Member timed out)

5.22
MR DANIEL MUHIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the President for highlighting to the state and this House the issues that we need to concentrate on while legislating and also monitoring our areas. If we follow this, we shall really achieve a middle income status by 2020. 

However, we should also know that sensitising Ugandans on the laws of the land is one of the milestones that we should have as legislators –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I need your protection from the hecklers.

THE SPEAKER: You are protected. Honourable members, do not heckle.

MR MUHIRWE: If we do not teach Ugandans the laws of the land, we shall have them succumb to the learned people who take away their property and this will hinder the steady progress as planned. We should also help Ugandans interpret court orders in favour of the poor. The poor receive court orders in their favour but the implementers interpret them in favour of the rich. We have to consider that.

The farmers who are supposed to help this country to move a step ahead have not been helped. We have left them at the mercy of the middlemen, who determine the pricing and even give them loans at rates they wish. At the end of the day, they find no reason for farming and end up selling their land and they start coming here to the town centres to ride boda bodas. 

Yes, we can achieve a middle income economy, but it is likely to be in the hands of a few individuals. We, therefore, have to help our farmers and low income earners to move at the same pace with the others, so that the riches are not in the hands of a few. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ALUM SANTA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the issue of the ministers not attending plenary sessions was raised, you ruled that by 5.00 pm, you want to see the Front Bench still full. Unfortunately, when I look at the Front Bench, we have only eight ministers out of 80. This side, we have shadow ministers but I am talking about the Government ministers. 

Madam Speaker, very many important issues are being raised by Members. Imagine the issue of middlemen cheating our farmers by 58 per cent; that is a very important issue and I feel bad that the honourable ministers are not here to take note of that. Are we, therefore, proceeding well to keep on talking about these very important issues to ourselves?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am caught between wanting as many Members as possible to contribute in the short time we have - However, I would like to announce those who are not here: 

The Ministry of Works is totally absent; Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, totally absent; Ministry of ICT, totally absent; Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, totally absent; Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, absent; Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, absent; Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - I know they have a function but there are five minsters there – Okay, she is there; Ministry of Finance, totally absent; Ministry of Defence, absent without official leave (AWOL). (Laughter)

Attorney-General and Ministry of Justice, absent; Kampala City, absent; Ministry of Presidency, absent; Ministry of Cooperatives, absent. Where is the Government Chief Whip? Please, call those ministers. 

5.28
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, the whipping is going on. (Laughter) However, there is also an age-old tradition that everybody is aware of, which is collective Cabinet responsibility. I am quite confident that the ministers who are here will definitely communicate the issues and messages to their colleagues and the Members’ concerns will be taken care of.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, you are the only presiding officer, the only person who can give us guidance on what is supposed to be done according to the proceedings of Parliament. You have ruled that all ministers should come and listen to the responses of Members of Parliament to the very important State of the Nation Address.

Madam Speaker, you emphasised the importance of these ministers being around. Is it in order for the minister in charge of Government business now, hon. Muruli Mukasa, who I respect a lot, to defy or to try to imagine that your ruling is irrelevant?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is really deplorable; the first State of the Nation Address and ministers have no time and have not come to hear from the new Members about their constituencies! Anyway, I want them here. We are going to be here until 7.00 p.m. and they must come back.

I am not going to adjourn this sitting because of the absence of ministers. Those who are away with my leave should have also told me that they are going away and so and so would be in charge. 

THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Madam Speaker, for the record, among the ministries which you read as absent included the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I am the Minister of State for Housing; therefore, the ministry is fully represented.

THE SEPAKER: For some reason, I still think about you as a health minister; sorry, my mind was on Ministry of Health. Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development have one minister present.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, you read out the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives but I am here representing the ministry; so the ministry is fully represented. Thank you.

5.32
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka County South, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. 

I particularly thank the President for his comment on plantation owners, that they need to move away from a subsistence economy to a market economy. The President was very clear on pages 16 and 17 when he said that plantation owners are capable of sustaining themselves and can develop their businesses; they only needed policy support. 

However, the President in his speech mentioned two major problems that are accruing as a result of plantation owners and plantations being in one particular place. He said there is a possibility of plantations and factories poaching on the sugarcanes of one another. He also mentioned that there is a possibility of suicidal cannibalism among these factories.

Madam Speaker, I would like to add something very serious. In the constituency and in the region where I come from, there are around five sugar factories, that is, in Busoga region. There are also many other challenges that the President did not highlight, which I feel were necessary to inform this House: One, among the out-growers that are mainly facilitated by these plantation owners, there is serious use of child labour. Many of the children are now sugarcane cutters and have dropped out of schools. This can easily explain why performance in many primary schools in that region is very poor. 

Two, these factories have created a very high demand for sugarcane and it has created a very big problem. Husbands who own land have leased out their land to other out-growers at a cost of Shs 400,000 per acre for a period of five years and sometimes more than that. This has created so many problems because housewives and children have been left landless with nowhere to cultivate. 

I support the President’s policy of having no new sugar factories at a radius of 50 kilometres. I also pray that in such a region, we do not add more sugar factories neither should we subtract.

Lastly, on the issue of increasing food security and getting the 68 per cent from subsidies to man the economy, I would like to appeal to Government to put up a policy that can give at least some percentage to the women in this country -(Member timed out.)

5.36
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to salute you, comrades, for making it to his House; it is a great thing. 

Madam Speaker, before I say a few things, I would like to know if the ministers representing the water sector and the road sector are around because I have issues there. The issues I am going to point out are pertinent to the people of my constituency and for me to speak without the presence of those ministers would be to undermine the expectations of my constituents in Kumi.

Madam Speaker, the President rightly said that now in Uganda we have built a base because we have electricity and roads. However, the Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi Road has never been tarmacked up to now. How can we talk of a base to propel activities that will bring about a middle income status to Uganda when that road is not yet done? 

My issue here is implementation; we talk about things but we do not implement them. If we measure what we are doing here, we can only talk about tonnes of speeches measured against grams of non-activity.

Madam Speaker, the road from Kumi to Serere to Soroti is not tarmacked up to now. Something has got to be done before we can talk about a middle-income status that can benefit the entire country and not only a few parts of the country. If we do not do that, the middle-income status we are talking about will be realized only in Kampala and be news to other regions.

Madam Speaker, a loan was acquired and it was approved by this very Parliament to put water in Kumi –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MR AOGON: It is my maiden speech. A loan was acquired to supply water to Kumi Municipality. However, someone somewhere is sitting down and not supplying the water. How will the middle-income status come to Uganda when Kumi has no water?

Madam Speaker, the flying school in Soroti needs to be upgraded to an airport. I fear that it will only remain in speeches and may not be done. 

I am not saying that Government is not doing anything. They are doing something, but the speed at which they are doing it is very slow. That is why the President is going to health centres and firing people because people who are supposed to do their work are not doing it. (Member timed out.)

5.39
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 2001, hon. Norbert Mao said “You can lock animals in a zoo and give them everything, but they will never stop trying to go out”. This means that much as NRM has done a lot for this country, we can never appreciate it. In public administration, they say that human beings are complicated. The President, sometime back said “I wish I was God, I would say ‘let there be electricity, let there be water, let there be roads, let there be hospitals’”. God created the earth in six days but you are not God to create the world like He did.

Madam Speaker, on democracy, we have a multi-party system in Uganda. The President in his speech said that he was not aware of any society in the world that has a more advanced democracy than that of Uganda; no wonder, we have many people belonging to different political parties. I was perturbed when one of the Members said that it was only on page 12 where he made a point. Yes, but on pages 2 and 3, the minority, the army, persons with disabilities and other groups are also represented.

NRM has transformed this country and we have a lot of evidence; for instance, on security, there is the Karamoja disarmament among others. If it were not for NRM, we would not be here. Regarding education, if it were not for NRM, I would not be here. I am here because of NRM – (Interjection) - In the past regimes, we could not make calls from our bedrooms; the only way was to come and line up at the post office in Kampala.  

I have not seen a Member of Parliament going to the Post Office to post a letter. However, back in the day, we would move from Karamoja and Gulu to come and make calls in the Post Office. Today, we make calls from our bedrooms. (Laughter) 

You have seen the GDP of Uganda rising and there is freedom of expression. However, before -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for the minority.

MR LOKWANG: Before, we used to have state bureaus in Uganda where you could say nothing. Someone should appreciate what we have and believe God to complete the rest. 

Madam Speaker, we do not want what happened in Rwanda, Kenya, Somalia and South Sudan, among other countries, to happen to us. Let us live together and fight corruption. We should not let the President fight corruption alone. Let us stand in solidarity and fight corruption together. (Applause)

5.43
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in appreciating and thanking the President for his speech and I would like to make a few statements.

First of all, despite all the good things the NRM and the Government of Uganda has done, we must improve in a number of areas. In the education sector, Government has constructed schools right from the rural areas up to university level. Unfortunately, the quality of education is still wanting and that is why our focus must be on improving the quality of education in this country.

Secondly, despite the laws and development we have in Uganda, the human rights issue is still there. Our colleagues in the police have been a bit brutal of late. They must be involved in protecting the rights of our people. In protecting the rights of our people, this country will move forward together.

Thirdly, we have many counterfeit products in Uganda. My appeal is that we must protect Ugandans from all these counterfeit products. We all know them.

Fourthly, on the health sector, there are very many health centres in this country; in my constituency, for example, every subcounty has one health centre. Unfortunately, there are no maternity units in the health centres III. These are realities in Ngora. There is a subcounty in Ngora with 43,000 people and it has no maternity unit and yet sometimes about nine women are delivered per day –(Interjections) - moreover in a toilet. What a shame! We must address these matters and I can provide the details if need be.

We must also focus on tourism and trade if we are to develop. Short of that, we shall only be kidding around. What we must do is to make sure that Uganda moves forward and for us to move forward, we must focus on key areas.  

Madam Speaker, in Ngora, there is no constant electricity supply. In places like Tororo, Mbale, Atapara, Kumi among others –(Member timed out.)

5.46
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency the President said that Uganda will be a middle-income country if we export more and import less. The shilling depreciates because we export little and mainly things of no value.

Hon. Abala talked about the education system in Uganda, which is very poor. However, he did not elaborate on it. Our education system is the root cause of all these problems in Uganda. We have graduate pharmacists in Uganda who cannot make a single drug, but they are degree holders in pharmacy. They are taught how to sell drugs made by Indians and Europeans, but they cannot make a single drug themselves. Therefore, we need to reshape our education system, Madam Speaker. We have holders of degrees in ICT and telecom engineering, but they cannot make anything. What can we expect? We need to reshape the education system of Uganda. 

Our curriculum at Kyambogo is being controlled by the whites. We are not in charge of the curriculum at the National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC). It is always difficult to get our Ugandan books on the syllabi. There is a lot of bureaucracy. Therefore, we need to reshape our education system if we are to address all these challenges.

How shall we reach a middle income status as a country with the current exorbitant bank interest rates? Even when inflation is around five per cent, the commercial banks are lending money at around 23 per cent. 

The President talked about introducing ADB, but still this cannot solve all these problems. We need to introduce banking reforms in Uganda. There is no person from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here, but we need bank reforms as a country. The tycoons are seeking bailouts not because that money will help them, what they really need are bank reforms.

Yesterday, someone talked about MTN beginning to give out loans and Bank of Uganda licensed Bank of Africa to partner with them. This is wrong. Bank of Uganda has given out its mandate of creating money. When I talk of creating money, I do not mean printing notes; I mean creating money that has not been existing. The commercial banks and telecom companies have now taken over this role of creating money in our country and that is why the economy is crippled. We need to address this as -(Member timed out.)

5.50
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the President for the State of Nation Address. I also would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for her response. Maybe I need to introduce myself; I am the UPC Whip.

I would like to start by responding to the blanket statements made here by the Leader of the Opposition. First of all, on page 7 she said that the rigging of elections in 1980 triggered the resistance war that destroyed lives of over 500,000 Ugandans. 

I do not know on whose behalf the Leader of the Opposition was responding. It is not our opinion that UPC rigged the 1980 elections. (Laughter) This statement was given without facts, but I have facts. As far as I know, according to the Commonwealth election observers’ report of 1980, they conclusively remarked that the people of Uganda carried out worthy, valid and conclusive elections. (Laughter) This is not my opinion; it is the Commonwealth election observers’ report -(Interjections)- Hold on, I will give you time. (Laughter) They further noted that there were isolated cases, which could be addressed through the courts of law.

I want to correct this blanket statement and also remind my Leader of the Opposition that there are very many examples along the way of stolen elections - 2001, 2006 and 2011 - and people went to court, –(Interjections)– even in 2016, and people are still in court. Here in Parliament, across all the political divides, there are independent Members of Parliament as a result of stolen elections. I would like to say the election pickpockets are in all parties. (Laughter) 

Let me now bring myself to the State of the Nation Address, which was delivered - (Member timed out.)

5.53
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The spirit behind Article 101 of the Constitution was that first, the President would appear in person to demonstrate to the country the state of its health; secondly, the President would describe the situation in the country and also prescribe measures to address those situations; and thirdly, to give an account to the people of Uganda.

I would like to thank the President for appearing in person especially since he has only four more years to appear in person before he retires. (Laughter) That is a fact because after four years, the President will retire, unless somebody can rise up and challenge me in this House on that.

Madam Speaker, I found out that the motion was brought requiring us to endorse it for being precise and clear. However, I have heard the submissions of all the Members and it is difficult for me to endorse the speech as being clear and precise because of the numerous complaints I have heard. 

I would like to bring to the attention of the President a few things. He mentioned something on democracy and said we have the best model of democracy. There are three pillars of democracy: leadership, the legal framework, and the institutional framework. That means whatever the leadership decides is honoured at every level. Now, if the leadership of the courts of law, for example, issued court summons and then the institution which is supposed to effect them refuses to honour the court summons, are we still on track democratically? Therefore, we have areas we need to improve in terms of our democracy. 

Secondly, the President did not account for the budget that this House appropriates to him. The aspect of accountability was emphasised even in 2010 when he was giving his State of the Nation Address. He said, and it is on record in the Hansard, “I am here not only for a ritual, but to account to Ugandans.” What happened to the accountability; we did not hear anything in that regard that day?

I would like to talk about the issue of lack of supplies to our abattoirs. The President said that our abattoirs require 400 cows every day. I think there are shortages. I wish I could remind him that the people of northern Uganda - Lango, Teso and Acholi - had all the required numbers of cows to supply any abattoir in this country until they were robbed in broad daylight. We are still looking for those robbers to return them, but we have not even found them. (Laughter) Right now, we would not be crying – (Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. KUTEESA: I would like to inform the Member that in 1988, while flying by helicopter from Kitgum to Gulu, I found a trail of cattle covering about eight miles long being moved from Achwa Ranch going to Karamoja –(Interjections)– Listen! I stopped in Gulu and called the community and asked them why their cows were going away. Instead of their sons protecting the cows, they said they are going to attack the barracks tomorrow. If you cannot protect your cows, how do you want Government to help you? The same morning, those people came to attack Gulu – (Interjections) - These are facts - 

MR AKOL: The General was in government and he saw cows being removed from the region; it was his responsibility to protect Ugandans and their property. Is it in order for the General to say in this House that they told civilians that their cows are being moved?

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I have no way of knowing what was said at that time. (Laughter) Please, just conclude.  

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, the matter being raised on this Floor is very important especially when it comes to the property and assets of the people who are citizens of this country. The General made a very clear statement that revealed things that I did not know. He said that when cows were being herded, he was flying over in a helicopter, and yet he was the commander of the army that was meant to protect the property and assets of the people.

I have been triggered to propose to this Parliament that the statement made by the General be investigated. Let it be referred to a committee so that it is investigated. Our people have up to now not known the real people who took our animals. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to follow up this matter in their routine work.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I wish to add a small rejoinder. I think I will also offer to be a witness in that committee. In the context to what the honourable representative of the UPDF has said, I was nine years old in 1988 and I did see helicopters with soldiers carrying some of our cows. I think that I will be a very useful witness to the committee as assigned by the Speaker. I thank you, honourable, for giving me this opportunity.

MR ODUR: I thank you for all the information and for your ruling, Madam Speaker. 

As I conclude, in the State of the Nation Address the President mentioned some very important figures and I would like this House to pay attention. The President said that in 1969, the rate of growth was –(Member timed out.)

6.01
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I appreciate the President for the State of the Nation Address and the Leader of the Opposition for her eloquent response.

On page 2, line 22, the President talks about democracy and the focus is on representation. In line 22 of page 2 of the State of the Nation Address, he talks about the different segments of that representation. I would like to draw the attention of this House to the UPDF representatives in this House. I do not know whether this came to your attention, but out of 10 UPDF representatives, we have six of them coming from one region - the west; there are two from the central, one from the Lango sub region and one from the Acholi sub region. There is none coming from the east. Is that democracy, especially if you are focusing on representation?

Madam Speaker, on page 10, line five and six, the President used inciting language, which I find unconstitutional. In line five and six, the President compared the corrupt leaders in his government to rats that steal from a millet store. I am uncomfortable with that definition. Also, he went ahead to say, “These rats must be exterminated”. (Interruption)

GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, hakuna mchezo; this is a statement that should be taken very seriously and everyone should understand. The Members of Parliament representing the UPDF went through a democratic and transparent process to come here. It was according to votes and those who are here are the ones who were voted for, like all other Members here. In the armed forces, we do not do things based on simplistic equality. If that was the case, the number of deaths that take place would follow that arrangement. 

Is the honourable member in order to come to this serious House where we do not want mchezo – [Hon. Member: “What is Mchezo?”]- It means playing and joking around – and say it was not democratic and yet it was transparent for the public and the entire world to see? He says it was not democratic but does democracy mean equal representation of tribes?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know where the elections took place but the result is that in the process, one region in the country lost a representative, Gen. Angina, who used to be in this House. The elections extinguished him. So, it is a fact that there is no equity. Let us proceed. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the General for his reference. Maybe he will have to excuse me because I am a policy analyst and a scientist who believes in evidence and facts and I was basing on the facts. 

On page 10, lines five and six, I am concerned about the language. Human beings and leaders serving in his Government are referred to as rats; and he does not stop there, he goes on to say, “These rats must be exterminated”. That is not justice; that a rumour of people who are alleged to have indulged in corruption should be killed or exterminated!

If I put or deployed a microscope on the Address on the State of the Nation focused on economic growth, it had nothing to do with economic development which concerns the quality of life of Ugandans. That is the reason why first-class degree holders from my constituency are on Kampala streets vending newspapers. That is the reason why Ugandans from my constituency have to compete with animals to drink water from a water point. About two subcounties in my constituency have no secondary schools. Is that what you call economic growth? 

I think this was not a State of the Nation Address but it was another chapter in the Lamentations book of the Bible -(Member timed out.)

6.09
MS CATHERINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the President because of the words of wisdom that he communicated on 31 May 2016 at the place where we all were.

Allow me to inform you that I am passionate about the sectors of health, agriculture and education. However, today I will talk about issues to do with agriculture. On page 16, I am glad to have heard His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni say, in his words of wisdom, that the struggle will be about pulling 68 per cent of the subsistence farmers into the money economy and avoiding any further land fragmentation. The people of Kabale are suffering with many issues regarding land fragmentation. 

Madam Speaker, the economy of Uganda is supported by agriculture, which contributes about one-third of the country’s GDP. The sector is mainly semi-subsistence with low input and low productivity. According to the Minister of Agriculture, Kabale District is one of the most well-known crop producers with great interest in potato production and other crops which include sorghum, maize, beans and others. As the struggle continues, my people have not been helped and this has been blocked by many issues and I want to highlight a few of them. In Kabale -(Member timed out.)

6.12
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to join my colleagues to thank the President for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address on the state of the nation.

I was tickled by the statement of the President where he noted that it is erroneous to think that we can modernise agriculture and industrialise the country using commercial banks. He further went on to say, and I was extremely excited to hear this, that the Government should capitalise UDB so that it gives low interest loans to agriculture and industry, that is, the manufacturing sector.

However, there are some bottlenecks, which need step by step practical answers led by technical people or by ministers. First of all, UDB is only based in Kampala; therefore, I propose that UDB spreads its wings all over the country. It should be done immediately and it should be explained. The other bottleneck is the land tenure system. The way we use our land is not conducive for production. If we are to commercialise agriculture, the land should be used for production.

The Government has not enabled farmers to procure earthmoving equipment and agricultural tractors for bush clearing and ploughing of the land. The Government has not massively and aggressively promoted irrigation. The Government has not tackled post-harvest administration; we lose a lot of food crop upon harvest because we have no silos. I propose that Government moves in quickly to establish silos at every subcounty and these could be hubs for manufacturing.

Uganda has 15 million cows, but as I said a few days ago, most of these cows are infected with disease; therefore, we cannot even export our beef. Government should move in and explain to us how we are going to move this country, how we are going to achieve this mission of moving our country to a middle-income economy –(Member timed out.)

6.15
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Allow me to thank both the President and the Leader of the Opposition for doing their part and giving justice to this State of the Nation Address. 

On page 2 of the State of the Nation Address, our President asked a very key question: “How many other countries in the world have special representation…?” As a country, we are happy and we rejoice that we have representation of women here through affirmative action. However, I think we should go beyond this if we are to talk about Uganda becoming a middle-income country. 

According to the world classification of women in national parliaments, Uganda takes the 31st position. As much as we now have 143 seats for women in this Tenth Parliament, the number of women in leadership positions is still low. As we move forward, we should move towards the 50:50 ratio recommended at the 60th session of the Commission on the Status of Women in March 2016 in New York. They advocated for gender representation in national parliaments worldwide to 50:50 and this is what we should be striving for.

I am also aware that as a country, we are signatory to various obligations that emphasise gender equality. We have the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), among others. I am only disappointed that from the State of the Nation Address, among the coming Bills to be presented during this session we do not have the Marriage and Divorce Bill. I hope that this will be incorporated because it has been shelved for long.

Finally, if we are talking about tarmac coverage of over 5,000 kilometres, how does this translate to the improvement of the life of a common woman out there? If we have tarmac being used to dry –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the shadow minister.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, if we have tarmac being used to dry cassava rather than adding value to the life of an ordinary woman, I think more needs to be done.

In Amuru, we have the Gulu Highway that stretches to Nimule. However, this road was not constructed with a gender perspective because it is very high and it is also inaccessible to people with disabilities. In addition, the women who would have benefitted from selling goods by the roadside are not able to do so because the road is very high and inaccessible. In the future, as we think about various infrastructural developments, we should use a gender lens. Thank you, and I pray for the best for my country.

6.20
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech. I congratulate the President upon presenting the State of the Nation Address. 

I wish to draw your attention to page 10, which mentions corruption by civil servants. Whereas it has been highlighted that fighting corruption is going to be the focus in this term, measures to curb corruption were not highlighted in equal measure. 

I did a study on corruption in the civil service and the issue of the welfare of civil servants is very critical. Honourable minister in charge of the public service, your civil servants are hustlers; they hustle to make ends meet. I was in my home village watching television when the Committee on Public Service was grilling the minister for paying out extra allowances. Members, I would like to garner political support for reforms to support the welfare of civil servants. This is because I was a beneficiary of those allowances and at that point, I considered them as an entitlement. People need to lead decent lives. 

In carrying out my research, housing came out as a critical need. Some people admitted to taking bribes because they needed to pay rent. If the take-home pay of an entrant is Shs 450,000, how can someone survive on that? There is no political will to support civil servants’ welfare. Please, support this move if we are to succeed in service delivery. Thank you.

6.22
MR KENNETH ESIANGU (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also applaud the President on the State of the Nation Address, which was delivered on 31 May. 

Allow me to interest the House in page 21, specifically where the President elaborated on illegal fishing. This was echoed by one of the Members from Kaberamaido. Interestingly, there is a lot that the President has lamented on regarding illegal fishing. This is one of the areas that I have had a lot interest in, in the past 15 years, and I have seen it go down the drain because of poor leadership. 

In Masaka, there were three fish-processing factories but all have closed, except one. In Kampala, there were six but now only three are operational. In Jinja, there were three but only two are operational. In Entebbe, there were four but now only two are operational. If we continue at this rate, it will be alarming because these are jobs that are being lost by Ugandans, and the foreign exchange that the fish is supposed to bring in is also lost. 

It has actually made matters worse because cargo operations at Entebbe Airport are in jeopardy. Most of the exports that pass through Entebbe Airport are perishable and 60 per cent is fish. We are now left with almost nothing to put on these planes and this is revenue that we are losing. The Civil Aviation Authority earns a lot of money from landing fees, clearance and navigation but the planes are no longer coming. This is revenue that we are losing as a country. 

The President acknowledges that he has tried – I will read from page 24 verbatim: “I have put a number of ministers in that sector to no avail.” This is not healthy for our country – (Member timed out.)

6.25
CAPT (RTD) DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues in appreciating the President for bringing the country this far, especially in terms of democracy. 

I would like to address myself to free and fair elections. Madam Speaker, I think Uganda is now known world over for this. Where else can you find an army captain defeating a general, moreover the captain was in prison? (Laughter) I commend the President for this kind of work. Civilians are also competing with generals and senior ministers and defeating them in elections. How then can someone come out to say that we did not have free and fair elections? We must appreciate. (Laughter)

Secondly, my point of emphasis is on the security sector. The UPDF has performed excellently in and out of the country and we must commend our gallant UPDF officers, particularly those who are in Somalia. It is well known that the US attempted to restore peace in Somalia but they ended up withdrawing their soldiers. These days, they even come to Uganda and consult the UPDF on how they managed to restore peace in Somalia. 

Still on issues of security, these days people travel freely from one border to another. They are able to move from Kisoro to Kaabong, Koboko and Mubende without having their movements tampered with due to the well-constructed roads. Nevertheless, there is still a lot to be done, especially in Mitooma where the President has been pledging the tarmacking of the Mitooma-Rukungiri Road since 2001. I urge the Government - (Member timed out.) 

6.28
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Due to time constraints, I only picked three areas to talk about in the State of the Nation Address. 

First, I would like to thank the President for reaffirming that this is a peaceful country and it is going to remain so and nobody is going to change that. For that, I would like to thank our gallant officers and men of the UPDF for maintaining this peace for the last 30 years. 

After carrying out my own research, I discovered that the UPDF is not only protecting us and our neighbours but it is the most disciplined army in the whole of Africa. I would like to thank you -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, this is my maiden speech so protect me. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the Member to speak.  

MR GAFABUSA: On pages 15 and 16, the President talked about Operation Wealth Creation and said that this is something that we have been talking about for a long time; the difference this time is that we shall not go everywhere, only to end up nowhere. In my opinion, that is something beneficial to all of us. 

He mentioned that for the start, we shall focus on crops like coffee, fruits and tea. If everything goes according to plan, as the President detailed in the State of the Nation Address, in terms of projection and allocation for this financial year, we are going to cover two million homesteads out of the 7.3 -(Member timed out.) 

6.32
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda County South, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here, first of all, to salute the President for his State of the Nation Address. I have read through it and there are a number of issues, which interest me and my constituency. The specific one I would like to talk about is on page 15, concerning agriculture and Operation Wealth Creation, where crops like coffee, fruits and tea will be distributed to farmers. 

Madam Speaker, my constituency has a problem of land evictions; unless that problem is addressed by this Parliament, we shall not be in position to implement this. A good number of people are bibanja holders and they have been evicted from their land or bibanja. There are also some people being threatened with eviction. Therefore, there is no way for us to implement this unless security is provided for the people on their bibanja. 

The Land (Amendment) Act, 2010 has a provision that stipulates that if a tenant spends two years without paying ground rent, the landlord can go and secure a court order to evict this person. What has happened now is that landlords are conversant with that provision and are now dodging the ground rent payments from the bibanja holders or are completely disappearing so that after two years, they can go to court, get an order and evict them.

Madam Speaker, I request this Parliament, especially the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, to come up with provisions in the law to protect tenants in case the landlord disappears at the time of payment of ground rent. We should come up with a provision where, for example, tenants can go to the subcounty and pay the ground rent so that we can stop evictions in our areas. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.34
MR PAUL CHELIMO (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three short comments to make. One, I would like to commend the President for targeting to pull 68 per cent of subsistence farmers into a money economy. 

However, I would like to clarify that in my constituency and Sebei sub-region, there is a community that is not involved in any production at all. This is the community that was evicted from Mt Elgon Forest Reserve when the forest reserve was upgraded to Mount Elgon National Park. As I speak, the Office of the Prime Minister resettled them in resettlement camps and they are still there. My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that the Office of the Prime Minister puts their words into action as soon as possible so that the resettled communities are assimilated into production to improve their welfare and achieve a middle income status. 

Secondly, I would like to commend the President for requesting Makerere University to develop solar power water pumps for micro irrigation to support farmers. However, I would also like to bring it to the attention of the House that geographically, my constituency is mountainous and I would like to propose that if the gravity flow scheme for production is considered, it will enable the communities to engage in better production.

Finally, I will comment on the Kapchorwa-Suam Road, which was mentioned by the honourable Member of Parliament from Kween. My constituency borders Kenya and recently, when we went into the constituency to bury one of our colleagues, the former chairman LCIII –(Member was timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Suam Road is really a headache. Please, use half a minute and summarise.

MR CHELIMO: Regarding the Kapchorwa-Suam Road, I was forced to pass via Kenya - Kitale, Ngoma and then enter via Malaba in order to access Kampala. I would therefore like to stress that the Minister of Works does something about this road in the near future. 

This road has been in the budget several times. I would like to request that it is considered this coming financial year as this will assist us. When we get patients, we cannot transport them to Kapchorwa because we do not have a hospital and accessing Mbale is a very big problem. At times, we have to go via Kenya. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.39
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join my other colleagues in appreciating the State of the Nation Address by the President. 

I rise on the issue of electricity. The President talked about electricity and how megawatts have increased. However, there is a problem with the service providers of electricity to our people. Umeme banded the smallscale industries, put their meters together and hanged them up. They introduced a policy where these people share a meter without their consent and without consultation. I would like to request the Minister of Energy to prevail over Umeme because that policy discourages our smallscale industries where our people are involved in value addition, especially in agriculture.

If we consult our people, this will bring about job creation for the youth because even in the villages, they will be able to manage their own power and engage in value addition on a small scale. Otherwise for now, many have fallen out of business because of this policy. It is important that Umeme respects the consumers of the service.

The other issue that was also raised on electricity is the issue of Bujagali. Electricity from there is very expensive; I wonder what can be done about that. We said that we shall develop a win-win situation but I wonder what we are doing to protect the consumers of Bujagali electricity. This is because they are consuming it at a very high cost, which becomes a problem for rural electrification.

I would also like to add my voice to that of other Members who said that there are cases where poles have existed for a long time and yet no power is installed. What is the intention of having these poles pass through areas and then the transformers are not installed and people look at the poles for many years without electricity? (Member timed out.)

6.42
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make my maiden speech. I rise to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. I will be very brief because of time.

The President, in his speech, on page 5, spoke about electricity infrastructure and he said that we have 850 megawatts of excess power compared to 1986. It is, therefore, so surprising that in Kashongi County, where I come from, we do not have a single electricity pole. 

I would also like to mention that much as in Uganda we have 5,200 kilometres of tarmac road, in Kashongi County, we do not have a single tarmac road. It is really surprising to come from Kiruhura District and in Kashongi we do not have a tarmac road. In the President’s manifesto of 2011-2012 and 2015-2016, he pledged to tarmac the road in Kashongi County from Kafa to Rufumba but up to now, we have never had anything like a tarmac road for all these years.

Madam Speaker, during the President’s rallies of 2010-2011 and 2015-2016, he always pledged to give us water in Kashongi. At his recent rally, he even directed the Minister of Water and Environment, Prof. Kamuntu at the time, to give us water from Rubindi. The task is now for the new Minister of Water and Environment to take up. We do not have piped water and we do not have enough dams to provide water for consumption and for our animals -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: No road, no water, no power; okay, use half a minute to wind up your submission. 

MR TUMURAMYE: Madam Speaker, I call upon this august House to help Kashongi County to give us three major items that have been pledged over the years - water, electricity and tarmac roads. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.45
MS MARIA GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to join my colleagues in supporting the motion and in thanking the President of Uganda for the State of the Nation Address. 

I would like to limit myself to page 16 of the State of the Nation Address where the President talked of improving agriculture in order to pull farmers into the money economy. A number of my colleagues have talked about this, but I would like to speak on behalf of the smallholder farmers whose land is already fragmented. 

In Kaberamaido, where I come from, most of the farmers are in this situation. The question is, how do you bring them into the money economy? I suggest that these smallholder farmers with fragmented land pieces be pulled by forming themselves into cooperatives. Therefore, I would like to pray that the formation of cooperative societies be fast-tracked; it should not just be a policy but a reality.

It is through formation of these cooperatives that these farmers, who have small pieces of land, can benefit from their small farms. As a cooperative, they would be able to get inputs easily and buyers for their produce. They would sell in bulk and be able to make sure that prices are well negotiated. That is how we are going to do away with middlemen who are always cheating our farmers.

Before the cooperative movement collapsed, we had extension workers called “cooperative officers”, who were being trained in Kigumba Cooperative College. If these farmers are going to be in cooperative societies and understand cooperative farming, they need extension workers who are going to give them knowledge and skills using cooperative principles. I, therefore, suggest that training and recruitment of cooperative workers should go along with the reintroduction of cooperatives. It is again - (Member timed out.)

6.49
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the interest of time, I have an entire critique on the speech by His Excellency the President as well as the speech delivered for and on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition.

In 2002, as a student of International Economic Law, I had this to say in my thesis: “The greatest commission or omission committed by the NRM Government at its initial stages was over-liberalisation and over-privatisation of our economy.” It is good that Government has realised that mistake and we are now seeing its participation in the revitalisation and rejuvenation of the civil aviation industry, and participation in the establishment of industrial parks vis-à-vis the creation of agro-industries. The question now goes to the concerned ministers to see to it that we shall not have an entrenchment of systemic corruption, both in the private and public sector, as it was in 1988 when we had the privatisation unit in this country.

We are talking about agriculture but I would like to say that as a Ugandan, regardless of my political affiliation, there is over centralisation of state power vested in none other than the Uganda police. Madam Speaker, if you move around the police stations of Kampala, you will find so many of our young people and members of the business community languishing in prison and being detained by none other than those cadets you are seeing on the roads and those manning police stations in Kampala. 

They are also being detained over and above the 48 hours because they must, whether they like it or not, produce money. I have moved around Kampala and in other parts of the country but I would like to state it clearly that I have never seen in my life a Minister of Internal Affairs moving around the police stations to find out what is being done.

We also have another problem of the land protection units. These officers are designated to be prosecutors, policemen and judges; they are even determining the important question of land ownership in this country -(Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, the issue raised by the honourable member is a very important one for the country. I kindly request, if possible, for this issue to be forwarded to a committee that will investigate and possibly report back.

THE SPEAKER: We will do that at the end of the exercise; please, conclude.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much. There is a problem with the land protection units because they sit as judges to determine the important question of ownership. That is the reason why in places like Kampala, Wakiso, Mpigi, Mukono, these rampant evictions are experienced and manned, managed and planned by none other than some of our police officers -(Member timed out.)

6.54
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad that after 30 years, the President has realised that the economy is in big shit. It was contained in his own statement where he called Uganda a supermarket economy -(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I realise that it is coming to 7.00 p.m. and probably that is why the honourable member holding the Floor, who is a senior member of this House and who should be well versed with the Rules of Procedure of this House, is using an un-parliamentary word. Is she in order to associate it with the Head of State without mentioning the page where the President said that the economy is “in big shit”?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was listening intently to the President and I do not remember hearing that word. However, if the honourable member knows where he said it, can she point it out?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I realised that the Front Bench was not around and some of them were sleeping so I wanted to wake them up. (Laughter)

Secondly, Madam Speaker, that was my own opinion from the statement that was made by the President on page 9, where he referred to the nation -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know that word will remain on the Hansard. Just withdraw it.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I really did not want to say that was the word the President used. If it is offending the House, I withdraw it but I thought, in my own opinion, that is what his statement meant. 

The President said that Uganda is a supermarket economy and he made good suggestions to reintroduce UDB so that our people can access cheap financing and not borrow money to import things to sell in supermarkets. In saying all this, I thought the President meant that the economy was doing badly because by the time we become a supermarket economy, things are in a bad state. 

That aside, I would like to thank the President for suggesting that the decision that the country made 20 years ago to privatise our economy was wrong. This is because the privatisation and liberalisation of this country reduced the economy into one that cannot allow Ugandans to access cheap credit facilities. 

Right now, people cannot engage in agriculture because there is no access to a commercial bank that can lend Ugandans money cheaply. Over 60 per cent of Ugandans that still rely on the agricultural sector do not have access to financing –(Member timed out.)

6.59
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy to be back in the House, having been here in the Eighth Parliament.   

Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion and thank the President. Since we have very little time, I would like to say that it is imperative that we all support the President in realising the objectives of his statement and Government. We have moved from far in many areas. Therefore, we should support each other in order to develop our country and prosper.

There are three points that I would like to highlight and I will follow them up later with protocol. When I read the statement, I see a lot of money placed in the infrastructure industry - in energy, roads and housing. However, all that money is being taken back by foreigners. The Ugandan workers have been eliminated from all these jobs. Therefore, as Parliament and as a country, we must have a strategy for local content so that we create jobs and support our own Ugandans.

Secondly, if you went out just now and shouted, in two seconds you would get a crowd. In Uganda, we have many rowdy youth. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, and especially the department handling youth affairs, must help us to redirect our young people. 

Many youth have lost direction; they are using narcotics like marijuana and are gambling, among others. We have no employment skills because our youth have lost direction. Therefore, we must make a deliberate effort especially to look at the informal sector and the young people, redirect them and give them informal skills so that they can be employable and can help themselves to develop this country.

Lastly, I see the President talking about supporting Makerere University researchers to develop a few items, especially pumps. In this country, we have a big problem of de-linked research and development. We have a lot of research in this country, which is idle and is not causing development. I, therefore, propose that in addition to the industrial parks, we create innovation and occupation centres for research so that researchers can have their research interlinked with market and development. 

The habit of His Excellency getting researchers out of research institutions and making them into developers and manufacturers cannot help us – (Member timed out.)

7.02
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to join the rest in appreciating the President for the State of the Nation Address.

Madam Speaker, the President lamented very much about issues of industrial parks and industrialisation in this country. He talked about the availability of electricity and the surplus that we have at night. He wanted electricity in this country to be cheap so as to attract investors and create employment in this country.

Madam Speaker, as result of liberalisation and privatisation, there were very many industries and factories in this country. A case in point is Lira where we had Uganda Spinning Mills and the cassava factory. They are now idle and yet they used to employ more than 900 Ugandans. These are areas that we feel that the nation should invest in. We, therefore, feel that Government should take this as a priority. There are existing buildings and the machines are there but they are not being utilised. I implore the Government to take action on this matter so that we can use the available ones first.

Secondly, on page 19, the President said that the country should build a gold refinery. Ugandans are exporting gold that is not purified and we are earning very little in terms of foreign earnings. In his statement, he stated that miners need to be regulated and what they are harvesting should be known and recorded. 

Madam Speaker, some time back we travelled with the former Leader of the Opposition to Tororo. While there, we monitored where gold is mined but when we requested to see the gold, they did not allow us access. We do not know the records of the quantities being mined, what is stored and what is exported. 

I am glad that the President pointed it out in his statement that this information should be recorded. We have to take stock of what we are taking out of the country. I think this is the right direction. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 54 Members have contributed today and I would like to stop the debate here so that we resume on Tuesday. On my list, I have 10 Members who have registered and these are as follows, and we shall proceed in that order:

    1. Hon. Julius Ochen 
    2. Hon. Cyrus Imalingat Amodoi 
    3. Hon. Edward Makmot Otto 
    4. Hon. James Kaberuka
    5. Hon. Elizabeth Karungi
    6. Hon. Richard Oseku. 

Those are the first and the others are on the next page.

Honourable Leader of Government Business, I am really disappointed that the Government is visibly absent. The Minister of Science and Technology is not here; the Minister of Education and Sports is not here; the Minister of Foreign Affairs is not here; the Minister of Transport and Works is not here; the Minister of Energy and Minerals is not here; the Minister of ICT is not here; the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is not here; the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is not here; the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with six state ministers are not here; Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is not here; the Attorney–General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs are not here. 

This is free research. Members are giving you free information, which you cannot get from your bureaucrats. Honourable Government Chief Whip, really crack the whip on the Cabinet. We want them here on Tuesday. 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much. House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.06 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 16 August 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)

