
Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.


Thursday, 1 August 2019

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this Sitting. Let me start by altering the Order Paper to accommodate a motion for this House to grant hon. Jacob Oboth leave to present the Advocates Act (Amendment) Bill, 2019, specifically to deal with the issue of pre-entry exams. The Order Paper is accordingly amended. 

Honourable members, I wish to welcome you again. Yesterday, 31 July 2019, marked the 26th coronation anniversary of His Majesty, the Kabaka of Buganda. On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to extend our heartfelt congratulations to His Majesty, the Kabaka of Buganda, his Government, the Lukiiko as well as the people of Buganda and Uganda at large. 

I commend the message contained in the 26th coronation anniversary whose theme is, “Financial Unity”. Indeed, this resonates with the vision of the Government of Uganda. As Ugandans, we continue to reflect on the socio-economic challenges that we face and seek for avenues to collectively fight poverty and improve on the livelihood of all Ugandans. I wish His Majesty long life and continued wisdom to cause socio-economic development of Buganda and Uganda at large.

Honourable members, we note with sadness the passing of Dr Joseph Robert Jumba, the former National Executive Director of the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) Comprehensive Institute, which occurred in Lisbon, Portugal. The late steered Uganda YMCA from a donor-dependent institution in 1994 to a fast-growing, self-sustaining organisation; with skills of over 5000 job-creators annually. He has left it at the level of a degree-awarding institution. 

On behalf of Parliament, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to the family, relatives, the nation, YMCA and all Ugandans upon this great loss and pray that the deceased secures eternal rest. 
Honourable members, let us rise and observe a moment of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member for Buvuma Islands had requested for the Floor because he has an urgent matter to present.

2.11
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. It is common knowledge that Buvuma Islands does not touch the mainland and we access it by use of a ferry, which has been operating three trips - Monday to Friday and one trip on Sunday. 

Effective today, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has suspended trips from Monday to Friday as well as the one on Sunday. The reason they gave us for this is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not given them enough money to carry on all the trips. 

I am raising this matter because it has already affected service delivery in the islands; district workers are stranded. The people who were supposed to go with the mid-week ferry cannot access the islands. On Sundays, the whole island cannot be accessed; the ferry being the only gateway. 

Therefore, my prayer is that UNRA, through the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Government Chief Whip, who was there sometime back, should rescind this decision so that the people of Buvuma can access services, like any other parts of this country. Thank you. 

2.13
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, indeed, this is a very serious issue that needs urgent attention because the ferry is the road to the islands. I have to make sure that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sits with the Minister of Works and Transport to make provisions to ensure that this road is not closed. I think we will be able to come back and inform you – or we do not have to? 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you do not have to. Just fix it and that is it. The people want ferry services. Thank you very much. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from the Master of Arts and Development Studies class of Uganda Martyrs University, Nkozi. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause) 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The other week, while you were in the Chair, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development presented a report before this House on labour export.

In the preceding debate, you ruled that you would be coming the next Tuesday to decide whether we are going to debate that report as a full Parliament or you would appoint a select committee. Mr Speaker, you went for consultations. 

Since then, Mr Speaker, we have not heard from the Office of the Speaker. However, we have got more new cases of people who are victims of trafficking calling out for assistance. The saddest thing happened in my constituency, where one of my constituents died in Riyadh last week, under circumstances yet to be established.

The procedural matter I am raising is; would it be okay for you to guide us on how to proceed on that matter, specifically how to handle new cases? 

Then, when you ordered that those girls who were stranded at our embassy in United Arab Emirates be assisted to come back, the ambassador was captured on a video chasing them away. It is very painful because they are Ugandans in Dubai and yet their ambassador chased them from the embassy – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I deal with the procedural issue now?

MS NAMBOOZE: The procedural matter I am raising is; would it be okay for you to guide us on how to proceed on that matter and how to handle new cases? Much obliged. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. There actually seems to have been some miscommunication. As you know, I did not Chair Parliament last week and I should have given this guidance on Tuesday of last week. We had a discussion with my senior colleague to come and deal with this matter and apparently, it has not been handled. I will crosscheck to see what could have happened and then, I will get back on that matter. 

Suffice to say that all those people who have been sent through the licensed institutions have an umbrella organisation. I had a meeting with them and they said that they all pay a lot of money for insurance. Issues of repatriation and sickness are handled by the association. Therefore, there should be no burden to any parent that their child is stranded somewhere and they are looking for money to repatriate them or that their child is stranded somewhere and they are demanding for some money to be refunded before they are brought back. That is supposed to be handled by the association and their address is known. 

All those cases should be referred to the association for those companies that are licensed and operating within the framework of the law. Please, deal with that instead of coming to Parliament. Just go and access those people; tell them, “we have this case.” 

They will activate their systems to create the repatriation of such affected individuals. From now, that should be the procedure.

We will deal with this matter subsequently when I come back and after being briefed.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. HELLEN ASAMO ON THE NEED FOR GOVERNMENT TO SALVAGE THE SCHOOL FOR THE DEAF IN WAKISO DISTRICT

MR MPUUGA: On this matter for your guidance, Sir 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  On this same matter?

MR MPUUGA: Yes, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, I will give further guidance, next week. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is a response under rule 46. We do not want lengthy statements on these matters because they are supposed to be quick responses to urgent matters that were raised. Honourable minister, proceed.

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION)(Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate hon. Hellen Asamo’s concern over the need to refurbish the classroom block, at Wakiso School for the deaf, where disaster struck and caused critical damage to infrastructure.

A heavy downpour and strong winds at Wakiso School for the Deaf de-roofed a two-classroom block on 8 July 2019. The disaster that befell the school prompted the ministry to seek an urgent assessment report of the extent of damage to the school. Accordingly, a team from the ministry visited the school on 12 July 2019, to assess the extent of damage. We found out that repairs will cost Shs 46,305,147.

Mr Speaker, Cabinet at its meeting held on Monday 13 May 2019, had directed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide a contingency fund amounting to Shs 26 billion to the ministry of Education and Sports to facilitate repairs and reconstruction of 356 primary, secondary and technical institutions damaged by various disasters. Wakiso School for the Deaf will take first call on these resources, which my ministry has requisitioned based on the assessment already done.

I wish to inform you that we have already written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, requesting for the release of Shs 46.3 million so that work can commence. I have also attached pictures from our site visit for your information.

I would like to lay on Table the letter that we have written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you very much. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Hellen Asamo, would you like to make any supplementary question?

2.21
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Eastern): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the response. I would like to comment that this is a unique school for unique learners and they are only two in Uganda. What I know on the ground is that they are sharing classes. Can’t we have an urgent way, for example to have tents for the children to learn as we wait for the ministry to release this money, which might never come? If they could have tents, they would continue learning. The information I have been given is that senior one and two enter class after senior three and four, in shifts. How will they finish the curriculum, Madam Minister?

I would like to beg you that as we do with people who get disasters, let the tents be taken to the school. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, students are studying in shifts.

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I strongly appreciate the challenge. Like I have already pointed out that we are working hand-in-hand with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we know that this is going to be sorted. However, on the issue of the tents, we are going to work with the Office of the Prime Minister to ensure that that is done in the meantime. 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have a budget process and as far as I am concerned, the Ministry of Education and Sports has an emergency fund. I would have expected the Minister of Education and Sports to tell us how she is initiating processes to access the emergency funds to address the issue at hand. 
However, she is telling us that they are working hand-in-hand with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. That is not anywhere within the known means for which money has been appropriated. I wonder whether it is not procedurally right that the Minister of Education and Sports would commit herself on the issue of the emergency fund instead of what she is telling us, which seems to be a political statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I can see the difficulty you have to raise this procedural matter. I think your intention was to raise the point of clarification to the minister and the minister had gone and she could not allow you because she was no longer holding the Floor. However, I think the minister has taken note, that you have some emergency funds that could be used to deal with this situation. If you want to say something about it, you can.

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I have made it clear that we already have this contingency fund to deal with emergency constructions. You will agree with me that disasters happen at different times. We have already created this fund, which has been approved and it is already in the budget. I would like to inform you that when it is a contingency fund, if a disaster happens, you just requisition for it, as long as you have done the assessment and you already have the Bill. That is why I am saying we have already submitted our requisition to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we are just waiting for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to release this money because it is already there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Can we have the next item?

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. PATRICK NSAMBA ON THE EXACERBATION OF LAND GRABBING IN KASANDA DUE TO DIFFICULTY IN VERIFICATION OF LAND TITLES DUE TO THE ONGOING COMPUTERISATION OF RECORDS AT THE REGIONAL LANDS REGISTRY OFFICE IN MITYANA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, you told us that the minister would be here this afternoon to deal with this matter.

2.24
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Yes, Sir. I saw the minister talking to the Member of Parliament who raised the matter. I am wondering why she is not here. Can you, please, give me two or three minutes to find out where she is?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us deal with the next matter.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. DOROTHY NSHAIJA ON THE STEPS BEING UNDERTAKEN TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF LIFE OF PEOPLE LIVING WITH ELEPHANTIASIS (PODOCONIOSIS) IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is not here to ask a supplement question but she has designated hon. Abigaba to ask the on her behalf. 

2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Mr Speaker, I stand here to respond to an urgent issue that was raised by the Woman Member of Parliament for Kamwenge about the quality of life of people living with elephantiasis, especially in Kamwenge and Uganda at large.

Elephantiasis is a condition common in tropics and subtropical areas of the world. It is a sign of an underlying problem within the lymphatic system, which leads to accumulation of fluid. Elephantiasis can be painful, uncomfortable and it reduces the sufferer’s ability to lead a normal life and as a result, affecting the productivity of the person.

There are two common types of elephantiasis, one is caused by a thread-like worm, filarial and it is transmitted by mosquitoes. It is common in the north, east and Busoga regions and also south of Lake Kyoga with a small focus on western Uganda, especially Bundibugyo District. 

The second type is due to the exposure of bare feet to the red clay soil, which is derived from volcanic rock. This is called podoconiosis. It is common in Mt Elgon areas, western highlands and central Uganda, most especially in areas with red clay soils and among people that walk barefooted, especially agricultural communities who are not protecting their feet.

What has been done so far?

As a ministry, we have carried out surveys in Ibanda, Kabarole, Kasese and Kamwenge districts, in the respective sub counties. 

The findings show that the type of elephantiasis in those areas is not caused by the filaria worm but the type that comes from the problem in the soil. 

Another survey was also done in Kyenjojo and Kibale districts in specific sub-counties. Kyenjojo had 89 cases while Kibale had 112 cases.

Investigation has been done by the Ministry of Health in collaboration with the World Health Organisation and other partners and it has shown that 95 per cent of cases have skin itching and swelling of the feet. Females were more affected compared to their male counterparts and 75 per cent of these people stay in Kamwenge District.

More than 30 years – especially from those other districts and most of these people depend on farming as a source of food and income. People who have been tested have also confirmed that they have podoconiosis.

Among the activities that have been carried out, advocacy meetings were held in Kamwenge District with the leaders and sensitisation of the affected communities was done. 

Training for the health workers was done, most especially in the districts of Kamwenge, Ibanda, Kabarole, Kibale, Kween and Manafwa. 

We are making a proposal to map the geographical distribution of this condition in Uganda. This is with the support from a fund from Welcome Trust.

What we are planning

As it is a serious condition, which is affecting families and communities, the first intervention is to care for the affected people.

These are the activities that my ministry is doing in corroboration with the districts;

    1. Strengthening community surveillance, most especially mapping up the condition
    2. We are empowering the community and educating them on how to protect the feet
    3. Distributing ICT materials on elephantiasis so that communities are in position to manage
    4. Treating the affected communities
    5. Organising weekly management centres for these communities.
    6. Following up cases and educating the affected persons with simple exercises like elevation of the affected, breathing exercises and antibiotics in the health facilities for the septic conditions.
    7. Planning to incorporate elephantiasis management in the primary health care facility package among the affected community.

These are the measures that have been put in place. I thank you, My Speaker. I thank my colleague who has raised this issue. As I said, we are providing the needed timely interventions. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us take the supplementary question.

2.32
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister who has come up with the statement.

Busiriwa subcounty, which is highly affected is in the constituency I represent and this is a serious matter in our area.

I expected to hear from the minister if this disease is curable. She has not told us whether it is something that can be cured. 

Secondly, from the interventions that have been done, I expected her to tell us whether this disease is on the increase or the interventions are making it decline.

Lastly, the persons who are affected cannot do anything for themselves. Therefore, I had expected the minister to propose some kind of special intervention where they can be helped because we have heard of similar cases where Government has come out to help people in similar situations. For example, when we had nodding disease in northern Uganda, there was specific intervention. I would have expected the minister to tell us something that they are planning as a ministry because the affected cannot do anything by themselves. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS MORIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said, the subcounty he talked about in Kamwenge District, Busiriwa and Kamwenge sub counties are the subcounties where surveys were being done. Indeed, it is true that the people have been identified. As I said, this is a condition caused by a thread like worm spread by the mosquitoes but the other type is caused by the soil texture where people walk barefooted. 

What I can assure my colleague is that this condition, when identified early and timely, can be treated. It can, of course, result into complications like septic wounds and blockage of the lymphatic system for which interventions have been put in place.

However, the concern that he raised, especially providing social help for these people because it has affected their capacity to generate income, I would wish to liaise with the Office of the Prime Minister to see how best these people can be supported in terms of psycho-social help and needs for their family.

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE ON THE STAFFING CRISIS IN KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (KCCA)

2.36
THE MINISTER OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Betty Kamya): Mr Speaker, I rise to respond to concerkns that were raised by my long-time friend and namesake, hon. Betty Nambooze, Member of Parliament for Mukono Municipality and also the shadow minister for Kampala Capital City. 

On 24 July 2019, hon. Nambooze raised the following concerns:

    1. Directors of Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) were resigning from their positions in spite of the high salaries they were being paid.
    2. Many senior officials of KCCA are in acting positions, including Eng. Kitaka, who was assigned the duties of Executive Director of KCCA.
    3. There are many staff on renewable four-month’s contracts.
    4. There are staff that were recruited by Public Service Commission (PSC) on instructions of KCCA but were neither absorbed nor deployed by KCCA.
    5. There is a court case against KCCA by staff recruited by PSC but not deployed by KCCA.

Mr Speaker, arising out of hon. Nambooze's concerns, you directed the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority to submit a comprehensive statement to Parliament on the matter of staffing in KCCA. Therefore, here I am. 

There has been a lot of talk, rumours and speculation about this matter. I am grateful for the opportunity to clear the air by making an official statement to Parliament and I will begin by correcting the inaccuracies in hon. Nambooze’s statement.

It is not true that “apart from the Directorate of Audit, all the directors of KCCA and their deputies have resigned” as recorded on the Hansard. The substantive Director of Gender, Community Development and Production (Ms Harriet Mudondo), the Director of Human Resource Management (Mr Richard Lule), the Director of Education and Social Services (Ms Juliet Namuddu Nambi), the Director of Audit Services (Mr Moses Bwire) and the Director of Physical Planning (Mr Moses Atwiine) are substantive officeholders and firmly in their offices and working. 

Mr Speaker, the substantive Director of Engineering and Technical Services, Eng. Andrew Kitaka, did not resign but was assigned the duties of the Executive Director of KCCA when Ms Jennifer Musisi resigned. While the substantive Director of Revenue Services, Mr Sam Sserunkuuma, did not resign his position but was assigned the duties of the Deputy Executive Director of KCCA. 
However, due to these new designations, their respective deputies are acting in their positions. Out of 10 directorates of KCCA, seven substantive directors are in place.

It is also not true, as hon. Nambooze claimed, that under section 17 of the KCCA Act, 2010, H. E. the President is the one mandated to appoint all directors and their deputies. The truth is that section 17 provides only for the appointment of the Executive Director of KCCA by the President.

With your permission, Sir, I will now address myself to the specific issues of concern raised by my honourable colleague, who represents Mukono Municipality. 

On the matter that directors and deputy directors of KCCA were resigning in spite of the high salaries they get, it is true that both senior and junior staff have been leaving KCCA since 2013 but it is not true that KCCA pays the highest salaries from which employees cannot walk away. Besides, money is not the only reason that influences people’s decisions. I am sure that honourable colleagues in this House worked somewhere and many of us are not here because of the money that we are getting but because of the goals that we set for ourselves.

Mr Speaker, 13 directors and deputy directors of KCCA have resigned since the establishment of KCCA in 2012 for reasons ranging from pursuing better salaries and employment terms, better job opportunities, career growth, job security, doing their own businesses, going for study, retirement and death.

I would like to give a list of reasons why some people left office. 

Ms Teopista Birungi, who was the Deputy Director of Education and Social Services, resigned in 2016 when she got an international job with the UN Education Programme.

Ms Phoebe Kamya, who was the Director of Revenue Services, resigned in 2015 when she got an international job in Ghana. 

Ms Jennifer Kaggwa, who was the Director of Human Resource Management, resigned in 2016 to join UNRA, which had better terms of employment.

For Dr Sseruga, who was the Director of Public Health and Sanitation, his contract expired in 2017 and it was not renewed on grounds that his performance was not satisfactory.

Dr Jennifer Musisi resigned on 15 December 2018. In a lengthy 21-page letter to H.E. the President, she enumerated her successes and satisfaction in working as the Executive Director of KCCA but cited in just four brief paragraphs, the reasons for her resignation, which included challenges of reconciling competing interests of political expediency against strategic planning, political interference and inadequate funding. I dare say these are challenges that every employee in such a position of leadership would face. 

Fortunately, Dr Musisi got herself a job she could not resist as City Leader in Residence of the Bloomberg Harvard City Leadership Initiative at Harvard University, where she heads a programme aiming at enrolling 240 cities from around the world in its programme. Her new salary is way ahead of her old salary at KCCA. 

Mr Fred Andema, who was the Manager Revenue Reconciliation and Reporting asked for leave without pay for one year from February 2019 because he had been offered a contract for a job as Chief of Finance and Administration by IGAD, stationed in Juba, South Sudan. The salary he was offered was irresistible and way above his salary at KCCA. 

Mr Michael Okua, who was the Director of Legal Affairs at KCCA resigned on his own volition in October 2017 to build his law practice from which he had taken leave to join KCCA. He realised that his caretakers were not doing justice to his law firm. Therefore, he rejoined it to concentrate on rebuilding it. 

Mr Ambrose Atwoko, who was the Deputy Director of Education and Social Services, in his letter to the executive director, indicated that he would not seek to renew his contract, which was to expire on 15 December 2018. He had got himself a permanent job as Town Clerk of Nansana Municipality, which made him accounting officer, better than a contract job with KCCA.

Mr Daniel Kyambadde, the Director of Treasury Services, in his letter to then Executive Director indicated that he would not be seeking to renew his contract, which was to expire in October 2017, citing ill health, a condition which, according to him was well known to KCCA and his doctors had ordered him to take it very slow.

Dr Judith Tukahiirwa resigned in October 2016, citing political expediency versus strategic planning as competing interests that she could not deal with.

Mr Charles Ouma was previously the Deputy Director for Legal Affairs but was promoted to Acting Director for Legal Affairs after the resignation of Mr Michael Okua. His contract was extended to 2021. He was recommended by the Executive Director to the PSC for promotion to substantive Director for Legal Affairs. However, I wrote to the PSC asking them to stay Charles Ouma's promotion, until an audit had been performed of the Directorate of Legal Affairs which, to my knowledge, had lost all cases against KCCA since 2012, which had cost KCCA up to Shs 50 billion in garnishee orders. 

In the same letter, I asked the PSC to stay any promotions or automatic renewal of senior staff contracts, until the PSC and the Ministry in charge of KCCA had discussed performance of individual officials. 

Mr Speaker, I copied the letter to among other people,  Mr Charles Ouma. Two weeks later, he tendered his resignation, which was after the Chairman of the PSC had written to me, complying with my decision to stay promotion of Mr Charles Ouma until adequate investigations in the performance of the legal department had been conducted.  

Finally, Mr Julius Kabugo who is the Deputy Director of Treasury Services tendered his resignation on 11 July 2019, although his contract had been renewed in January, running up to July 2021. He cited no reason. However, I had informed KCCA Management during the monthly meeting of 10th June that because of unsatisfactory performance and rumours of gross corruption and misconduct, I intended to commission an audit in the management of the Directorates of Physical Planning, Treasury and Revenue Services as well as Legal Affairs.

Mr Speaker, I wrote to the Acting Executive Director of KCCA on 17 July 2019, instructing him not to accept Mr Julius Kabugo's resignation but have him stay in office in order to help with the audit. 

On 17th July, I wrote to the Auditor-General after a verbal consultation with him, requesting for a special audit of the Directorates of Physical Planning, Treasury and Revenue Services, and Legal Affairs. He informed me that he had a lot on his plate but he would do his best to schedule a special audit on KCCA. 

Mr Speaker, earlier, in March 2019, the Acting Executive Director of KCCA and I had a chat with the Chief Justice on the matter of garnishee orders, which had cost KCCA up to Shs 58 billion, where the institution was never given the option of negotiating for a settlement out of court or reasonable payment plan based on instalments. The Chief Justice advised an audit on the management of the legal cases against KCCA. 

To this statement, I have attached all these documents; my letter to the Chairman PSC, my letter to the Auditor-General and notices of resignation as well as the letter from the Chairman of the PSC staying the promotion of Mr Charles Ouma.

Another matter of concern that hon. Nambooze raised was that many officials of KCCA are in acting positions. As I have already said, out of 10 directorates, seven directors are substantive including; Harriet Mudondo, Richard Lule, Moses Bwire, Juliet Namuddu, Moses Atwine, Andrew Kitaka and Sam Sserunkuuma. All those are substantive directors of KCCA. It is, therefore, not true that most senior officials of KCCA are in acting positions as claimed by my honourable colleague and friend. 

The officials that are in acting positions though include, the Acting Executive Director of Legal Affairs, Mr Caleb Mugisha, the Acting Director of Treasury Services, Mr Julius Kabugo, the Acting Director for Revenue Services, Mr Noweri and the acting Director for Engineering and Technical Services, Mr Semuwemba.

Mr Speaker, the third issue that my honourable colleague and friend raised was the question –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you see the difficulties we face. This was supposed to be an urgent matter and it was entertained under rule 46. As you can see, it is hardly an urgent matter. Unless we help this House, we will not be able to process business properly. 

Ordinarily, urgent matters should not take an hour like the way the honourable minister is responding now. This should have been a substantive parliamentary Question for Oral Answer that should have been entertained and scheduled as such. Now, we are proceeding under Rule 46 and abusing it as we please, and raising matters that are not urgent, which is causing us this kind of situation.

It is not the minister’s fault but the person who asked the question. It is not the problem with the rules because if you proceed under the exception, it only has to be an urgent matter. If it is not urgent, you proceed under Rule 44, where you ask normal questions for oral answer and we schedule it accordingly. However, when you proceed under urgent matters, you cannot ask substantive questions like this. It has to be about disease outbreak, bridge breakages and things like that.  
	
MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Except for the reasons, I am as concerned as you. When you listen to an issue that is termed as a staffing crisis - and I have listened to the answers provided by the honourable minister, who happens to be my “mother”, you find that it is actually a crisis. 

The crisis is that there are no people holding substantive positions, where they are supposed to be and you are talking about a period of more than a year, where someone is in acting capacity but the powers that be have not appointed substantive people. Actually, the reason for having those positions is lost because people are not there.

The second issue is that whereas you listen to the minister having frozen the process of promoting someone and of course, the person decided to leave, there have been no efforts to appoint a substantive person. That is a crisis and that to me is urgent.
Mr Speaker, why I thought it is a problem with our rules is that when a minister gives answers like those, they appear substantive. Urgent matters can also be substantive but with no room for debate.

I have the hindsight of this matter having come up in COSASE where I sit and an issue arose as to how somebody was appointed to act - they are using the word assigned.

You do not know for how long this assignment is going to continue and in the end, the positions of those acting people are left limping.

For example, when my brother Andrew Kitaka was assigned, his substantive position was filled by somebody in an acting capacity who left his position where he was acting substantively.

Mr Speaker, we need to look at our rules; when a matter like this happens, for now, you cannot send it to the relevant committee to do an investigation, you need a substantive motion.

There is generally a problem with the way we structured our rules on this because the Member was concerned and in her judgement, which I agree with, it is urgent.

They are supposed to render services, people are supposed to act in accordance with the law. They are acting for more than six months, which is provided for.

Somebody is saying the President does not appoint directors; I have posed a question, how did these directors come into place? They were appointed by the President. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I will state it again, this case is not a case for an urgent question, if you look at your Rule 46. This is a substantive matter that should have been dealt with through a Question for Oral Answer because it touches on policy; some procedures and he is very involved.

Urgent questions under Rule 46 are those questions where something has happened; where you do not have sufficient time to give notice which is required. A bridge is broken; there is a disease outbreak, that is what I anticipated under Rule 46 but not this category of things. 

That is why I entertained the one for disease outbreak in other places, bridges have broken and have cut people off. The ferry has been stopped from operating because it should have been going everyday four times but it is now going three times and not going on Sundays; that is urgent and the answers are specific.

We will find remedial measures to deal with it but where you are now answering an urgent question for an hour, it is not urgent.

There are no problems with the rules but it is only us and I urge you Members that we need to look at the way we ask these questions again.

If a matter is not urgent do not baptise it so, let it be handled in a correct procedure of the rules. If we just now stampede- 

I have seen that last week alone, there were 17 questions asked in one meeting and none of them was responded to; so, they will all go on the Order Paper as now. Four of them have come - there are maybe 24 or 50 others pending. When will they have time to deal with these things?
		
We need to go back to our Rules of Procedure if we are going to be effective. This is not an urgent matter; it should have been asked properly under the rules and substantially dealt with by the minister.

If the minister was here that day, would she have been able to give these answers? No. urgent answers are given there and then because it is about responses to disasters. Please, let us abide by the rules.

Not that we think that something is urgent, therefore, it is urgent; we have to verify them. That is why you go to the Speaker and have a discussion with him saying that; “this matter, you need to use these other rules. This matter is urgent”. 
Let us help this out honourable members, otherwise we will get stuck. Please, conclude honourable minister because it was already asked.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, as I said, there were four questions and I was directed to bring a comprehensive report which I am doing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is it; a comprehensive report cannot be about an urgent matter.

MS KAMYA: That is true -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And an urgent matter, which has five legs of questions; please, wind up.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to propose, unless I can go on for another 10 minutes to finish this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we do not have that time because we have other matters. It is too long.

MS KAMYA: In conclusion, there is no crisis that cannot be managed by the current administrators of KCCA, as I said. I know that His Excellency, the President is aware that the Executive Director resigned and that Mr Andrew Kitaka has been assigned those duties and His Excellency has promised that as soon as he finishes his round by next week, he will be dealing with this matter. 

I would like to report to this House that there is a process going on right now to address all the issues that have been raised by my honourable colleague and if she does not mind, I can explain everything to her outside this House. If she is not satisfied, she can still take your advice and bring it as a question under the rules as provided in the rules of this House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Any supplementary question?

3.03
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I am rising on-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had asked for a supplementary question. If it is not there, then I will deal with the procedure.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I realised that the report given by the minister was very detailed and very informative. I am of the view that we should make use of it now that it has arrived in Parliament.

I am pleading with the Speaker and the House that the report should be given to the relevant committee and we use it because I find it very useful. The minister has accepted that there are very many vacant positions and there are very many acting.

We have seen letters also talking about the crisis of staffing. It is very useful information. I am pleading that you allow that report to be redirected to the relevant committee. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will be creating a new situation in our rules, which state that urgent matters are dealt with promptly and finished under Rule 46.

So, if this is not an urgent matter, then it should be brought properly, in which case I would have the latitude to refer it to a committee. As of now, it cannot be referred. Let it be brought substantially in a way that it can be sent to a committee. Can we go back to item no. (b)

RESPONSE ON THE EXACERBATION OF LAND GRABBING IN KASSANDA DUE TO THE DIFFICULTY IN VERIFICATION OF LAND TITLES DUE TO THE ON-GOING COMPUTERISATION OF RECORDS AT THE REGIONAL LANDS REGISTRY OFFICE IN MITYANA.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS)Mr Persis Namuganza): Mr Speaker, I rise to respond to an issue, which was raised by hon. Patrick Nsamba Oshabe on the difficulty in verification of land titles, due to the on-going computerisation of records that the Regional Land Registry office in Mityana had started.

Allow me to inform this August House and the honourable Members that the computerisation of land records for Mityana Ministerial Zonal Office was finalised successfully and the office is now fully operational.

In the same spirit, I wish to encourage all districts being served by this zonal office to utilise it to access all the ministry services. There is no longer need to travel to Kampala now in quest for the ministry services. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that the computerisation process of land records is a tedious and cautious exercise, arising from the sensitivity of land records, voluminous documentation of the land records, among others. 

The delay in finalisation was because of the computerisation process at Mityana Zonal Office, which was majorly triggered by the need to rehabilitate and reconstruct old documents and full verification of all records and data migration from manual to digital formats.

However, all the predicaments were handled and as I speak now, there is no more difficulty in verification of land titles at Mityana Zonal Office. I encourage my honourable colleague to go there and if there is anything, maybe, he should report back to us. 

Right now, Mityana office is fully functional and we shall continue to give the necessary support as far as land matters, verification and other related matters are concerned. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any supplementary question?

3.07
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for she has indicated that they have finalised with the process. However, I was in Mityana a week ago and was informed that the titles are not there.

Now, I would like her to confirm that – because she is here – I cannot verify right now. I would like her to clarify and confirm that between last week and now, the titles are there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister?

MS NAMUGANZA: Mr Speaker, I re-confirm that the Mityana Zonal Office is now fully operational and that is why I have urged my colleague to go there –(Interjections)– No, yesterday, it was already working.

The Mityana Zonal Office has been fully operational for four days now and if you go there right now, normal registration and other land services are taking place there. The office, I confirm, is now fully functional. It opened a few days ago but it is now fully functional. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED “THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Niwagaba, please, confirm to me that you have harmonised so that it is only one motion.

3.10
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Yes, Mr Speaker. I have harmonised with my colleague, hon. Paul Mwiru and it is one motion, which I will present and hon. Mwiru will be among the seconders and elucidators in support of the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. 

MR NIWAGABA: Most obliged. Mr Speaker, this is a motion seeking leave of this House to introduce a private Member’s Bill –(Interjections)– to introduce a private Member’s Bill, which will be a consolidated Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019”. 

It is being moved under the provisions of Article 79 and 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rules 120 and 121 of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution and Rule l20 (1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament give rights to Members of Parliament to move a Private Member's Bill;

NOTING that at the end of every five years, the Government of Uganda conducts general elections;

FURTHER NOTING that the country is remaining with less than two years to go for general elections;

AWARE that the Supreme Court in the matter of Amama Mbabazi V. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, Electoral Commission and the Attorney-General in Presidential Election Petition No.0l of 2016 directed Government to have electoral laws enacted before two years to the general elections;

AND AWARE that, under Article 259 of the Constitution, Parliament has power, by way of addition, variation or repeal, to amend any provision of the Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down;

CONCERNED that the perpetuation of regional, gender and other inequalities in allocation of employment and other opportunities that threaten national unity and cohesion and potentially capable of eroding the attainment of objectives in the National Objectives;

RECALLING that previously, there have been concerns about skewed allocation of opportunities in public offices and spaces; 

NOTING that there have been calls to have the Public Service of Uganda to reflect national character and; 

AWARE that under Article 86 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda vests the High Court of Uganda with jurisdiction to determine questions relating to –“

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you reading the same motion that you supplied to the Speaker’s office?

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, because I have had to consolidate the one with hon. Paul Mwiru, the other parts I am now reading are from hon. Mwiru and I thought he had submitted it to you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Presiding Officer does not have a copy of that motion. The one I have is what you submitted on 27 July.

MR NIWAGABA: In that case, let me concentrate on mine alone but we will see how we move together. (Laughter)

“COGNISANT of the need to have the necessary laws and reforms worked on in time;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:
This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, for an Act entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019”, a draft of which is with the Office of the Speaker as was submitted and that Parliament do orders the publication of the said Bill, in preparation for its first reading.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

MR RUKUTANA: Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you hold on and I finish this process before you come in? I see secondment from hon. William Nzoghu, hon. Betty Aol, hon. Joseph Ssewungu and hon. John Baptist Nambeshe. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR NIWAGABA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. We are all here as a result of elections and the concept of free and fair elections remains an outcry for not only us who are here but the majority of our citizens.

For us to have free and fair elections, specific articles in the Constitution need to be aligned with the citizens’ outcry. 

There have been various petitions in the courts of Judicature and I will only cite two in the Supreme Court; which Supreme Court has had occasion to recommend an overhaul of our electoral law to align it with the dictates of free and fair electoral processes.

The first one is Electoral Petition No.1 of 2006, between Dr Kiiza Besigye Vs Electoral Commission and Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. I will quote verbatim the Supreme Court’s observations and it said: “Another aspect pointed out by the observers is the late passing of the necessary electoral legislation in time. Again, this is a matter that the Government and Parliament must address. All the necessary legislation must be put in place in good time to enable the electoral commission to organise a truly free and fair election. When the electoral laws are passed late and with little or no time to correct anomalies and contradictions in them, the Electoral Commission is left with no time to attend to all the issues and problems that arise since it is trying to beat the constitutional deadline of holding the elections.

State organs must in my view perceive of elections as an event that must be preceded by deliberate processes, carefully thought through and put in place to ensure that the event does produce free and fair elections”.

The Court further went on to say that “The Government must address the question of the involvement of the military or armed groups in elections. No one denies the responsibility of Government to provide security for the Country where the situation warrants it, even during the election period. In my view -”, and that was the reasoning of one of the Justices of the Supreme Court:

“--the police force should be adequately trained and equipped to handle elections. It may only be supplemented by other security forces where the situation clearly warrants it. However, where there is no cause for it, the army should be kept away from election counters”.

I will also cite the Supreme Court decision in “Amama Mbabazi Vs Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and others” Election Petition No.0l of 2016. And from that Supreme Court decision, there are many areas of recommendations the Supreme Court made directing the Government to bring electoral laws with a view to align them with the dictates of free and fair elections.

Among the areas mentioned that I would like us to concentrate on in our Bill are the following;

    1. The time within which fresh elections may be held following a by-election.
    2. Donations during election period.
    3. Involvement of public officers in political campaigns.
    4. And most importantly, is the adjudication process especially election petitions involving members of Parliament at High Court level and Court of Appeal level that have turned out to either be “cash cows” for some of the judicial officers involved or some of the parties.

Mr Speaker, our proposed amendments will begin with the character and nature of the Electoral Commission because we cannot talk about elections without talking about the Electoral Commission. If honourable members agree with me for the period since the Electoral Commission was established, I doubt whether any of you has ever seen a public advertisement calling for interviews for people to be employed in the Electoral Commission especially at the highest level; district registrars, returning officers and the like.

Secondly, the constitution of the Electoral Commission itself - for the Electoral Commission to continue to have any sense of credibility, the way the commissioners are appointed, their qualifications and the way they lose offices is of material importance.

Thirdly, we want to look at the character of this particular House. The composition of Parliament and also in particular, the Speakership; we are proposing to have a Speaker’s Panel especially in instances where the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are not in the country or unable to chair sessions for one reason or the other. Parliament should be able to proceed with some of the not so controversial businesses under the chairmanship of the Speakers’ Panel.

Therefore, we also intend to look at the Executive. One of the cardinal principles behind our proposed amendments is to have a truly concept of separation of powers. We intend to move that if you are appointed to the front bench and you hold a constituency position, then you leave that constituency position and strictly become a minister and serve Uganda without having divided loyalty among other things.
Mr Speaker, I have had the occasion to look at the proposed Bills by the Government to address some of the concerns that have been raised by courts. However, my initial and overall assessment is that the Bills as presented by the Attorney-General are only in respect of addressing the consequential amendments following the enactment of “The Constitutional (Amendment) Bill 2018” infamously referred as the “hon. Raphael Magyezi Bill.”

Therefore, our proposed amendments have nothing to do with that constitution amendment Bill, has no connection with the current Bills before the House and I beg honourable members that you grant us leave to bring these amendments, which will further deepen our fight for proper democracy, rule of law established through free and fair elections. I beg to move. (Applause)

3.23
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker for granting us the opportunity today to have us on the Order Paper. You realise that we started pushing for this since January. In January, we were told that if Government did not present its amendments by April, then we would come on the Floor of Parliament.

However, again, on 30 April 2019, I alerted the Speaker that Government had disappointed us. She said that she wanted to first read and internalise what we had proposed. Today, we are here after Government has presented. Why have we come to present ours after Government?

We would like to appreciate the presentation but-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are seeking leave to present a Bill. Therefore, you are not presenting a Bill.

MS BETTY AOL: Why are we seeking leave to present; because the first amendments that the Government tabled are different from those recommended by the Courts and also from those that Opposition and civil society have for over a decade been pushing for.

As the Opposition, we cannot fold our hands and let the candidate to appoint members of the Electoral Commission and we just sit back and watch, yet, they allege it is an Independent Electoral Commission.

The public is concerned about reinstatement of the term limits-(Interjections)- yes. There is that concern. Then we also have the public resources through donations given during the electoral period. These are some of the issues that we need to talk about when you grant us leave to go and consult our people.

During elections, some public officers are involved in campaigns as well as the role of the Attorney-General in electoral petitions, as we have observed. This is coupled with whether or not Government should meet the cost incurred during the petition, by a candidate against another. This matter has to be determined once and for all. 

This plea is not only about the Opposition but all Ugandans. Let us have something, which is substantial and will address all our issues.

There is a concern that Uganda needs electoral reforms. We have been singing about this. If you grant us leave, all this will be handled.

The role of the military in politics is still unresolved. The status of a sitting President being a Presidential candidate is also still unresolved. There is the need to start thinking about the transition period in case another candidate wins the election.

Therefore, we are asking that Parliament grants us leave to prepare our Bill that shall address all the matters above. The proposals are attached herein to give Parliament a picture of what we intend to bring. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, are you moving another secondment? [MR KIVUMBI: “Yes.”] Do it briefly so that I can propose the question.

3.28
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason we are here is basically to answer our cardinal role that we are all democrats. Wherever democrats are, they have three defining duties;

First, if there is no democracy, your role is to establish one and if it has been established, you consolidate it. However, if it has been consolidated, it is for you to make it better.
We think these amendments are so cardinal because at every turn of our history, there are disputed elections. The quality of our democracy has impaired our economy and security. Therefore, this motion is not intended for the sake of it but to ensure that we once and for all make an investment. 

In today’s world, there is what we call “investment ventures for infinity and beyond.” One of the components of investment for “infinity and beyond” is in the quality and the deepening of a democratic society in which we all live.

The reason we think it is so critical for us to deal with this once and for all is that parliaments before us have attempted to give this country a durable and workable democracy. However, at every turn of an election, we have an election petition that goes to the Supreme Court. Not a single election in this country has been held and not disputed.

Therefore, this amendment is to ensure that we legitimise our democracy so that once there is a Government, there should be no dispute. Once you win in a free and fair election, you speak for the people you are supposed to; that is why we are here to make a humble appeal.

I was one of the members of Parliament who stood when there was a motion to kind of gag hon. Magyezi from moving an amendment. We fought so hard against it. However, the measure of democracy is for you to give space even when you feel what will be presented will go against your will.

Therefore, we are here to make a humble appeal to our honourable colleagues that this is not in search for power. Power is not fought for here; we will fight for it among the electorates at the right time. All we would like to do is to ensure that there is a generation in this country, which will say, “This was our finest hour; we gave our country a set of rules of law and electoral regulations that ushered in a free and fair election.” That investment will stand for not only us but also our children and their children.

Even if there could be those Members with sentiments, there will be a time for us when the Bill is presented for people to object. That time will be so critical. For now, allow us to do this enviable job that parliaments have failed to do before. We are to ensure that we present a comprehensive constitutional amendment that will for once rest the quest for constitutional amendments. 

The only reason we have an Electoral Commission and all these so many registrars is that we are not decent people. I have been to the United Kingdom to observe elections. It is the Ministry of Interior that organises the elections because there is no registrar that will go out and tamper with the electoral process.

Mr Speaker, in order to have an answer to that kind of society, we have to come back and give our country a pair of constitutional amendments that will ensure that we have a free and fair election, once and for all. We will give our country a durable constitutional and legal order and regulations that govern our country. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the question that I now propose is for debate on the motion that hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, Member of Parliament for Ndorwa County East, be granted leave of this House to present a Private Member’s Bill titled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019.” 

To refresh your memory, sitting in this Chair, it is very interesting watching how this House can change. I was in this Chair when arguments were pelted against hon. Kafeero, the Member of Parliament for Nakifuma County. They were with such strength that a private Member cannot move a motion to amend the Constitution. I said that that kind of argument will come to haunt you one day. The honourable Member of Parliament for Nakifuma never succeeded in this House. 

Later on, when it came to hon. Magyezi, the same arguments were advanced. Nevertheless, it came to a vote and they succeeded. Honourable members, that is why I am saying that in the debates in this House, never take a line that will eventually end up tying the hands of a Member of Parliament. (Applause)- Never set that precedent for this House. 

If we had agreed to those principles that you were arguing eloquently about in a well-researched way, you would not be having these speeches you are giving today. Nevertheless, debate starts now on this motion for leave – Yes, point of procedure?

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like us to appreciate what we are doing and agree whether we are procedurally in order. What is before you, Mr Speaker and Members, is a motion for leave to be granted to present a Private Member’s Bill.

When I look at Article 93 of the Constitution, it provides as follows, “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government – 
    (a) Proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill, that makes provision for any of the following…” 

The instances are listed as (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv).  
    (b) “Proceed upon a motion, including an amendment motion to a motion, the effect of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes specified in paragraph (a) of this article.” 

What we are dealing with is a motion to present a Private Member’s Bill; it does not matter the contents. My interpretation of this Article is that even this motion requires a Certificate of Financial Implications. That is the first line of my procedural observation. 

The second line is that doing this - proceeding upon this motion - is contrary to a resolution passed and adopted by this august House. What resolution am I talking about? Honourable members, since 2005, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs received several proposals for the amendment of the Constitution. These proposals received by the ministry were compiled and are waiting for further processing through a Constitutional Review Commission.

We have told this House before that the establishment of the Constitutional Review Commission is in its advanced stages. Honourable members, during the process of enacting the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have some order? 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, thank you for the protection. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Civility demands that you listen to those you disagree with and then you earn yourself the right of reply. 

MR RUKUTANA: Could I be protected from hon. Ssekikubo who is heckling? 

Mr Speaker, during the process of enacting the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which scrutinised the Bill, made a recommendation to this august House. They said that since there was popular demand for amendment of the Constitution, Government should set up a Constitutional Review Commission to process the proposals received by the committee, which were outside the scope of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015.

This report, of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs was adopted by Parliament and it is on record. In adopting the report, the committee also adopted the recommendation of the committee to set up a Constitutional Review Commission to consider all the proposals that were received but were not considered because they were outside the scope of the Bill. 

Processing this Bill would, therefore, be contrary to the parliamentary recommendation – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a motion.

MR RUKUTANA: Processing this motion would, therefore, be contrary to the parliamentary recommendation which was adopted – this is because you process a motion for leave to present a Private Member’s Bill but we have said that that position was already agreed upon by this House in a recommendation; that all amendments should wait for the Constitutional Review Commission. 

We told this House and we would like to repeat it; that Government is in advanced stages of constituting a Constitutional Review Commission. The names have already been identified; they are pending appointment and very soon, we shall have a Constitutional Review Commission in place to process holistically all amendments after consulting with Ugandans. 

Having said that, we do not engage in a motion in vain; it is for leave to present a Private Member’s Bill. However, the law requires that a copy of the intended Bill accompanies the motion. The objective of that - to demand that a copy of the intended motion is attached for leave - is that we have to look at it and see if the intended Bill contravenes any law. 

Having scrutinised the intended motion, I would like to inform this august House that it has financial implications. For example, in the intended motion, it is proposed to increase Commissioners of the Electoral Commission, which definitely calls for additional resources. 

Secondly –(Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I feel very uncomfortable to call the Attorney-General to order on matters of the law. However, I am very passionate about this book called “the Constitution” because I was part of it at the time we were debating its original facts and figures.

Article 93, which talks about restrictions on financial matters, is not relevant at this stage. The Attorney-General is aware that the financial implication will only be called for by Parliament after the Bill is read the first time. Thereafter, you must come with the clearance from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but not at this stage. 

Mr Speaker, let the process of legislation continue after we have been given leave; when we come back, you can then ask us whether it has financial implications. Is the Attorney-General, in order, to waste our time with the long statement he has made, which is very relevant to law but not for this debate? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Deputy Attorney-General, are you in order? (Laughter) Honourable members, like I said, it is really interesting to sit here and watch. Today, the learned Deputy Attorney-General is arguing as if he was from this side and hon. Niwagaba is arguing as if he was from that side. (Laughter) It is a real case of balancing the boat.

This House can only be better advised if we have thorough discussions on matters; interrogate, ventilate and understand them properly. These are not matters you can rush through. You need to have a fair assessment of things and then you deal with them.

Is the Attorney-General in order to raise the issues he is raising whether it has financial implications - that is the substance of his procedure? He is saying that it has financial implications. Now, he is raising a procedural matter, which I have to rule on. At the same time, you are also telling me that it does not have financial implications. Is he in order to say that it has a financial implication? You are asking me to rule on a matter that I am still listening to; give a preliminary ruling and listen to the rest of it and I do not know how I will guide.

You are now crowding my sense of judgement and assessment of the flow of this argument. By and large, you end up spending the time we should have used for other things. I would have wished that we listen to the learned Deputy Attorney-General. Let him make his presentation. I will then give my guidance on the matter and we proceed. Would that be fair? Can we listen to the Deputy Attorney-General, in silence, so that he concludes and then we move?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much, as usual for that very wise ruling. My point was that the reason we demand that for a motion for leave to present a Private Member’s Bill, is that we want to look at the intended Bill and see whether it is in consonance with the provisions of the Constitution and other laws. 

I have looked at the intended Bill and I want to point out well in time that the intended Bill has financial implications. If I do not point out that and the Bill comes here, suppose we debate it, we shall find ourselves tied by the provisions of Article 93 of the Constitution and our own Rules of Procedure.

The financial implications I have observed in the intended Bill are:

    1. Increasing the number of commissioners of the Electoral Commission.
    2. Requiring the Judicial Service Commission to participate in appointing members of the Electoral Commission by advertising in at least, two newspapers and electronic media. 

To mention but a few, those are clear aspects where the intended Bill has financial implications. If the intended Bill has financial implications and we have identified it in time, in the spirit intended - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is on procedure.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, my submission is that we cannot proceed when we know that it contravenes the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure because we do not debate and take decisions in vain. We must take decisions, which are enforceable, practical and actionable –(Interjection)– yes; I have a copy of the Bill here. The rules require that it should be attached to the motion. It was attached and I got a copy. That is where I derive my reading.

In conclusion, it would be procedurally wrong to proceed on this motion. Mr Speaker, it is my contention and I invite you to rule that it would be procedurally wrong to proceed on this motion because it offends the provision of Article 93. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the learned Deputy Attorney-General is just being a lawyer. When you finish your submission in court, you invite the judges to agree with you. That is very normal. Therefore, he is now making an attempt to invite me to support his view that these objections are sustainable both by the Constitution and our rules of procedure.

Honourable members, the issues raised are several and varied. I will just touch on one and then we see how to proceed. The issue of the motion having a draft Bill; the statement by the Attorney-General seems to suggest that that Bill must be in its final form. If you look at Article 94 of the Constitution, the last provision says that when a Member is finally granted leave, the entire legal department must render him or her assistance to prepare the final Bill. That means, what is looked at - the motion cannot have a final Bill because after the motion is granted, under the Constitution, the Member now accesses our services first, by the Parliamentary Counsel and all the other departments, to prepare the final Bill.

It can only be a suggestion and indication of the areas they intend to cover. However, you have raised the issue of financial implications; our rule 117 on the Certificate of Financial Implications and the issue of constitutional review and that there was a ban on multiplicity of the amendments coming when there could be one set of amendments put together and dealt with. You also said that this particular motion would be in vain if we do not make take care of all those things that you have stated.

Honourable members, you will agree with me that the issues are several and involving. I cannot provide a clear ruling off the cuff. I need to give guidance that would help us so that we proceed in a way that is sustainable. If it was only one issue of final draft Bill, I would have dealt with it already. You can now see that the issues are several; even if you were in my shoes, I am sure you would be wondering what to say on each one of them.

I need to reflect on them and give a fair assessment of the ruling I will give to the House on the procedural matter raised by the learned Attorney-General. I think that would be fair. 

3.55
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree that the issues raised are substantial and serious. I do not know, and that is why I am seeking your guidance on whether you would not listen to rebuttals from our side as you prepare to make your ruling because we have some factual situations that you may need to consider. 

I would like to thank the learned Attorney-General for making reference to the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and I would like to share with this august House, part of the institutional memory.

It is true that that was a compromised position with some members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and three of us departed. I was a member of the committee in the Ninth Parliament and I have a copy of the minority report that was authored by hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Florence Namayanja and I. 

The principal reasons for our departure were two. The first was that we did not have trust in what Government was telling us although we were barred from legislating in anticipation that it is a Government you cannot trust. 

The second was that throughout the entire term of the Ninth Parliament, we had pleaded with the Executive to bring these reforms and they failed to do so. This debate was conducted in the month of July 2015. 

A private Member, proposing to bring a Private Member’s Bill on issues where the public appeared to be unanimous that we need them; the court has been both consistent and persistent in the vote of no confidence in the ability of the Executive – in particular, I will point my finger at the Deputy Attorney-General because I know he will not be angered, knowing our relationship which he denies here. (Laughter)

The point I am making here is that by a Private Member coming up to bring all these amendments is a vote of no confidence in the ability of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to give us any assistance.

If you can come here and plead default that since July 2015 you have failed to honour your commitment to this House twice; the commitment by the then Attorney–General, hon. Fred Ruhindi, subsequently the commitment by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of this country to bring these amendments and yet the reasons you gave in the Ninth Parliament in July 2015 were that we do not have enough time to process these amendments.

I have photographic memory of you, Mr Speaker, seated where you are in the same position of Deputy Speaker, where you guided and said, “Don’t waste your time bringing a Private Member’s Bill. A vehicle is with us for you to load everything you have”. We struggled to compile this minority report with all the amendments from the views collected across the country. 

For how long is this Parliament going to be stampeded by the Executive? For how long shall we be taken for granted? That you make the Prime Minister of this country – in the Executive he is No. 3. He is the Leader of Government Business in Parliament. He comes to a national Parliament, does not promise but undertakes that honourable colleagues, do not worry – this is the language of Ndugu Rugunda, “In a few months, we are going to appoint a Constitutional Review Commission.” 

Finally, we are barred from legislating in anticipation. How do we anticipate; 

    a) That this time round, unlike previous times, Government is going to come up with the Constitutional Review Commission?
    b) That the minister responsible for finance is going to deny us a Certificate of Financial Implications?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On that, the rules are clear. When there is such denial, we will proceed without it under the rules.

MR SSEGGONA: Much obliged. I am moving from the background where my brother, the Deputy Attorney-General, was indicating as if we will not get the certificate. 

We know that a minister, acting in good faith, in accordance with the laws of this country will give us this certificate. However, even in the event that he does not deliver, the laws of this country give us leeway; one way is going without it as the rules provide and the other is to compel him in a court of law.

I thought it would be important and I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your magnanimity in permitting that we give you some of this information to beef up your decision making process –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Sseggona for giving way. Mr Speaker, I have been around for some time – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May I know where? (Laughter)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I have been inside these chambers for some time. I will begin with the Seventh Parliament. They brought 141 amendments to the Constitution. The then sitting Speaker, the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, it was agreed that we get out what we shall use for the next election and that we shall bring the rest to the next Parliament.

In the Eighth Parliament, nothing of the remaining 125 amendments came. At the same time – that is why I would like to thank hon. Sseggona because they said the next Parliament, which was the eighth and nothing appeared. The same happened in the Ninth Parliament. We were told that it would be processed as soon as the then current Parliament opened - which was in 2015 - we were told it would be the first business. 

There was even a Supreme Court case after the election of 2016. The question was raised that in 2006, we directed that go and look after this, the same with 2011 election, now what is happening? As usual, the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. Rugunda says that the Government is aware. This is always his customised answer. (Laughter). 

I am informing hon. Sseggona that from May 2015, almost five years down the road, nothing has happened and hon. Rukutana also says that they are working on the process. 

The information I bring to my brother is that we are remaining with only one year to go to the next election and nothing has happened and it is in light of that that a motion to allow a Member to bring a Private Member’s Bill is being moved. They are trying to answer to the issues, which have been raised in the public and even the Supreme Court.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I have received the information and there are only two points. I have accepted it with grace. The same argument being raised by the Deputy Attorney-General and I like your opening remarks on this, was our same argument – and in good faith – when hon. Raphael Magyezi came. I fondly refer to him as “Raph”. 

When he brought his motion, we said, “No, since the Government promised us that they are coming up with a Constitutional Review Commission, let us deal with constitutional amendments comprehensively.” The Deputy Attorney-General did not stop at defending that but even ordered for my arrest in the courtyard of Parliament –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Knowing that I do not command any troops, I am not a police commander; the alleged arrest is not known to me. I am a very civil person and I cannot command anybody to arrest anybody. Is it in order for hon. Sseggona to stand here, before you, our respected Speaker, and tell a lie that I ordered his arrest when I do not know anything about it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the functions of the Attorney-General are listed in Article 119 of the Constitution and I suppose that also deals with the functions of the Deputy Attorney-General in Article 119A. I have had a quick scan at this and I have not seen anywhere, where this Constitution grants the Attorney-General the authority to order arrests. I am going by the law. The law does not allow him to order arrests. If he did anything like that, it would not be understandable by any laws of this land. (Laughter)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have heard from the Attorney-General when he said he is a sensible man. I have received that information. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I can only speak to the extent that I know –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go to the substantive issue.

MR SSEGGONA: Yes. As to whether the directive he gave to the police to arrest me was lawful or not, I concur with you that it was unlawful. However, factually, it happened. (Laughter) 
Just in case he is not sure, I forgave him because that is me. 

I had two points and the first was that he was speaking that the expectation that there would be a Constitutional Review Commission would not stop a Private Member, hon. Raphael Magyezi, from proceeding. This time he is arguing that that anticipation is good enough for us to halt this process.

The last point I am making, Mr Speaker, is that the entire House has agreed before – actually, it was hon. Nsamba’s motion – in principle that if we are to comply with the Constitution and the rules and to avoid debating in anticipation and to allow freedom of legislation in this House – it does not matter how that freedom was achieved and arrived at the other time – we must allow a Member to present the motion and we look at the Bill. 

We are intelligent men and women and we still have the residual power; the final authority lies with us to scrutinise the Bill and say, “Yes, this meets the test and this does not.” I get very offended whenever we get very apprehensive in anticipation that this Bill must be targeting something. 

In the Ninth Parliament, hon. Lulume Bayiga presented a motion which had something called “the Presidential Transition Bill”. When people heard “presidential transition” they were very apprehensive and rejected it at the preliminary stage. That is the ground upon which we were rejecting hon. Magyezi’s motion because we were also angered. 

However, you guided us, subsequent to those events, that “forget about the past and look at the future. In the event that the Government comes up with comprehensive proposals, we will discuss them. This Parliament is not ending today”. Hon. Niwagaba’s motion is not going to end this nation. Let us legislate for posterity. Do not stop a debate. Allow the debate. The quality of debate will guide us.

Finally, Mr Speaker, why sometimes I feel hurt and my heart bleeds is that I always sit and listen to views, however unpalatable. In many cases, hon. Rukutana has brought here proposals which are very unpalatable to me but I painfully listened to him because I am commanded, one, by the rules of this House and two, by the conventions and wisdom and, three, by the democracy of our country.

Voltaire said – and he was a very famous philosopher – “I disapprove of what you say but I shall defend to death your right to say it.”

Colleagues, let us listen to each other. We are all products of an election. Let us listen to anything that can improve the quality of elections through which we come here. I would like to legislate, thinking and agreeing that we all went through an election which may have been rough because of the laws or which may have been made rough because of the personnel. 

If one of you succeeded in rigging that election and got here, you were lucky. Let us stop the luck of getting to Parliament or to positions through rigging. Let us listen to each other. This is our country. You are Attorney-General today, I will be tomorrow. Actually, my anticipation is to be president but I want to be president through a free and fair electoral process. It is only then that we can avert a political crisis –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member will not use this House to campaign for presidency. (Laughter)

MR SEGGONA: I will give my manifesto elsewhere –(Laughter) -however, as to expression of aspirations and ambitions, Mr Speaker, I think I am perfectly permitted. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, give me the time I have requested for to come back and guide on how we can proceed. I have listened to both the procedural matter raised by the Attorney-General and now I have listened to the statement by the Shadow Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Allow me time to reflect on these and come and guide the House in a way that will cover most of the engagements we have had over these similar matters. It will be a more comprehensive ruling that can guide us. 

Therefore, I will pause it here until the ruling is done and open the debate and move properly. Thank you. Next item.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I presented a notice and motion to your Office on the 30 July 2019 and I had the benefit of a discussion with you. Yesterday you guided that I should harmonise with hon. Niwagaba, which we did by consolidating the two motions and the Bills. 

I seek your guidance as to whether or not your ruling on the same will suffice on my motion. It was a consolidated motion but you alluded to the fact that you did not have a copy, meaning that maybe that did not form part of what we are dealing with and I will have another opportunity to present mine.

Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on whether this is assumed to be proceeding together because your ruling on the same subject will suffice in respect of my motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My ruling will cover the whole subject and your motion was substantially presented but it was only when we reached the prayers that I raised the matter. The motion was presented fully and I think you will be the first person to debate when we open up debate so that the matter is covered.

MR MWIRU: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether that pauses my friend’s issues of the Private Members’ Bill. Let us not bring another one but wait and I guide on the same matter in a comprehensive way.  

Honourable members, there was another motion seeking leave to allow hon. Oboth to present his motion. I will deal with all of them. Let me not go into another motion of a similar nature since I have paused this already. Next item –(Mr Oboth rose_)– I have just guided on that. I have said we will proceed with yours after my ruling.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY [AMENDMENT] BILL, 2015

Clause 7

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you will recall that we had quite a good engagement on this issue of clause 7, on the Lord Mayor and the Deputy Lord Mayor. 

By the time I adjourned the House, there was debate on the issue of a political head. My parting remark was that if you are going to hold an election in an area by universal adult suffrage and you come up with a leader of that area, what crime would you commit by calling that person the political head of that area? That was the question I paused and I asked you to go and harmonise this before we proceed. That was the issue. Honourable minister, are we now ready to proceed with this matter? 

4.18
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Chairman, we listened to your guidance and after consultations, we still think that our position was right. However, given your guidance and for the good of the House, we leave it to the House to decide.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let me refresh the question we are dealing with. If the Lord Mayor of Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) is elected by universal adult suffrage, should he or she be referred to as the political head of that institution or not? That is the question and we are going to decide that by vote.  

Honourable members, we had a serious debate on this matter. Should the person elected for KCCA be referred to as -

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairperson, I have followed your guidance very clearly. I, therefore, do not think that we should bother ourselves to put this to vote. I would like to commit Government to accept the proposal that the person elected by universal adult suffrage be the political head. (Applause) 

Mr Chairman, what I would like to say is that we should clearly stipulate the functions of the offices. Where functions are very clear, we will not suffer any conflicts; that is why I decided to stand and concede on behalf of Government so that the House moves ahead in harmony.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Chairperson, would you like to propose this again now? Who had proposed this amendment? Sorry, it was the Shadow Minister of KCCA. Could you now propose it for decision?

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, for the spirit of harmony she has cultivated this afternoon. No wonder she is dressed in more green with a little yellow today.

Mr Speaker, allow me to propose that the amendment reads “Clause 7: Replacement of section 9 of the Principle Act.

“9. Lord Mayor and the Deputy Lord Mayor 

    1. There shall be a Lord Mayor who shall be the political head of the Capital City;
    2.  The Lord Mayor shall be elected by universal adult suffrage through a secret ballot at an election organised by the Electoral Commission;
    3.  The Lord Mayor shall, with the approval of the council, appoint a Deputy Lord Mayor from other members of the council;
    4.  The Lord Mayor and the Deputy Lord Mayor shall serve on full time basis.

 I beg to move, Mr Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do we have a copy of this amendment?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairperson, allow me to lay on the Table a copy of the amendment I have just read out.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, these are things that should be shared with the Presiding Officer. We have made guidance on this but the only matter you are -

MS NAMBOOZE: I am sorry, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The only matter you are substantially adding is the issue of the political head of the institution and the issue of the Lord Mayor appointing the Deputy Lord Mayor but the rest is the same. Are we agreeable to this, Chairman? Is there any problem with this? 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. In our report, we refused to make the minister the political head of the capital city. We removed it when it was put under the functions of the Lord Mayor. To us, that was not a function but a position or status from which, functions are derived. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are we agreeable to this? Do we now adopt the proposal from hon. Nambooze as the running amendment? Can I put the question to this amendment as proposed by hon. Nambooze? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 7 as amended stands as part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are deleting the entire clause 8. The justification is that the Clause is redundant since qualifications of the Lord Mayor and the Deputy Lord Mayor are provided for under section 10 of the principal Act. The qualifications of other members of the council are already provided for under clause 3. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that fair? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 8, deleted. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 8 deleted, now can we go back to those other proposals since we have cleared with the Lord Mayor. Do we still have functions? Where are they?

Clause 9

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We stood over the earlier amendment we brought before clause 7; I am just reminding the House.

We are deleting paragraphs (a) and (b) and insert two new paragraphs (f) and (h) as follows: 
(f)		To monitor the administration of the capital city 
(h) 	To address the council on the state of affairs of Kampala Capital City once a year.

The justification is that having introduced the Office of the Speaker of the capital city council, paragraph (a) becomes redundant. Under section 11 (2) of the principal Act, the Lord Mayor shall in the performance of his or her functions be answerable to the council and the minister.

The provision takes cognisant of Article 5 of the 1995 Constitution. In view of the proposed amendments, the mandate to make reports on the state of affairs of the capital city to council now shifts from the Executive Director to the Lord Mayor (IV) to provide for extra roles of the Lord Mayor. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? Can I put the question to that?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, we are not particularly proposing changes here but we want to request, as a way of amendment, that the proposal be adopted to re-align the functions as listed in their order of gravity.

The justification is to give the law more clarity and to show the functions of that office in their order of priority and if you will allow me, I would read out the proposed re-aligned functions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we deal with the proposal because you are proposing sets of amendment. These things are not shared so I have a problem and we have guided on this; that for us to be able preside these meetings properly, we need advance copies of these proposals.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, yesterday you guided that today we shall look at only one item, which has been cleared by hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. If you had told us to do it, as usual, we would have done it. We would like to seek your indulgence that we continue as we started in that spirit because going back right now might take a day.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, this has been a standing guidance for this House. This is law making, not a public discussion, which has no implication. Whatever you are proposing on the Floor has to add sufficient interrogation from technical people so that it makes legal sense.

These amendments that are brought and are not shared can cause us problems. I have not seen the amendments myself and I am presiding, now when do I read, I am a drafts person; how do I read and understand them.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek your indulgence -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is not about indulgence anymore, it is about proper procedure where we make laws in a good way. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am not changing anything but referring to the old law, which exists and that means if we agreed yesterday with the Attorney-General and the members that this law is more or less like a Local Government law.

I am saying that if we are trying to make functions of the Lord Mayor, as we agreed yesterday, he is like a district chairperson. We need to import the functions of a district chairperson so that we merge them together with this addition and that is what I was trying to raise, which does not need any writing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thought that was what the committee had proposed.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to inform the House that in our report which we re-uploaded on the intranet, we have given a sequence of the flow.

We provided for functions and inserted new clauses for the functions. I only pray that Members will give us time to present and they amend where necessary because if it is about other functions apart from what I have read.

We elaborated on the executive functions which copy we circulated because we wrote to you and uploaded. I pray that we be given time to present and Members will amend where necessary. Thank you.
	
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are dealing with clause 9 and the chairperson has outlined what they propose as a committee and the proposal they are making is that we delete paragraph (a) insert two new paragraphs as (f) and (g) as follows:

(f) 	To initiate strategies and programmes for development of the capital city.
(g) 	To address the council on the state of affairs of the capital city once a year. That is what was added by the committee.

MR MUWANGA: Mr Chairman, this is in line with what we stood over. This amendment is consequential to the fact that we have the Speaker now. 

Now that we have not even decided where we shall have a Speaker, we stood over it. Even this one at this material time is subjected to the fact that we anticipate that (6) is already adopted. My humble opinion is that the reason we stood over the question of the Speaker was for Parliament to first clarify on what the functions of the Lord Mayor will be.

Once we are clear about that, well elaborated as she talks about in other clauses, then we can quickly deal with these ones. If we do not clear the functions of the Lord Mayor as they will be, then all these consequential things will be difficult to deal with. I propose that the chairperson helps us at this stage to spell out all the functions of the Mayor. Once that is dealt with -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what we are dealing with right now. There are functions that are already in the parent Act. She is asking for some to be deleted and to be 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are functions that are already in the parent Act. She is asking for some to be deleted and others to be added.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, Mr Chairperson. Now, if you delete what she says – let me be very clear – all that the Lord Mayor will be left to do is to come and address the Council once, which will be a ceremonial function of the Lord Mayor. Now, let us go to what you call the executive functions of the Lord Mayor.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are on section 11 of the Act. That is what we are looking at, which is clause 9 of the Bill. The chairperson has just told us that we have deleted (a) for the reasons we did because when the definitions were adopted for the Lord Mayor, that is the political head. We do not have to repeat it in 11(a) - that is the principal Act.

She is proposing that it be deleted because it does not make sense anymore; it is not a function. She has now proposed that of the listed functions of the Lord Mayor, they add two - that on the ones listed in the Act, they add two, which are (f) and (g). There is 1(a) which is deleted, then (b), (c), (d) and (e), they are proposing to add (f) and (g). No, there is already (f) and (g).

What are you adding, chairperson?

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Chairman, what we are trying to say is this proposal –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, no, no! Please, honourable member. We have not yet agreed that you should speak; so let us first get to where we understand each other. Chairperson, are you using another set of amendments, different from the ones that are in the report?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We are not, except we also made a provision for the executive committee, where the Lord Mayor has been provided with specific functions when we go to 14A and 14B. That is why I request that Members should allow us to first finish this. Then, when we go to 14A and 14B, we shall still give you more functions of the Lord Mayor.

However, if it pleases you that immediately after this we go and present the executive functions we have given for the Lord Mayor and the committee, we can still do so.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I was reading from a wrong text. The committee moved away from what I read in their submission of 16th July, this year. The amendment now being proposed on the additions is to delete paragraph (a) and insert three new paragraphs – but there are two – to monitor the administration of the capital city.

(h) To address the council on the state of affairs of Kampala Capital City once a year. Therefore, these are additions to what is in the Act, with the exception of paragraph (a), which was saying he will be the political head, which has been dealt with.

So, if this is satisfactory for these sets of functions, then it would be more comprehensive for us to understand if you read out for us what the other functions would be, so that we have a full picture. It might help. Please chairperson, let us be guided. Where are the other functions under?

MS ABABIKU: Mr Speaker, under 14A and 14B, where we inserted new clauses, in our report. It is on page 28.

“The principal Act is amended by inserting, immediately after section 14, the following new sections:
14A City Executive Committee

    (1) There shall be a City Executive Committee for Council which shall perform the executive functions of the Council.
    (2) The City Executive Committee shall consist of:
        a. The Lord Mayor, who shall be the chairperson
        b. The Deputy Lord Mayor, who shall be the vice chairperson and;
        c. Three other members appointed by the Lord Mayor from among members of the Council, with the approval of the Council.

Mr Chairperson, we amended (c) and gave you a circulation, where we said that at least one member should be a female.	

    (3) The Lord Mayor shall constitute the City Executive Committee during the second sitting of the Council.
    (4) Members of the City Executive Committee shall serve on a full-time basis.
14B. Functions of the City Executive Committee
(a) 	Perform the executive functions of the Council -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the City Executive Committee shall…

MS ABABIKU: Mr Speaker, we elaborated it in the amendments we wrote to you.

The City Executive Committee shall:

    (a) Ensure implementation of Council programmes and decisions;
    (b) Monitor sector performance and report to Council;
    (c) Present the annual budget of the Authority to the Council and;
    (d) Assist the Lord Mayor in the performance of his or her functions under this Act.

The justification is that the current proposed provision that provides for the executive functions of the Council is ambiguous. So, we elaborated and specified them. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We leave out – The Business Committee does not involve the Lord Mayor; so, we can come back to that later. Are we clear on this, honourable members?

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Chairperson, the proposal in clause 9, amendment of section 11 of the principal Act – that is (g) – “to address the Council on the state of affairs with the capital city once a year,” presupposes that we have put a position of the Speaker, which is still a proposal and is not agreeable by some of us.

So, when the would-be presiding officer can now only address the Council at least once a year, you are already saying that we have created the position of the Speaker, which is not.

MS ABABIKU: Mr Chairperson, you guided and allowed me to present on behalf of the committee because Members insisted. They wanted to be sure about the functions of the Lord Mayor and also the Executive Committee, before looking at the position that we created for the Speaker.

So, we read it to you. Now that you know what we have provided for the Lord Mayor and the Executive Committee, I thought the next is to either say “Yes” or “No” for the specific functions and you allow us go back to present on the Speakership so that you also discuss it because you asked for it and we have provided.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is really how we were going because we stood over the proposed amendment, which was inserting new clauses to new sections to deal with the office of the Speaker. We stood over it because we wanted to first understand the functions of the Lord Mayor.

Therefore, now that we have understood, if we adopt, let us go back and deal with the office of the Speaker; as simple as that.

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a proposal on the same that we do not delete paragraph (a) but instead –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, no, no. We have already dealt with that one, please. We have dealt with that already in a comprehensive way. We said under opening paragraph, proposed by the honourable member. We captured that there. Please.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I am not comfortable here when we are engaging gears back and forth. Government’s side on the Bill, they moved quite a good step. The moment they conceded on the political head, I am surprised that some of us are still asking whether we shall have the Speaker and you are asking whether President Museveni would also be the Speaker.

The moment you say you are the political head and you are copying some other attributes of local government - (Interjections) - if am getting it wrong, allow me get it wrong. The issue of a political head largely settled this matter and I thought that we had made a big stride towards the right direction -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we do not have any disagreement now except that there are Members who came late and had not followed the other decisions. Can we proceed?

MR SSEGGONA: The essence compels us to admit that by not submitting our proposed amendments, we faulted. We apologise to you and to our colleagues across.

Secondly, my honourable colleague says, “with costs” - I will pay minimal costs that non-lawyers are entitled to. However, on a serious note, Mr Chairman, we are in agreement that once we sort out the issue of functions, we have no problem with the speakership because as we all notice, the President only comes to Parliament to address us. 

Our problem will only be on the statutory limitation of once a year. I suggest that we leave it flexible because when he goes, it is an administrative issue he will be handling with the Speaker. The President does not come to address us without the consent of the Speaker. Personally, we shall sort out that. 

However, for neatness in drafting, we are thinking that section 11 of the functions; since the chairperson as I listened to her, made reference to section 14, it would be better to say like to head the executive committee in performing the functions under section 14(b) for clarity. They will make inter-references that if I am looking for the functions of the Lord Mayor, I am reading section 11.

However, the wisdom of Parliament has stipulated those functions in 14 (b) - to me would give us progress and would be neater drafting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the one in section 14 (b) is of the executive committee which the mayor is and has additional functions there. It is not specifically for the mayor. He has additional functions as leader of the executive committee there. Therefore it would be -

MR SSEGGONA: I am saying he is only heading the executive committee in the executive committee performing its functions -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: As an additional function under section 11?

MR SSEGGONA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. It makes sense.

MR SSEGGONA: He is only heading that committee when it is doing its functions under section 14 (b). That is our proposal. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not have a problem with that because we provided that the Lord Mayor shall be the chairperson of the executive committee. Therefore, it does not make any difference. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That makes sense. Can we be processing them now because we are going to get back to things we have already concluded?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: We are in agreement but I would like one clarification from the chairperson, whether the Lord Mayor is a member of the council because why I ask so, the district chairman ordinarily is a member of the council. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We decided to separate roles by accepting to create the council of the Authority and we also decided to have the executive committee headed by the Lord Mayor. We decided to provide for the Speaker. Therefore when the Lord Mayor becomes the political head and head of the executive then the powers are separated. He cannot sit like any other member of the council to deliberate issues.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, in as far as separating the role of the executive and legislature, we are together. However, we should also consider the nature of the local Governments. It is true that the President does not come to this House every other day but we have the leader of Government business and Cabinet ministers always here to defend, clarify and to inform the House on what is taking place on the side of the executive.

In that spirit, Mr Chairman, that is why we are proposing that the chairman of the executive committee and his executive would be part of the council as Cabinet. That is the executive; a council that is chaired by the Speaker to make reports, clarifications, answer questions and inform the council. There is no other way we can create that bridge other than allowing them to be part of the council; the Lord Mayor and his executive.

MS ABABIKU: Mr Chairman, we are speaking the same language. Our understanding as a committee is that when we created for the executive, it sits in the council meetings and participates in generating the Order Paper of the council. It also responds or accounts to the council.

Therefore, we are not saying that this executive committee shall not sit in the council meeting -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the issue is with the Lord Mayor not being a member of the council. That is the issue.

MS ABABIKU: The Lord Mayor, as we have been taking Kampala as a district – (Interruption)

MS NAMUGWANYA: The information I would like to give the chairperson and share with the House is that yesterday, we passed clause 3. When you look at clause 3 of the Bill, it stipulates the members of the Council and it says, “the council shall consist of the following members;

    a) The Lord Mayor
    b) The Deputy Lord Mayor and then those categories of the council.”

Therefore, Mr Chairman, this puts the issue to rest.

MS SSEGGONA: Mr Chairperson, I agree with my honourable friend. The trouble with that is on the one hand, he is a member of the council and on the other hand, you are telling him to report once a year. How do we harmonise the truth? Are we talking about the state of city address?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes that is what it is; to address council on the state of affairs of Kampala Capital City; that ceremonial address like the state of the nation.

MR SSEGGONA: I agree. My only addition is to say at least once a year because the word at least gives room to flexibility. Just to add the word “at least”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, this is a specific request like the state of the nation. You cannot have it twice a year. This is the state of the council affairs. This is the State of the Council Address other than just other addresses.

Here, they are being specific on the state of affairs of Kampala Capital City Authority. This is equivalent to the one the President does.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I am alive to all that. The only issue that may come up, and this will come back to us not far from now, is that what happens when there are situations when there are emergency issues that we have not provided for elsewhere in the law?

I have seen the President at some point addressing us twice in a month. That is the flexibility I am talking about. The moment you say, “Once a year” – but if we used the word “at least”, then we would be covered. I am happy that the minister agrees with me.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my colleague, hon. Sseggona that we have already agreed that the Lord Mayor is a member of the council. He or she will sit to deliberate from there every other time the council sits. 

The aspect of “once a year” is to give a broad state of the affairs of the city. You cannot do this every day, month or week. You compile that comprehensive report on the status of the city and present it to the council.

When you look at the parent law we are now amending, even the minister has that responsibility of reporting to Parliament once a year on the state of affairs of the city.

Therefore, I would like to request hon. Sseggona to leave it at that because by making it often, we water down the essence of this clause. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Article 101 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda states thus:

    1. “The president shall, at the beginning of each session of Parliament, deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation.”
    2. “The President may, also, in consultation with the Speaker, address Parliament from time to time, on any matter of national importance.”

This extension is because the President is not a Member of Parliament but the Mayor is a member of the council. Each time the Mayor needs to address the council, he will tell them to put him on the Order Paper.

MR SSEGGONA: We do concede, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we now proceed?

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am not comfortable with the chairperson’s proposal on the creation of the executive where she says that at least one person should be female. 

I do understand that the term “at least” means “more than one”. However, in most cases, some male leaders may only select only one female person so, I am not comfortable –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They are talking of “at least one”. The committee is to have only three members.

MS WATONGOLA: Why don’t we talk of a third of that committee?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are supposed to be only three committee members by law. Honourable members, can we process these decisions? I think we are satisfied. Can we now take a decision on the functions of the mayor?

The addition is, to- 
“
    1. monitor the administration of the capital city;
    2. address the council on the state of affairs of Kampala Capital City Authority once a year;
    3. head the executive committee in performing the functions under Section 14(b) of this Act.”

I put a question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us now go back to the provisions of the Speaker.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are inserting a new clause. 

The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after Section 6 the following new sections: -
“
6A: Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Council
    1) There shall be a Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Council elected from among members of the Council.
    2) A person shall not qualify to be elected Speaker or Deputy Speaker if he or she is a Lord Mayor or Deputy Lord Mayor.
    3) The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall serve on a full time basis.

6B: Election of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Council
    1) The Speaker and the Deputy speaker shall be elected through a secret ballot.
    2) At the elections of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker, a person shall not be declared elected Speaker or Deputy Speaker unless that person gets more than 50 per cent of the votes of all members of the Council cast in his or her favour.
    3) Where a person does not obtain more than 50 per cent of the votes cast, the elections shall be repeated between the first two persons getting the highest votes until one of them gets more than 50 per cent of the votes.
    4) Where, during the election of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker only one person is nominated, that person shall be declared elected Speaker or Deputy Speaker.
    5) A Chief Magistrate shall preside at an election of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker.
    6) Except for the taking of oath of the members of the Council, no business shall be transacted in the Council before the election of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker at any time that the office is vacant.

6C: Functions of Speaker and Deputy Speaker
The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall -
    (a) preside over all meetings of the Council;
    (b) be charged with the overall authority for the preservation of order in the Council and ensuring the enforcement of the rules of procedure of the Council;
    (c) perform functions, which are similar to those of the Speaker of Parliament as may be consistent with this Act.

6D: Removal of Speaker or Deputy Speaker from office
    (1) The Speaker or Deputy Speaker may be removed from office by the Council by a resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members of the Council on any of the following grounds:
    a) Abuse of office
    b) Incompetence
    c) Misconduct or misbehaviour
    d) Physical or mental incapacity that would render the Speaker or Deputy Speaker incapable of performing the duties of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker, or
    e) Failure to convene two consecutive meetings of the Council without reasonable cause.

    (2) A Chief Magistrate shall preside at the removal of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker
(3) 	The office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall fall vacant if the holder -
(a) 	resigns the office in writing addressed to the minister;
(b) 	accepts appointment to a public office; or
(c) 	dies."

Justification – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the justification was given very clearly yesterday. Do we need to go through it again?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have had discussions on this. We are clear on this. Can we take a decision?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, as we told this House yesterday, we are agreeable to this new section in the law. However, on the people that can be elected Speaker, the committee proposed that those who do not qualify include the Lord Mayor and the Deputy Lord Mayor. I think that we should also include members of the executive committee because they also do not qualify to be elected Speaker. If you do not include it here, you may find a secretary for something again coming and contesting as a Speaker and wins.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they are appointed after elections. Sequentially, they cannot be – 

MS NAMBOOZE: The seat can fall vacant and we have a by-election for the Speaker. I thought it would be proper to include that “members of the executive cannot be Speaker” for clarity purpose. 

Mr Chairman, on the issue of making the fight for the speakership so protracted – these are people who are going to stay together. They are about 20 or 30 in number. I think a Speaker would take the position on winning by simple majority, instead of saying that a Speaker should get more than 50 per cent. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what is in the Local Government Act, as you remember. They have just lifted the same provisions.

MS NAMBOOZE: For the sake of uniformity, we concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, is it only the issue of the executive being elected as Speaker? Can an executive member be a Speaker by operation? If you are elected Speaker, then, you would cease to be in the executive because that would be a merger of roles that we are trying to separate.

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are agreeable to almost everything but the title “Speaker of Kampala Capital City Authority” is too big to be left just like that and we do not put academic qualifications. It involves so much; presiding over council meetings and judgement – of who is to speak what and at what time. Therefore, it needs someone with at least some qualifications.

Hence, I propose that as Parliament, we put some qualification on these two people; the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we are not reinventing the wheel here. This is the practice in the Local Government; so let us adopt this and move, honourable members.

I will put the question to this amendment as proposed for the new insertion of new clauses to deal with the issue of the Office of Speaker. I will put the question to all of them. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

New clauses, agreed to.

Clause 10 

MS ABABIKU: Mr Chairman, we propose to replace the entire clause with the following –
Section 12 of the Principal Act is amended –

(a)  In sub-section (1)-
(i) By substituting for the word "Authority", the word "Council";
(ii) By repealing paragraph (e)
(b) In sub-section (3), by substituting for the word “Authority", the word “Council”
(c) In sub-section (9), by substituting for the word "Authority", the word "Council"
(d) In sub-section (10), by inserting words "Speaker, Executive Director" immediately after the words "Lord Mayor"
(e) In sub-section (15), by substituting for the word "Authority", the word "Council"
(f) 	In sub-section (16), by substituting for the word "Authority", the word "Council"
(g) 	By substituting for sub-section (17), the following-

"(17) The Minister shall, within 14 days of receipt of the report of the tribunal or medical board, present it to council."
(h) 	In sub-section (18), by substituting for the word "Authority", the word "Council"
(i) 	In sub-section (19), by substituting for the word "Authority", the word “Council”.

Justification
    1. The procedure for removing the Lord Mayor and Deputy Lord Mayor, as laid out in the principal Act, is elaborate enough and allows fair hearing and transparency.
    2. Consequential amendments.

Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I will put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to. 

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are amending Section 19 of the principal Act by –
(a) Replacing paragraph (c) with the following – 
(c) By substituting for paragraph (f) the following – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, you had proposed the insertion of a new clause in the report. Maybe we should deal with them before we go any farther. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you for reminding me. Mr Chairman – 

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Chairman, this is a very important matter. We are seated in the National Assembly and somebody representing the army is continuously reading newspapers. Is it in order for a Member to continue reading newspapers, when we are debating a very serious Bill? Is hon. Pecos Kuteesa, who represents the UPDF, in order? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the documents for the supply of information to this House are normally circulated for discussion. 

But, honourable members, we also have a bad habit these days; so you cannot tell which one is which. Sometimes, we also bring here newspapers and refer to them to inform our debate. (Laughter) For example, there was an honourable member who wanted to lay a newspaper on the Table. Please, let us stick to the documents for this House rather than resorting to newspapers for supply of information.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, this is a very respectable august House where our dress code is provided for. Is it in order for hon. Nzoghu to come dressed in an open shirt, as if he is going to graze cattle? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I ruled on that matter yesterday, except that today he is dressed in a different colour. Yesterday, he was wearing a brown shirt but today it is blue. Let us proceed with business, please. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In paragraph (b) of the proposed amendment in the Bill, we proposed that the following words be inserted immediately following the words, “Advice the” appearing at the beginning of the sentence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where are we Chairperson? I thought you are going to the proposed new clauses. Insertion of a new clause. Amendment of Section 13 of the Principal Act. Okay?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Clause 13, we are amending Section 19 of the Principal Act, by replacing paragraph (c) with the following -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, Chairperson. You proposed to make this insertion. I thought we had agreed that we would deal with those ones then we go to the clauses of the Bill.
 
MS ABABIKU: Mr Chairperson, I think it is an error. What I have–

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am on page 28 of the main report.

MS ABABIKU: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have done a lot of work on this matter and we do not want to leave out anything. If you have abandoned it then –

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Chairperson. We are inserting a new clause immediately after Clause 10 to read as follows: 

“Amendment of Section 13 of the Principal Act. 
Section 73 of the Principal Act is amended by repealing subsection (3).”

Justification

The provision is redundant since the representation of the professional bodies has been repealed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We need to find a way of dealing with it. There is nowhere in the Bill, where it can be handled, that is why she is trying to bring it so that we can deal with it. It was in the Bill, as an active provision; so the committee is proposing that it should be handled. That is why they are proposing to insert some clauses after clause –

MS ABABIKU: When we were handling the composition of the council, we decided to remove it and we gave justification. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It was supposed to be immediately after clause 10. Is that okay, honourable members? Can we deal with this? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 14, we did it under the executive committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Did we adopt it? We did not vote but we guided ourselves on it.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Insertion of a new clause
sections 14(a) and 14(b).
The Principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after Section 14 the following new sections: 

“14(a), City Executive Committee. 
(1) 	There shall be a City Executive Committee for Council, which shall perform the executive functions of the council. 
(2) 	The City Executive Committee shall consist of -
(a) 	the Lord Mayor, who shall be the chairperson; 
(b) 	the Deputy Lord Mayor, who shall be the vice-chairperson; and 
(c) 	three other members appointed by the Lord Mayor from among members of the council with approval of council.” 

Mr Chairman, we did some amendment to at least have a female, among the three members.
“(3) The Lord Mayor shall constitute the City Executive Committee during the second sitting of the Council.
(4) Members of the City Executive Committee shall serve on a full-time basis.” 

14(b) Functions of the City Executive Committee. Mr Chairman, we made elaboration to that; that is on the new amendment we gave you.
“
    a) Ensure implementation of council programmes and decisions.
    b) Monitor sector performance and report to council.
    c) Present the annual budget of the authority to the council.
    d) Assist the Lord Mayor in performance of his or her functions under this Act.”

The justification

The current proposed provision that provides for the executive functions of the council is ambiguous.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members?

MS ABABIKU: “14(c). Business Committee 
    (1) There shall be a Business Committee of the Council consisting of the following:
    (a) The Speaker 
    (b)  Deputy Speaker, and 
    (c)  Chairpersons of the standing committees appointed under section 16. 

(2) 	The Speaker shall preside over sittings of the Business Committee and in his or her absence, the Deputy Speaker shall preside. 

(3)	The Business Committee shall generate business for the Council and arrange the business of each meeting and the order in which the business shall be taken.” 

Justification 

    i. To establish an executive body of the council, which shall support the Lord Mayor in execution of his or her functions.
    ii. To create a business committee of the council with the responsibility of generating business for the council.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members? Unless there are strong objections, I would like us to adopt this. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, when I read the committee’s proposal in subsection 14(a), in principal, I have no objection, except looking at subclause (3). I propose to change it to say, “The Lord Mayor shall constitute and present the City Executive Committee during the second sitting of the council for approval”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, Chairman? Can you come on record that you have agreed to that amendment to your proposal?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, I agree to the proposal.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, I am on subsection 14(c). The Business Committee. You are saying that it is going to be a Business Committee chaired by the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker and the chairpersons of the standing committee, which the executive committee of the council is not part. That will generate another conflict. 

Secondly, in the ordinary functions of the executive of the council, is there a necessity for us to constitute a Business Committee? In my understanding, you have the executive council headed by the Lord Mayor that gives business to the council chaired by the Speaker. In my humble opinion, to avoid a scenario like what we have been experiencing, of pulling of power centres - You are now going to create another power centre within the – you shall go to another branch which is the authority, you have the council with the executive, you have a speaker with some – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do we have a business committee in the local councils? So if we do, we are not inventing anything new. 

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, if it is there, then the executive needs to be represented on the business committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is like the business committee we have in Parliament here which seeks to determine the business of Parliament.

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Chairman, drawing from my experience at the district local government, it is provided for in the Local Government Act. The hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has a point. As you constitute a business committee, there has to be a leader of government business who has to come from the executive, usually the vice-chairperson. The business of the executive is given priority, so there has to be a member drawn from the executive on the business committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are not making a new provision; we are adopting what is in the Local Government Act. So let us adopt it in its entirety with modifications where necessary. So what does the Local Government Act say? 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, I think ordinarily the vice chairman at the district or sub county level represents the executive and I wish to propose that the Deputy Lord Mayor be a member of the business committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Immediately after the deputy speaker, correct?

Let us look at the Local Government Act. Chair, please guide us.

MS ABABIKU: Chair, I think I need to apologise. We had discussed as the committee to have the Deputy Lord Mayor on this committee so that we would be able to represent the executive committee in the preparation of the order paper for the council. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS NAMBOOZE: As much as we have provided that the Lord Mayor can appoint members of the executive committee, we have not shown that it is the same person who has the powers to make a reshuffle – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He who appoints can disappoint.

MS NAMBOOZE: If you would allow me to finish. We should also put a provision on how someone can cease being a member of the executive committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is up to the appointing authority.

MS NAMBOOZE: I concede, after being guided by the legal minds here.

MR SSEGGONA: As she concedes, I just want to share a practical situation that may arise. For example, you have a Deputy Lord Mayor who was appointed by the Lord Mayor. Now, the law has provision for removal of Lord Mayor and Deputy Lord Mayor. And we have just discussed the principle of law that we have always known. Are we saying that this is a unique situation where the Lord Mayor cannot dismiss his deputy? We have provided for a different mechanism of removal. In other words, when I appoint you my deputy, I am stuck with you.

The situation is different in the US and in Kenya where you are the president and you have a running mate and you are elected together so you are fused. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have to come back to that.

MR SSEGGONA: I think we need to address our minds in order to avoid a crisis. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we come back to this? We will come back to this matter and deal with it. Can I put the question to these amendments as proposed by the chair? I put the question to the insertion of the new clauses as proposed by the chair and as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

I now put the question that those new clauses stand as clauses to this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are amending section (19) of the Principal Act in paragraph (b) of the proposed amendment in the Bill. 

We propose that the following words be inserted immediately following the words “advise them” appearing at beginning of the sentence, “executive committee”. 

The justification is to allow the executive director advise the executive committee as well as the council.

(c) 	by substituting for paragraph (f) the following, “prepare the annual budget for the approval of the council.”
(b) 	insert two new paragraphs immediately after paragraph (e) to read as follows – 
in paragraph (k) by substituting for the word “monitor” with the  word “supervise”
(h) 	by repealing paragraph (m)
(c) 	by redrafting (i) to read as follows – 
(i) 	by repealing paragraph (v)

Justification 

    i. Presentation of the annual budget to the council should be the responsibility of the executive committee of the council and not the executive director. The executive director should oversee the preparation of the annual budget of the authority.
    ii. The substitution for the word “monitor” for the word “supervise” is for use of appropriate grammar.
    iii. The repeal of paragraph (m) is a consequential amendment arising from the repeal of the metropolitan authority.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I do not understand very well what the chairperson has stated in (f) because I do not understand the grammar there. “Prepare the annual budget for the approval of council”. Mr Chairman, that is not right. Unless it is redrafted to say, “Prepare the annual budget for the approval by council”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “The approval of” is very correct grammar. In fact the grammar is perfect.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, this is about the budget, it is not approval of council but approval of the budget.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, our proposal is that “the Executive Director shall offer technical assistance to the executive in the preparation of the budget” because making the budget is the work of the executive, headed by the Lord Mayor.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thought that is the principle we had adopted earlier– to give “technical guidance” instead of what you proposed.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The budget belongs to the council and in the budget preparation, technical input is needed. When we say that “the Executive Director will advise both the Executive Committee and Council”, we meant the whole technical team playing their advisory role in preparation of the budget.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I can see where my sister is coming from but the problem is this: First and foremost, preparation and presentation of the budget for approval is a political function. She can prepare and in preparing she is only doing this function for the executive. The executive presents the budget to the council the same way we receive the budget from the Executive. 

In that case – as reminded by my chairperson, hon. Oboth, that it is already there – this one is redundant because the Executive Director has no business with respect to the presentation of the budget to the council. He or she comes to the council as technical support for the executive. In that case, therefore, we would have no business –(Interjection)– Oh, I understand my colleague has been in the council before –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have been thinking about this. When we are talking about the Business Committee, I thought the Executive Director is supposed to be the secretary to the committee as a technical person. I thought that we are trying to remove somebody who is supposed to bring the technical aspect of the whole business. That resolves what we have just talked about here. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which clause are we on now? You need to point out what you are talking about so that we know. 

MR AOGON: Mr Chairman, we are dealing with the Business Committee and the way it is formed and we listed the people who will form the Business Committee. However, we never included any technical officer in that committee and I felt it would be an oversight, unless it is provided for in another clause.

MR SSEGONA: Mr Chairman, the principal Act had a stipulation in section 19(f) and (g). Section 19(f) was “to present the annual budget to the Authority”. Remember that the Authority was still fused; it was both the executive and the legislature. We just need to provide for modification.

Section 19(g) was “to advise the Authority on technical, administrative and legal matters pertaining to the management of the Authority”. To me, this is more or less to do with providing technical support and the hierarchy is that you prepare the budget, give it to the executive and the executive passes it on to the council.

MR KASIBANTE: I am not a former councillor but I have some information. Mr Chairman, a budget carries policy statements, which are a reserve of the executive. Therefore, there is no way it can be presented to the council if it does not go through the executive because it is the executive which has the policy statements from which this budget must be got. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The point that came out is “what role the Executive Director should have in the budget process”. Can we now purify that, please? We are getting out of what we were discussing. We are coming back to council. (Interjection) No, it is not about council anymore but about what role the Executive Director should play in the budget preparatory process. 

MS NAMBOOZE: We propose that it reads: “Offer technical support to the executive in preparation of the annual budget for approval of the council.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? 
Can I now put the question on the rest of the provision as proposed? I now put the question that those clauses, as proposed, be part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MS ABABIKU: Mr Chairman, we propose to replace the entire clause with the following: 
“14. Amendment of section 21 of the principal Act 
Section 21 of the principal Act is substituted with the following: 
21. Metropolitan Physical Planning Department 
(1) There shall be a Metropolitan Physical Planning Department within the ministry. 
(2) The Metropolitan Physical Planning Department shall coordinate physical planning within the metropolitan area.
(3) In performance of its functions, the Metropolitan Physical Planning Department shall liaise with the ministry responsible for local governments and the ministry responsible for physical planning.” 

This is to enable coordinated physical planning within the capital city and the metropolitan area.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, the issue here – before we adopt this – is that we have to first adopt the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. This provision is drawn from the fact that we have now adopted the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. The concept in this law, where we want to house the metropolitan authority, would be a bone of contention: Why, in the amendment of the KCCA law, would you import the whole of the metropolitan authority, which has districts outside Kampala? It is not until we have adopted the principle of the metropolitan authority that we can come to the component of how to constitute this.

My humble appeal is that we stand over all these provisions until we have adopted the whole concept of whether we can house – even legally – the metropolitan authority under this Act. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do we stand over or delete it? Do we stand over and come back to it?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: When?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Today. Mr Chairman, what we are saying is that under the law, the jurisdiction of Kampala Capital City Authority is well articulated and it was done by this Parliament. For the metropolitan authority, whose jurisdiction shall extend to Mpigi and other places, we need to first adopt whether we agree with that concept and then, we come back to adopt the components, if that is agreeable –(Interjection)– I am not objecting. I am only saying you cannot object to parts when you have not agreed on the principle. Let us first adopt the principle and then we come back to this and it will be a smooth ride.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Our report was approved when we presented it and it was debated and adopted.

On page 17 of the report, we took a position on the proposal made by the Government on having a Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. We dropped this proposal because of the following reasons: 

First, we said we are not going for the creation of an authority, within an authority because it does not add value to us.
Secondly, we have two directorates and departments in the authority. 

Thirdly, we realised the importance of coordinating physical planning beyond Kampala as a district and as a capital city. We, therefore, said that within the ministry, we can have a department to only coordinate but leave out the independent functions of local governments and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

Mr Chairman, this department will coordinate issues to do with road infrastructure development from Kampala, especially how it should flow from Kampala, Mukono and Mpigi. It is just for coordination purposes. We have totally dropped the idea of having a Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. It is outside our report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we move now?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, I would like to request that you allow us to stand over these matters as proposed by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. We shall revisit them in relation to the delicate issue of bringing two districts outside Kampala to cooperate with Kampala. You can give it any name but it remains cooperation.

Secondly, there is also a Metropolitan Police that is being proposed. Actually, there are many things that will come under this law. This issue even has something to do with the Constitution. We have the districts of Buganda, which are already deemed to have agreed to cooperate under this Constitution. Yet, we are here coming up with a legislation, when the district councils of Mukono, Mpigi and Wakiso have never sat to endorse this cooperation to do with physical planning.

Mr 	Chairman, this would be justified with the resolutions of those councils. For example, it will detail that Mukono District Council sat and made such a resolution and accepted that they will work with the districts of Mpigi, Wakiso and Kampala and Wakiso District Council and Mpigi District Council.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the law is not talking about cooperating with Mukono. The Metropolitan Physical Planning Department is in the ministry. What they will do is that when they are doing their planning, they will make sure that it is coordinated with other activities of other districts so that if they are doing roads, there should be - but you are talking about something else. It is not like they are going to hold a joint council meeting to adopt this. What they are saying is in the ministry, there should be a Metropolitan Physical Planning Department, which should make sure that there is coordination in whatever they do.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Chairman, the Constitution provides that whenever there is going to be relationship between two or more districts, there is a process to reach - (Interruption)

Ms ABABIKU: Mr Chairman, I am happy about this cooperation. We really need Kampala to be a befitting city.

Hon. Nambooze is aware that we consulted, though it may not be constitutional that we have complied with what she expects. However, we went to these districts and by the time we went to her district, she was sick. We extended invites to her, but because she was sick, she could not attend.

In fact, when we met all these three districts, they agreed. What they never wanted was to be part of the authority. However, on the issue of having a department to coordinate physical planning, they agreed and all their issues are part of our report. Mr Chairman, we have reported on what each of the local government said; we did thorough consultation. Thank you.
 
MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I think it is not a deal-breaker. How many other departments have we legislated on? Do not forget that these ministries report to the centre. For example, as we speak, KCCA is overseeing the construction of Kitebi-Bunamwaya-Lweza Road, whose loan we passed here.

Mr Chairman, they were working on road outside the jurisdiction of KCCA but we had agreed. I am a member of that council that agreed. We said “Fine, we do not have a problem”. My view is that it would be over legislation to start providing for departments in ministries. To me, it is something that we need to –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you now make a substantive proposal?

MR SSEGGONA: My proposal is that we delete section 21 of the Principal Act. 

The justification is that there is no need to legislate over it. It is idle.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Indeed it is true we are deleting section 21, which creates a Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority.

What informed this decision was the requirement by Government to rationalise Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAS). We, therefore, could not create any authority. However, there was a need to make an official relationship and coordination amongst the metropolitan area. The only way we could do it was creating this department such that when KCCA is picking Wakiso, Mpigi and Mukono, there is that official relationship.

What we did to construct the road was because there was no official relationship. Of course, this Act had created the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority, which was not operational but it was catered for in the Bill.  Now that we are doing away with the creation of the authority, we are saying that to make that relationship official within the metropolitan area, we need this department.

Mr Chairman, allow me to inform colleagues in this House that the concept of metropolitan development is the way to go today world over and we need to embrace it. Otherwise, if we do not plan for the metropolitan area, we are destined to create a huge Kampala, Wakiso, Mukono slum and this is not what we want to see. It is not about governance or taking people’s powers. The chairman of Wakiso District will remain powerful; the mayors will remain powerful. What we would like to see, is just a coordination role.

We deliberated on this with the Ministry of Lands; at the beginning they also had fears that we were taking away their mandate. We deliberated this with the Ministry of Local Government and they too had fears that we were taking away their mandate. But at the end of the day, when we sat down with the Local Government and Ministry of Lands and they understood what we wanted to do, they appreciated it and gave ago ahead.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is it fatal to have a department in the law?

MR OBOTH OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I wondered why they are just creating a department. The Ministry of Works, for example, is relating with all the districts on matters of roads, it is statutory. Don’t you know about the Uganda Road Fund and the Act that we now form district road committees that all Members of Parliament are members?

Why would we even resist creating a department just by law; you are removing it from KCCA to let us have proper housing for it under a ministry. If there is any planning matter the ministry of Kampala can be able to relate with Wakiso, Butambala - the ministry for Kampala or whatever you want to call that. This is very basic.

The issue that was resisted out rightly which I would also resist was to create a metropolitan physical authority within an authority because you have to create any authority, within Government by an Act of Parliament, independent. You cannot create so many authorities within.

Honestly, my sister, my MP I know you as a person; concession has been over those Bills for long. Who can deny a fact that what is happening in Mukono, Wakiso, Mpigi is affecting the city here, must we ignore that? You get up and concede hon. Nambooze.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: My question still stands, is it fatal to have a department in the law? 

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In as far as your question is, from the Ministry of Public Service responsible for structures, I would like to request that we leave it open. As it is hereit is: ”There shall be a metropolitan physical planning department.” From Public Service we are requesting it to be as follows: “There shall be a department responsible for….”

At least when we change the name the function will be there because when you make it that way, it is like the department name has been fixed statutory and it leaves no room for flexibility. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What were you saying? 

MR KARUBANGA: I was saying that Public Service is responsible for structures. The way it stands here that there shall be a metropolitan physical planning department within the ministry -As Public Service we would rather have it that: “There shall be a department responsible for metropolitan physical planning within the ministry.” It can take any name but we just want the function “responsible for”, thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay?

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Chairman, we want to remove any doubt because I think we are talking about a joint working committee so for us to have a department that will have repercussions in terms of staffing, I think that could bring a problem.

However, if we have a joint working programme within the ministry that means they will designate members from each district who will belong to that committee

Instead of talking about something that will be created that will have salaries, I think we provide for a joint working team for physical planning within the ministry so that they designate may be the CAOs from the districts and somebody from KCCA.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in the Act, section 2, they define what a metropolitan area is. It means the area of jurisdiction of the authority together with the neighbouring districts of Mpigi, Wakiso including Mengo Municipality and Mukono.

So, it will now be something like, a “metropolitan area” means the area with the neighbouring districts of Mpigi, Wakiso including Mengo Municipality and Mukono. That is what is in the Act as of now.

I have not seen any proposal to amend that definition but the point is, Kampala Capital City would be responsible for planning within the city but that city is connected by surrounding districts.

For example, if they are going to do a water channel that is going to empty into Mpigi, will there be need for Kampala to contact Mpigi that, “we are doing this channel that will empty into Mpigi” there may be need for us to cooperate to see how we can make it exit properly. That is what is being foreseen here.

Now, do you need a department created by a law to deal with that? The fact that there will be need for coordination is no doubt. It is the mechanism that they are having issues with.
Who is going to present for us a creative way of dealing with this situation because we cannot say that it is not necessary, that will give us a way forward?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, there is no doubt that cooperation is necessary and it is important. Situations have arisen between Wakiso and Kampala to cooperate in terms of placing the levy on taxi drivers, even Mukono.

First and foremost, that relationship is not statutory in nature, you just sit and agree. Even collection of Local Service Tax because many of our residents in Wakiso work in Kampala but those administrative arrangements she always discussed.

The creation of departments in ministries and elsewhere is a function of that particular ministry and Public Service. 

My thinking is this: There is no bar in districts cooperating on specific functions. KCCA has very many departments. Those functions were not created by an Act of Parliament. That is an administrative function of the Executive, through the relevant ministry. For this one, it is not that we have high stakes. It is about neatness of legislation.

When KCCA notices that there is need for this kind of department, they will generate memos. They will generate, through meetings, minutes and inter-ministerial cooperation. Then, they will create a department and give it terms of reference. But we are not going to sit here as Parliament and start creating departments; I think it is not neat for Parliament to do so.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As colleagues have said, we cannot wish away the daily relationship that exists between Kampala and neighbouring districts. We cannot wish that one away.

Two, regarding the creation of Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority within the Kampala Capital City Authority - it was right that you cannot create an authority within an authority. However, the purpose of that authority actually had been to coordinate the physical planning within but technically, it could not work; so it has to be removed.

We had a problem and I think this was a practical solution to a problem that was seen at a time when the metropolitan areas actually resisted what is being called the “Big Brother Syndrome” of KCCA. There were times when they were discussing the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Economic Development Strategy. The metropolitan resisted it so much. What they were resisting actually is the “Big Brother Syndrome” of KCCA.

By the way, when this ministry was created, it was originally the Ministry of Kampala Capital City. However, when the ministry that is responsible for structures, the Ministry of Public Service, was discussing on structuring this ministry, the question of cooperation with the metropolitan was obvious because it is not coming five years from now but it is here with us today. 

That is when the Ministry of Public Service proposed that we should actually expand it to be called the Ministry of Kampala and Metropolitan Affairs. This is because metropolitan affairs needed to be coordinated and they could not be coordinated by one of the equal partners. They needed to be coordinated by one who is not one of the partners. That is why the Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs was created, precisely for this day-to-day function. The relationship happens every day –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you. I would like to thank the honourable member, Mr Chairman. You see, in this country, every single area – even in Rushenyi – is a planning area. Uganda has the National Planning Authority, which is supposed to coordinate the planning function for the whole country –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, here we are talking about physical planning. It has nothing to do with NPA.

MR SSEGGONA: Yes, there is no trouble. However, even when you go by those standards, Mr Chairman, what is proposed has nothing to do with the housing, et cetera. Each of those districts is going to retain its planning function.

I agree that the cooperation can be done but it is not a statutory matter. Supposing you put it in the statute – and this is where the tensions are going to come from – the department from KCCA is going to come and say, “We must coordinate as a statutory requirement.” How is that going to be practical? The “Big Brother Syndrome” that the minister is talking about is going to come in.

For example, if you are talking about inter-ministerial cooperation, the ministry responsible for Kampala – they are even adding “and Metropolitan Affairs” - will cooperate with the ministry responsible for Local Government –(Interjection)– No, I am giving information. They will work together. You do not need a statutory stipulation. With that information, I rest my case.

MS KAMYA: Thank you for the information. I wish to inform my son that while what he is saying is reasonable, I think it is important to make it statutory. If you do not and it remains amorphous, nobody knows who is supposed to do what. You need to be clear who is going to perform this function because if KCCA, for instance, was planning to do a road to Wakiso or Mukono, where do they start talking from? Or if Mukono wanted to do something with KCCA, who do they talk to?

You need a coordinating office and you need it to be statutory because if you do not make it statutory, then nobody knows where to go for that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this Bill has been deferred several times for discussions. What have you been discussing? If, up to now one clause takes us this long and we have been pushing this thing; you say, “Please consult on this matter, harmonise so that we can move quickly” – now we are taking an hour to process one clause. Really?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairman, at the beginning of this Act, we recognised that KCCA will have its distinct legal personality and I also believe the districts too. So, if we put in the statute, we would be infringing on their freedom of contract. We would be tying the hands of those districts on how they can relate. I can imagine that there are also other things that they have to relate on.

Why don’t we leave it out? We have seen UNRA, for example, do so many roads within the municipalities if the road passes through the municipalities they have a mechanism; they can always talk to each other. So, it is better we leave it out.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City  Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and passed the following clauses: 7,8,9, inserted clause 6A, B, C and D, 10, 11 and clause 12; and inserted clauses 14 (a), (b), (c), and passed clause 13. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
6.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the Whole House. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Again, honourable members, this Bill is not that big and it should not be taking us this long. We have referred this matter back to the minister and honourable members who feel strongly about this Bill to have discussions and harmonise.

If this is the way harmonisation goes, then we are going to have to redefine that word completely because we are not making any headway. Even where we should, we find mechanisms for stalling it.

Honourable members, please consult in the next few days so that when we come back, we can move with this Bill and finish it. The gaps in this law are still causing problems and we are hoping that what is being proposed now will deal with those difficulties in the law, as it is to free the system to function properly and assist the people who are within the city.

Honourable members, House adjourned to Tuesday, 2 o’clock.
 
(House rose at 6.15 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 6 August 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
