

Tuesday, 23 August 2016

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. The 18th National Prayer Breakfast organised by Parliament will take place on 8 October 2016 at the Hotel Africana, Nile Hall from 7.30 to 10.00 am. The guest of honour will be His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the host will be the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament. The keynote speaker is Jonathan Aitken, former Minister of Defence of Great Britain. He will be giving us a keynote address on the theme “We shall know them by their fruits”.

Please, kindly register and confirm your attendance to enable us prepare better for you. Fill in the form and place it in the box next to the pigeonholes so that you are registered as attending the prayer breakfast on the morning of the 8 October 2016, the day before Independence Day. That is how we scheduled it to be. Be there as we host this national function.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Konge Parents Day and Boarding Primary School from Kampala District, represented by hon. Allan Ssewanyana and hon. Nabila Sempala. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, you will notice that we have had the unmissable absence - you could not miss the absence - of one of the Members of this House. You could not fail to notice that he was not present. We are happy to have Gen. Ali Moses, the Deputy Leader of Government Business, back. He has been unwell but he is back in the House. (Applause) We thank God for enabling him to come back to the House. He has requested me for an opportunity to make a short personal statement. 

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.13
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity and thank colleagues for their attendance of Parliament.

Now that I am a Member, I take this opportunity to thank the Almighty for rescuing me from this long illness, as you were all aware. 

I would also like to thank His Excellency, the President and Government for taking me abroad for further treatment. I must say that I have come back better than I went. I am really grateful for that effort. 

Before I went abroad, I was admitted in Nsambya Hospital from 20 June to 17 July 2016. During this time, I was very happy and encouraged because most of the Government officials visited me. The Vice-President, the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the Prime Minister, my former colleague the First Deputy Prime Minister, the current deputy prime ministers, ministers, Members of Parliament and many others all visited me. That has encouraged me; indeed, I was completely overwhelmed and very happy because of that. 

I must recognise that there have been numerous prayers offered from all sections of people of religious difference and groups. Many people prayed for me and I am glad that God has accepted their prayers and that is why I am here today. I would like to take this opportunity to thank everybody; whether your prayers were known or not, you are recognised. We are very happy as a family and grateful that many people prayed for us. I have recovered. I cannot say I would run 100 metres with you - I cannot do that yet - but at least, if you ask me to bring you some water, I would. I am able to have the energy to do that. 

With that, Mr Speaker, I am very grateful for this opportunity to be in the House so that colleagues are not so worried; at least, I have come out of that very serious sickness. God has helped me. Thank you very much for the attention.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Gen. Ali. We continue praying that you recover fully so that you can perform the normal duties you do in this House that make us appreciate your presence. We thank God for your recovery so far and pray that you recover fully.

Honourable members, permit me to alter the Order Paper; there were statements that were missed out. Two statements from the Minister of Water and Environment will be accommodated. One will be on saline water. That statement was requested by the House and it is ready. The other one is on de-gazettement of forest reserves. Those two statements are ready. Clerk, alter the Order Paper to accommodate these two statements from the Minister of Water and Environment. 

2.18
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance. 

In yesterday’s Daily Monitor, you must have read about the embarrassment caused to this country by a diplomat at our mission in New York. It is very embarrassing and shocking. I have on a number of occasions raised issues on this Floor about the appointment of people who serve in our missions. I expected this official, who had worked in State House, to at least be cautious of the nature of documents that are passed on to the mission and are supposed to be laid on the Floor of the United Nations (UN).

A one, Kintu Nyago, got a brief from the Permanent Secretary advising on how the mission should proceed. This official circulated the contents of the two-page document, which was secret, to the members of the UN Security Council. What a shame to Uganda! We did not even have the same position like America that was sponsoring the motion on South Sudan and this was very embarrassing. 

What shocked me further is that the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry Foreign Affairs, instead of reprimanding this official, said that he was cautioned. I keep wondering how this official is going to carry out his duties in New York when he knows that he has caused an embarrassment and all the missions will be looking at that fellow.

If they want to save this gentleman, a one Kintu Nyago, possibly they should recall him and send him somewhere else. However, he should have known what “top secret” is and what “confidential” is. He just let out everything.

Mr Speaker, last week, there was another article; you were away but you may have seen it. The accounts of our mission in Geneva were shut down, again because of a mistake by the mission. The mission dismissed a worker who went to court and the mission also went to court, not knowing that there is a Vienna convention protecting missions from appearing in court. They went to court and they lost the case and then woke up to claim diplomatic immunity; but they were told, “You went to court”. Uganda has now been asked to pay $300,000 to this worker who was dismissed.

How long is Uganda going to get embarrassed because of these political appointments? They have caused us great embarrassment. I demand that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or any of the ministers available comes to the Floor of Parliament to explain how our missions are being run, how this country is being embarrassed, for how long we are going to get embarrassed because of wrong people being posted to missions.

Mr Speaker, I have even requested before that career diplomats be the number No.2. -(Interruption)

MR FELIX OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, the issue of our missions abroad has been coming up for a long time and we have debated it. However, the Minister of Foreign Affairs has never appeared in this Parliament. You can check on the records of Parliament or the recordings for the Minister of Foreign Affairs. 

I do not know whether he is a minister or somebody else. I do not know whether he takes the ministry seriously or this Parliament seriously. I do not understand, but you can watch the recordings of Parliament and you will never see the Minister of Foreign Affairs seated in this House or on the Floor of Parliament. 

I do not know what is going to happen because our rules are very clear. If a minister or a Member of Parliament does not attend Parliament for 14 consecutive sittings, that Member is recalled. I think this is a procedural matter that should be raised. If you are appointed to serve the nation and the people, then you must be willing to serve and attend to problems that are raised by Members of Parliament who are representatives of the people.

Mr Speaker, I would like to know from you whether we should continue debating and raising issues that are very important yet the Minister of Foreign Affairs has never appeared on the Floor of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do recall that the minister holding the portfolio of foreign affairs appeared here when I was chairing and gave a statement on South Sudan. I do not know whether you are talking about a particular individual or a representation from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. However, I am aware that a minister from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has made a statement on the Floor of this Parliament.

Secondly, when Members are absent, you need to interrogate whether they have not sought the authority of the Speaker to be absent from the House before we can take other steps to reprimand them. You need to crosscheck those records first.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have had a lot of issues to do with embassies abroad to the extent that some of our embassies are not financed, to the extent that some of our embassy buildings, including the residences -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is it related to this particular issue?

MR RUHUNDA: Yes, I am building my point, Mr Speaker. This is linked directly to the absence of the full minister. We are talking about the full Minister of Foreign Affairs and a lot of issues to do with the embassies. The dire state in which our embassies are is appalling but we have never had a report from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development giving us feedback to this effect. 

Mr Speaker, that is why I implore you, from a procedural point of view, to get the full Minister of Foreign Affairs to come to this House and give us a comprehensive report on all the issues that are in the Hansard, which we have raised concerning the running of the embassies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want a particular individual or do you want a statement from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs? 

Honourable members, let us be Parliament because we cannot make a demand of an appearance of a particular person; you need to do it in a certain way for that Member to show up. However, that is more appropriate in the committees; for this House to summon a Member to appear in this House here, I have not heard that incident before. However, let us deal with the facts that have been raised.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much. I want to thank honourable members for the information they have given the House. 

Mr Speaker, I raised the issue on this Floor that the President has the prerogative of appointing ambassadors; there is no question about that. I requested that 30 per cent be given to career diplomats to help the political appointees so that they can run the affairs of the missions properly. However, as I speak now, we only have two career ambassadors; the one in Rwanda and the one in Addis Ababa. The rest are political appointees, including the No.2s in missions.

I would like to request that the minister comes and makes a statement to explain the circumstances of running our missions, to save Uganda the embarrassment in the whole world, especially at the UN. Multilateral stations need career diplomats who know how to run missions; you cannot appoint any Tom, Dick and Harry to go and run a multilateral station. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we extract the minutes of this and pass on to - Chief Whip, do you want to say something on this, or we extract the minutes and send them to the Minister of Foreign Affairs so that he comes and makes a statement on these issues?

2.28
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Most obliged, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Foreign Affairs is obliged to respond to Parliament’s request as one arm. The second arm is that when committees are receiving ministries, I just request that they put across certain issues, which need clarification, to the team that comes from the ministry. They will even have enough time to go into details.

However, Sir, I will inform the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come and give a statement and explain to this august House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, that is fair enough. 

2.29
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join you in receiving the First Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business. Indeed, we have been missing you and we thank God that you are now well enough to perform.

Mr Speaker, I would like to raise a matter of national importance. I have heard, as a rumour because I have not received anything in writing yet, that Hepatitis B Day will be commemorated in Dokolo District. I do appreciate that honour that as a district. We have been very concerned about the rate of the spread of Hepatitis B and also the manner in which people have mishandled that issue. Dokolo is ready to receive the medical team. 

Unfortunately, there are about three issues that have not been addressed and I think this is important for other districts that are facing the same kind of challenges. First of all, in the last Parliament, when we had raised this issue, there was a problem of the testing kits. Testing kits are now available although not enough. However, the most important thing is that when people are tested and are found to be positive, it means that such people must move to the next stage – that is treatment.

However, that is not what is happening. They are testing the people and when they find one is negative, they are vaccinated but those who are positive, the ones we are even much more concerned about, are referred to the regional referral hospital, where they are expected to get treatment.

Mr Speaker, about 75 per cent of the population of Dokolo live below the poverty line. I cannot imagine that a rural person, who does not have any regular income, is told to go to a regional referral hospital in Lira every other day as directed by a medical officer. They are expected to finance the transport to Lira, any upkeep or accommodation in Lira and then pay for the treatment, which I understand is hundreds of thousands of shillings.

Mr Speaker, this has affected me a lot because it looks like we want to count how many people are actually “walking corpses”. You cannot be tested to be confirmed that indeed, you are about to die. This is because there is nothing else these rural people are going to do other than be tested, found positive and they go back home. They do not have money to go to the referral hospitals. Even if they can reach Lira, where facilities exist, they do not have the money to pay for treatment.

I am raising this problem because we have been told that Hepatitis B is spreading at a very high rate in northern Uganda. Although we have put it at 20 per cent, right now, as I speak, it could be even be at 30 per cent. What we are saying is that all these people are condemned to death. This is because even if you are found to be positive, there is nothing the Government can do; you just have to stay at home and wait for death. Above all, you will spread it because this disease spreads more than HIV. At least with HIV, we are told it is only transmitted sexually but with Hepatitis B, any relative who gets in touch with you can contract it.

Mr Speaker, I am, therefore, very concerned about the lack of sensitivity by the Ministry of Health. They know that when a person has tested positive, that person needs immediate medical attention. If that is not done, then you are hurting us even more. Why do we spend all that money? In the previous year, we raised the budget from Shs 5 billion to Shs 10 billion. In the current budget, we raised it to Shs 11 billion. Now, you are telling me that my people of Dokolo, who will be hosting the Ministry of Health, will be told, “You are positive; go back to the village and die there?”

Mr Speaker, this is a matter which must be addressed before the 3rd of September when the people of Dokolo will be hosting the rest of Uganda in commemorating that day. Thank you.

2.35
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ogwal started by saying that she heard a rumour that something will happen on 3rd of September. I do not want to comment on a rumour; we will ascertain that later on.

She also raised a concern about people who go for testing and indeed, testing is intended to confirm who has the disease and who does not. If you do not have the disease, then you are vaccinated. Her concern is about the people who have been tested and are confirmed to have the disease; the services are far away and they cannot afford to travel because of the distance. She concluded by saying that she is concerned about the lack of sensitivity by the Ministry of Health. (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I spoke in English and I did not expect anybody to translate my English. If I spoke in the northern accent, it is your fault; you should have learnt it. However, I spoke in very loud and clear English and I did not expect any interpreter to be in this House and summarise for me and say I should have pronounced this word like this but I pronounced it like that. (Laughter)

Even those who do not know English very well, when they hear me speak, they understand it. However, I am surprised that you are summarising what I said for the Members of Parliament and yet nobody has said they have not understood me. So, why are you summarising my points? I am talking about testing and instead you are talking about vaccination. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Government Chief Whip to stand on this Floor and summarise the speech of a veteran politician, -(Laughter)- a distinguished politician who has spoken in several international fora and received standing ovations? Is she in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My understanding of a veteran is a person who has left service. So, if you have already left this service, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, then you might be in the wrong place right now. (Laughter)

However, I think what the Government Chief Whip was trying to do was to confirm with you whether she had understood you properly; she was trying to re-state the issue for your confirmation before responding.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for understanding your people very well. I want to assure hon. Cecilia Ogwal that if the Government Chief Whip is to pursue her concern, she needs to be patient so that she can move in a very clear way. That is why I would like you to confirm that I have got you properly. Thank God you did not say that I had misunderstood you; your concern was that I ably summarised your –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please  -

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I take the undertaking to once again tell the Minister of Health to explain to this House the policy on the treatment -(Interjections)- It is a policy. Can we afford to go down to the villages? Can Government really afford to facilitate health workers to go to the homesteads or villages? Which level of intervention in terms of treatment can we agree to? This helps us to appropriate the relevant finances to the Ministry of Health. 

It is not true that the Ministry of Health is insensitive; it is not true. Obviously, it cannot be true that the Ministry of Health is insensitive. However, it is because of the policy and probably, the other challenges, which you know very well because you appropriate money and receive policy statements from these ministries. I rest my case.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Minister of Health spoke here on this matter some weeks back. However, we expect her to come back and make some clarification on this matter so that the country understands what should be done for the people who have been confirmed to be carrying this Hepatitis B.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a member of the Committee on Budget, when we last sat and allocated money, I remember very well that hon. Cecilia Ogwal was present in that meeting. We agreed and even allocated extra funds for the sake of Hepatitis B so that the ministry can address this urgent problem. In fact, it was an emergency. I am, therefore, wondering why up to now, the situation in which people are is alarming. Where did those resources that we allocated go to? (Ms Silvia Akello rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Otuke, would you like to give some information? There is nobody holding the Floor at the moment. Would you like to raise some matter?

MS SYLVIA AKELLO: Yes. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to contribute on the matter of Hepatitis B. I would like to give information to the House that it is estimated that 70 per cent of my population have Hepatitis B. I will give an example. There is a widow who has five children and out of the five, four of them tested Hepatitis B positive. Unfortunately, the first born died just after joining technical school in Dokolo. She is now remaining with only one child. 

When you are tested and found to have Hepatitis B, they do not give you the medication right away. You are supposed to go for further testing of the liver function and other tests, which accumulate to almost Shs 200,000 for each patient. The local people cannot afford this. We are, therefore, saying that it is a very serious matter. 

On top of that, they went and tested secondary school students in my constituency and found that a number of students were positive because they share basins and plates from which this disease can be contracted. The students that were positive have not been considered in any way. For those that were supposed to go in for vaccination, parents are being asked to pay money. 

They also give you the first injection and the second one comes when the prescribed time has passed. It means that even the first injection is useless. It is really a more serious issue than other issues of insecurity that we may think are a priority. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government Chief Whip, can we have another statement from the minister clarifying on this, because there are issues here.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The way we are moving is a clear indication that we will need accountability of the funds that were given to the ministry to handle this. (Interjections) This was raised by hon. Alex Ruhunda; he asked what they used the money for. It was a question and an answer is needed. So, the decision to make the Minister of Health come back to this Floor of Parliament is the best one. Otherwise, how are we going to get the information to satisfy the Members’ queries? (Dr Tumwesigye rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, would you like to give us some information from institutional memory? 

2.44
THE MINISTER OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Speaker, I can give some information as a medical doctor, a Member of Parliament and a former minister. 

First and foremost, certainly Hepatitis B is a huge problem but the prevalence does not reach 70 per cent as some people would want to say. It is also true that not every person who has Hepatitis B requires treatment. It is actually a small proportion that eventually requires treatment. 

I think what the Members are raising and is true is the ability to assess who needs treatment after testing and also the cost of the assessment. What was planned required Shs 41 billion to cater for 39 districts in Teso, Acholi, Lango, Karamoja and West Nile. That money was not provided or what was provided was not adequate. However, even what was provided – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was this only for testing or for treatment?

DR TUMWESIGYE: That was inclusive of testing, vaccination and treatment. However, it is also worth noting that we had already acquired instruments that can be located at every health centre IV to help in assessment of people who need treatment. They are not very many machines but if appropriate reagents are provided, that can help in assessing the patients. Blood can also be taken from the patient without necessarily having the patient go to a health centre. 

I believe that a statement will be provided. However, it should be on record that the resources provided are not adequate and that not everybody requires treatment. It is actually a very small portion that requires treatment as most Hepatitis B is self-limiting; a few people will go on to develop liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. However, it is certainly a huge problem that needs to be handled. Thank you.

2.47
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 
I am concerned about the way the health emergencies are handled in this country. Whenever a health emergency occurs in this country, and particularly in my constituency and district, that requires a patient to either be moved to a health centre or referred to a bigger hospital, there is either no ambulance or it is spoilt or it does not have fuel. Often, a critically sick person is asked to contribute money to fuel the car to take him or her to a health centre.

Imagine a poor pregnant woman, who has failed to deliver normally, being asked to contribute Shs 100,000 to buy fuel for her to be referred for a C-section in a general hospital nearby, on top of possibly looking for Shs 300,000 to give the doctor to help her. I would like to know from the Minister of Health and whoever is concerned whether Government no longer buys fuel for ambulances in this country and if it is now policy that patients have to contribute money for fuel to be transported in ambulances. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR TUMWESIGYE: I can also give information as a former Minister of Health. Government has actually put in place the Uganda National Ambulance Service to be able to solve those problems of emergencies. I know very well that as Cabinet, we passed about 226 positions and these will be advertised and filled soon. 

The theory behind this is that hitherto, you would find ambulances stationed at hospitals, health facilities but without any control or resources to operate them and any clear policy. The creation of the Uganda National Ambulance Service is aimed at centralising all the ambulances and they would be based at different ambulance stations all over the country.

A software system is being developed; in which case, if somebody got an emergency, one can be able to press on a smartphone and automatically a central command centre will be able to know the coordinates of where that accident has taken place. In addition, a toll free number is also going to be availed, which somebody can call. This will enable immediate availability of evacuation facilities to appropriate medical facilities.

We have also been having a problem of limited adequately trained medical personnel to handle medical emergencies. To that effect, about two or three universities have been encouraged to start emergency medicine training. In addition to the current vehicles that have been bought and are being prepared for that purpose, there will also be helicopter ambulances. That is why now the new buildings of hospitals are providing for helipads.

There is also a possibility of having motorcycle ambulances. Unfortunately, these might not help those who have suffered as a Member has said. However, certainly, Government has plans to handle the challenge of not only emergencies by way of accidents but also medical emergencies like if somebody gets a heart attack and also disasters -(Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister. The Member who raised the matter is talking about emergencies and you are giving the House a futuristic statement. Will you clarify to this House, under the new arrangement of ambulance services, how many ambulances are available for dispatch to his district, because he is reporting a crisis?

Where I come from, a regional referral hospital serving ten districts does not even have a tyre for an ambulance. Will you report on what is available under the new arrangement for immediate deployment? We know where the future is; it is not in that statement. Would you want to clarify?

DR TUMWESIGYE: To the best of my knowledge - (Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Speaker, with due respect, I know hon. Tumwesigye as the former Minister of Health. The matters that are being addressed are for the Ministry of Health. Aren’t we overtasking him and forgetting his docket of science and technology and diverting him to health matters? Is this procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister has volunteered information. Nobody has forced the minister to make a statement. Therefore, we could not be overburdening him. He is the one who volunteered information and I think the information is good for the House.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Of course, it is also science. However, on what hon. Mpuuga is saying, for Masaka Regional Referral Hospital, which has direct funding from this Parliament, to say that they cannot have money for a tyre is a big statement and I would need to crosscheck it. I know their ambulance is there and I know that I participated in a function where even Villa Maria also got an ambulance. In addition, I know there are ambulances along the way.

However, what I said was not futuristic; it is what is happening now. I do believe, challenges notwithstanding, at least there is a solution that is forthcoming. I also do believe that the ambulance service, in the not too distant future, will do what everybody is expecting, given the funding. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There being no other Member wanting to raise another matter, can we move forward?

2.55
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. This is the first time for me to speak in this session when you are in the chair. I would wish to congratulate you upon retaining your seat as Deputy Speaker of this House.

We have an issue of the departed Asians’ property – which was taken under what we now call Custodian Board. Most of these properties that were not repossessed are under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, the people who are living in these properties pay tenants’ fees to the ministry. 

Some properties were claimed by individuals and taken in a pool like the case of Jinja. These people began collecting rent from individuals, claiming that they have rights from the previous owners. However, when we carried out investigations, we found that they were also crooks. Therefore, collecting of rent ceased. However, from the blue, titles have resurfaced from Kenya, London and now they are evicting people. These are over 100 properties in Jinja.

Mr Speaker, there is one particular property that I want Parliament to take keen interest in. That is Ripon Falls Hotel. This was the first hotel in the eastern region that even the first time Queen Elizabeth came, she had a meal there with our Kyabazinga. Now somebody claims he has bought this property from people in the UK. At the same time, the people who are sitting tenants in that hotel are paying rent to the Ministry of Finance, Planning an Economic Development, and then the ministry is everyday issuing certificates of occupancy on a basis of temporary allocation.

We have a Government and a Parliament; are buildings also for partitioning like land? Are we going to just sit and see people, because they have relationships with the top most politicians, come and put iron sheets around a building and say this property has been allocated?

It is high time that we stopped allowing people to have governments within governments. For that particular hotel, Mr Speaker, I want Parliament to put a stop to any activities until the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes and gives us a clear chronology of events and all the properties.

Actually, Parliament needs to put up a committee to investigate the Custodian Board. It has become too much for a normal person to start paying Shs 500 million or Shs 300 million for various properties and yet these properties do not even have certificates. The leases of some of them have even expired and Uganda Land Board can allocate them.

Mr Speaker, I would wish to request you to set up a committee to investigate this matter of the Custodian Board but in particular, Ripon Falls Hotel plot 31, 33, 34, 35 Nile Avenue in Jinja Municipality. We shall then stop the unscrupulous dealers who are taking us for a ride and cheating citizens under the guise of having repossession certificates. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It would be difficult for the Speaker to make any order on that statement. It will need to come through a formal process; not now. Prepare it properly and then it is articulated and the decision is taken by the House and we move from there.

MR BALYEKU: May I take your assurance as a verbal notice for me to bring a motion on that and present a paper to that effect?

THE SPEAKER: No problem; prepare the motion and you will be allowed to proceed. 

MR BALYEKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your first effective decision. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. I should not have risen over this procedural matter but I rise out of concern because I know you would like to see business in the House move properly and expediently. My concern relates to the time in which we receive the Order Paper; I have been trying to access the Order Paper from 11.00 a.m. until the bell rang and even when I came in, there were no copies.

Mr Speaker, you are aware that some of the Members here have no offices or computers, therefore, they struggle to access parliamentary information. I would like to seek for your indulgence and see how far we can be aided to prepare for sittings. Some of us hate looking haphazard on the Floor of Parliament. We would like to see what can be done with the people that generate the Order Paper. 

I know that from our rules, Government business takes precedence and if the Government has no business, we have no business. They need to help us to do our work better by availing the Order Paper in time so that we can prepare for Parliament. Mr Speaker, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. From the presiding officer’s perspective, we have tried to solve this. I usually sign off Order Papers the day before. We looked at this particular one yesterday and I signed it off. It was brought to me this morning by 9 O’clock and I confirmed it. I do not know what technical hitch could have happened that it is not being circulated. We need to improve on that. I will communicate this to the Clerk. Thank you.

3.01
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning Kawolo Hospital. It is located along Jinja Road in Buikwe District and it has been in existence for the last 50 years. Whereas it has been regarded as a district hospital, this hospital treats patients from Buikwe District and the neighbouring districts plus many accident victims along Jinja Road.

The hospital has been in a dilapidated state over the years. However, about two years ago, we celebrated the news that there was going to be some rehabilitation going on in that hospital. However, at the moment, there is a problem; the known donor of the land on which that hospital was constructed is battling a court case. The rightful owner has come up and is restraining any activity on that piece of land.

We got to know about it simply because part of the hospital land has been hoarded off by the Standard Gauge Railway corridor. When the process of compensating the owners of land began, these people came up and got a court order and letters of administration as the rightful owners. This has come at a time when the procurement process is almost complete. Therefore, there is fear that this project may stall if Government does not intervene to sort out this issue. 

Apparently, there is no tittle in the hands of Government for that particular piece of land where the hospital sits. It is my humble prayer, Mr Speaker, that Government intervenes to deal with this issue so that the hospital expansion project is not affected. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, please extract minutes of this communication and submit to the appropriate authorities.

3.04
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, since Kawolo Hospital has been sitting on this land, it qualifies to be a bona fide occupant. If so, the Ministry of Lands is hereby instructed to make sure that this land dispute is settled because Kawolo Hospital has been on this land for decades. 

I know what the land law says. This matter is supposed to be solved by the Ministry of Lands. I will instruct that minister to come in, in good time, to make sure that the hospital is saved. Regarding rehabilitation, we have been informed that it is on schedule but the bickering over land ownership is affecting it.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Starlight Infant Primary School from Tororo District. They are represented by hon. Ofwono Yeri Apollo and hon. Sarah Achieng Opendi. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR KABERUKA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the whole Minister of Defence to sit on the back bench. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not seen the Minister of Defence sitting anywhere.

MR KABERUKA: Minister of Internal Affairs –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the minister is consulting with some back bench Members. (Laughter)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, this statement was circulated last week on Thursday. I pray that all the Members have copies. This is a statement on the food situation in the country. If Members do not have it, I will request - (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, I have seen a copy of the statement the minister is talking about dated today. He is saying it was circulated last week but the date of last week and today cannot be the same. Is he in order to lie to the august House? Thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not seen the two statements, so I cannot rule on it. Proceed.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, this statement was supposed to be presented by my senior colleague, hon. Hillary Onek, but he requested that I do the presentation. I am sure some of the copies are being circulated. 

Mr Speaker, during the Prime Minister’s Question Time in Parliament on Wednesday, 20 July 2016, a matter of food shortage in the country was raised. During the subsequent session of Parliament, hon. Peter Ogwang, Member of Parliament for Usuk County, Katakwi District, raised the issue of hunger in Teso sub region as a statement of national importance and requested a response from Government. My ministry requested for more time to prepare a comprehensive statement on the food security situation in the whole country. I, therefore, beg to make a statement to that effect.

Mr Speaker, Government acknowledges the magnitude of the food shortage situation across the country and notes that it is indeed big. This is as a result of the delayed onset of the first season rains for this year, 2016, which normally begin during the month of March. Therefore, households that had planted crops according to the usual first season calendar of March never witnessed germination. Many of the crops planted later after the rains arrived were also scorched by the sun due to below average rainfall.

The sub regions of Karamoja, Teso, Lango, Acholi, Bukedi, West Nile, parts of Busoga and some districts along the cattle corridor have witnessed a massive crop failure leading to little or no harvest. This has now resulted into a food crisis and in some areas outright famine.

Mr Speaker, the worst case scenarios are expected. The Department of Meteorology projected that soon, the country will be experiencing La Niña. La Niña sometimes follows El Niño. While El Niño is characterised by massive storms associated with water and flooding, La Niña is a long dry spell characterised by heat waves.

This forecast by the National Meteorological Authority over the period of September 2016 to March 2017 indicates that this will result into the worst food shortage in the country, - if this happens, God forbid - with Karamoja being the most affected.

Mr Speaker, severe food shortage has already resulted into deaths – (Interruption)

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are very interested in food security in this country. We have a document before us and this document is dated 18 August but the first page does not have a number and then it goes to page 3. The second page of the document is not there. The minister is reading something which we do not have. Is he in order to read something that we do not have? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the document I have is dated 18 August 2016 and I received it yesterday. If page 2 is not there, look at paragraph 2.2 which is followed by paragraph 2.3 on the next page, which is page 3. The paragraph is 2.3. The content I have is what the minister has read. I am just crosschecking whether the document I have is the one you have. Paragraph 2.3 - “the worst case scenario is projected following the La Niña…” which he has explained. This is what I have. Is it a different document? Can we harmonise this, honourable minister?

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, that statement on La Niña was inserted by the Meteorology Department this morning. I must apologise to the House. It is just that one statement and you have the copies. When the Ministry of Water and Environment saw the statement, they thought it important for this to be captured. However, the rest is in order except that statement that was inserted by the Ministry of Water and Environment this morning. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have one document presented to the House?

MR ECWERU: Yes, please. The one you have and the one I have-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not debate; so, I do not need it. The Members who debate do not have it.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that we will just comment on the La Niña phenomena but use the old document. I will skip that paragraph and I will go to the rest of the paragraphs. That will be fine.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, can we harmonise the document?  Let us have one document and proceed with it. Honourable minister, you will proceed later and not now.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you have one document. (Laughter) Honourable minister, proceed or you do not even have any.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Mr Speaker, I sent the copies through the Clerk to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Statement on cassava brown streak virus in Amolatar District; do we have copies of this, clerk? I am being advised by the clerk that the document was actually submitted to the Office of the Clerk. They should be here somewhere. Can you sort out the documents, please? 

Honourable members, the document is somewhere in the building here but we cannot see it. So, honourable minister, we cannot proceed with what we cannot see (Laughter). Is that the one on cassava brown streak virus? Can you give out copies. Honourable minister, proceed.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, at the Fifth Sitting of the First Meeting of the First Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, hon. Okello Anthony, Member of Parliament Kioga County, raised concern about cassava brown streak virus which has damaged about 80 per cent of the cassava in Amolatar District. He requested for provision of cassava planting materials to the affected communities. 

 Mr Speaker, I hereby wish to respond as follows: Cassava, which is a major staple food and cash crop, is threatened by many crop pests and diseases including Cassava Brown Streak Disease (CBSD) which is a cassava virus disease. Its spread has been exacerbated by indiscriminate distribution of unclean cassava planting materials, which are not certified, and some of which are infected by this very cassava brown streak disease virus. 

This has been compounded by lack of use of standards in the cassava clean-up systems, inadequate funds to certify the cassava mother gardens, and CBSD tolerant varieties that have had a tolerance breakdown. The huge whitefly population presence has also contributed to the spread. 

Mr Speaker, to address the above challenges, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is implementing the following actions: 

a) 	Accelerated research for tolerant and resistant cultivars or varieties. The National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) is intensifying research into resistant and tolerant cassava varieties against CBSD and has released NASE 19, NAROCASS 1 and NAROCASS 11, which are being promoted.

b) 	Bulking of resistant or tolerant cultivars. Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF), working with the local governments, is supporting farmers to bulk cassava planting materials from research through a recommended process of seed production by establishing cassava mother gardens.

c) 	Cassava mother gardens certification. The MAAIF has designed a cassava certification manual that is being used to regularly inspect the cassava mother gardens and collect diseased or pest infested samples for laboratory analysis. The results are used for certification of pest-free mother gardens. The Operation Wealth Creation farmers, NGOs and other interested stakeholders are guided to buy and collect planting materials from only certified mother gardens to avoid further spread of CBSD and other pests.

d) 	Controlled movement of cassava planting materials. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, working with the district local governments, is to embark on controlled movement of cassava planting materials and where necessary, introduce plant movement permits to accompany any cassava planting materials. This is to ensure that cassava cuttings are only sourced from a pest-free field.

e) 	Cassava management bylaws and ordinances. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, working with local governments, proposes development of bylaws and ordinances whereby strict adherence to the above bylaws and ordinances will guard against haphazard movement of uncertified cassava planting materials. Local governments must ensure a closed season for harvested fields, strict adherence to minimum sources of infection by early removing of the diseased plants from mother gardens, and imposing severe fines to those who do not comply with the bylaws or ordinances at all local government levels. 

f) 	Co-ordination of the whole cassava clean-up system. Mr Speaker, MAAIF will ensure that all cassava planting materials are subjected to the above clean-up systems. Working with local governments, we are going to register all mother gardens in the districts, and ensure that all certified mother gardens are issued with certificates and cassava planting materials movement permits. 

For the current districts affected by cassava brown streak disease like Amolatar, Government, working through Operation Wealth Creation, will ensure distribution of CBSD tolerant cassava planting materials of NASE 19, NAROCASS 1 and NAROCASS 2 that have been developed by research. These will replace the affected NASE 14 cassava variety that has lost tolerance and has succumbed to CBSD.

Mr Speaker, attached is the Cassava Brown Streak Management Strategy. It shows the background to the situation, the problem statement, what can be done to address the situation and the budget. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, let us skip the Workers’ Representative for now. I will be allowing her to raise an urgent matter on the salaries of people later. Let me conclude with this matter from the minister before I allow her to do that. 

Honourable members, the minister’s statement attracts a debate but if there is no debate, we will receive the statement and see how to proceed with this matter at either committee or whatever level. Given the number of Members who have stood, can we limit the time? Okay, two minutes is fine.

3.25
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his response on the cassava brown streak virus in Amolatar. I would like to assure him that this disease is not only in Amolatar, but in the whole Lango sub region.

It is good he has appreciated that cassava is a major staple food and a cash crop as well, but it is threatened by the disease. This disease, coupled with the scarcity of rain in the area, leaves the population in dire problems. There is hardly any food for them. There are no potatoes, cassava and millet. The maize that they would rely on is also not there. Our people are having problems. The cassava rots from the roots and one hardly harvests anything. 

The minister is saying that currently the districts are being supplied with cassava stems by the Operation Wealth Creation. However, I would like to tell you that these people take the cassava stems very late and the stems are always dry. How do they expect people to plant dry stems sent at a wrong time? Our people are not assisted the right way. 

Also, why does the ministry wait for the circulation of the affected stems before they come to act? When did they start doing this? He said the district councils should come up with ordinances. Yes, they may come up with the ordinances, but who is going to implement them? 

Therefore, the ministry should come up with a full action plan so that this thing is handled critically. Thank you so much.

3.28
MR TOM AZA ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The cassava brown streak virus has also affected Moyo. This is mainly due to the issue of drought and unequitable rainfall. At times, we are deceived by the Meteorological Department. The forecast is not so accurate and this makes farmers plant at the wrong time. In the end, you find cassava leaves becoming brown and others turning yellow.

Therefore, my request is that the Meteorological Department gives us accurate information so that we do not have these problems. Also, at times, we have over flooding when it is at the peak of the rainy season. This also affects our cassava. Thank you very much.

3.29
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the colleague who brought this matter to Parliament and the minister for this statement. I will concentrate on page 1. The minister says that 1945 is when the cassava viruses took root. However, as I can see, little has been done by the Government and the Ministry of Agriculture in particular as far as this issue is concerned. 

I, therefore, implore the Ministry of Agriculture, in collaboration with other departments, to do a lot of research because even the varieties of cassava we have today - The people of Toroma that I represent consume cassava as a staple food and sell it as a cash crop. The cassava varieties we have mature within six months but beyond that time, they are no longer edible; they become something like roots. That is the cassava we know in Toroma, Katakwi and Teso. It changes after six months. Sometimes the whole garden can get rotten. That is why the Ministry of Agriculture should carry out a lot of research on cassava.

Secondly, in Amolatar and Toroma, we need a lot more varieties. I thank you very much.

3.31
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I thank the minister for his response and the colleague for asking the question. 

First, I would like the minister to add to his statement the difference in cassava diseases as they affect different varieties of cassava, including the old varieties. In West Nile, particularly Obongi Constituency, we have a cassava variety called “Biilo” –(Interjections)– People call it Biilo. I do not know why people call it that but that is the name. 

Mr Speaker, the people of Obongi have experienced this problem of cassava diseases, particularly the rotting of the root tubers. However, to them the cassava variety which is more affected is the one, which is supplied by the informed and knowledgeable people working under programmes like Operation Wealth Creation and the predecessor programme Boona Bagagawale. 

People believe that Government is deliberately supplying varieties of cassava, which are bad, in order to destroy their old and long lasting disease resistant varieties. What do you say about this kind of conflict? When they compare the survival of the old varieties vis-à-vis the new one, they find that the old varieties lasted longer.

In West Nile, cassava is also a food reserve during food scarcity. However, the long lasting variety is being left out by the Government and yet the one brought in by Government gets affected by diseases easily. How do we proceed in this respect? Thank you. 

3.34
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also the Minister of Agriculture and the Member of Parliament who raised the issue of cassava. 

Cassava is a staple food crop especially in the east and northeast of Uganda. I am a member of the Committee on Science and Technology of this Parliament and there is a lot of research and results, which I have seen on this issue. I would like to inform Parliament that scientists have developed drought and pest resistant types of cassava. The only problem we have is that there is no communication.

Therefore, honourable minister, I would like to request that maybe at an opportune time, you take honourable Members of Parliament to these research institutions. That is when we will appreciate what science and technology can do. Otherwise, the varieties are available but the problem is that we do not have a law.

Before I visited this research institution, I did not know that for some of us who suffer from diabetes, the insulin we use is genetically modified and we were wondering how we take genetically modified organisms. My father died of diabetes. He was related to Muslims and they were the ones who bought him insulin to help him survive. 

I appreciate that there is research and we have those varieties in the country, but I would like to ask this Parliament to appropriate enough money to agriculture and research in particular. Thank you.

3.37
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono):  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am happy to submit immediately after hon. Waluswaka, who is an engineer, because I intend to submit in a similar line. 

Science has all the answers to the problem of cassava mosaic. I was personally at St Louis in Missouri, USA, at some research centre and I met our own Ugandan from Serere –(Interjections)– Yes! I was there with Ndugu Hamson Obua. We saw that gentleman doing research on our own cassava from Uganda, trying to fight this disease called cassava mosaic.

Mr Speaker, two years later, he came up with a cassava variety that resists cassava mosaic. It is highly nutritious and drought resistant. This cassava is in Kawanda. 

Therefore, we already have answers as scientists. However, our impediment is this law called the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill that has not been passed by Parliament. This law would allow scientists to commercialise and release these varieties that will help our Ugandans survive this cassava mosaic problem. Thank you very much.

3.38
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have one critical concern. Yesterday, I went to Namulonge, which is the only research centre on cassava in the whole of East Africa. There is a big worry there about one businessman we all know called Sudhir Ruparelia. May I get to know from the minister whether he has now fully reconciled the interests of Sudhir in Namulonge land with the interests of the people of Uganda? 

I am asking this because to the best of my knowledge and from what I gathered from there, this gentleman still raises a claim on the whole of that research institute’s land. So, may I know from the minister what the Government of Uganda has done to completely get rid of the interests of Sudhir in Namulonge Research Institute where he claims ownership?

3.40
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also want to thank the minister for this statement. 

In Adjumani District, cassava is the main enterprise for both consumption and commerce. The outbreak of diseases has affected cassava since 2014 and I reported this to the ministry. The minister even wrote to us but up to now they have not implemented the commitment they made. 

If the ministry is facing challenges, let them bring this matter here. This is because this enterprise has been prioritised in many of the districts. Even if it means borrowing money, I think we shall participate in addressing the challenges facing it.

Mr Speaker, the minister made a statement about the activities of Operation Wealth Creation. However, the effect of this disease is too big. What is given out to farmers cannot substitute for what they have lost in terms of quantity and time. Operation Wealth Creation has not addressed even a quarter of the challenges being faced by the farmers.

Mr Speaker, there are many questions being raised by farmers about the new variety being given to them. Therefore, I would like to propose that you have a review so that we know whether these new varieties are helpful to our farmers or not. I am saying this because they are comparing this to the old or traditional varieties that we had, which were not being affected by –(Member timed out.)

3.42
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole County South, Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true that in the whole of Lango sub-region, cassava availability is a problem and yet it is the only staple food in every home. From what the minister has said, I wonder whether this cassava affects the life of the common man when consumed. 

Two, when we talk about Operation Wealth Creation, we need to note that this has become a parallel activity with the activities in the districts, especially those in the departments of agriculture. The traditional staff of the agricultural departments in districts do not want to work with the Operation Wealth Creation teams and this is causing a lot of misinformation among the people. 

Finally, there is also a delayed response by the Ministry of Agriculture whenever these diseases are reported. This delay causes the diseases to spread and all that we discuss now in this Parliament is late. Thank you very much.

3.44
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable minister for the response to the question that was raised by our colleague. However, I have a few issues that I would like to raise since cassava is a staple food for the majority in Uganda. 

I would like to refer the minister to the Comprehensive Agricultural Development Programme for Africa (CADPA), which was adopted by the ministers of agriculture - I know that the sector minister from Uganda also signed - to ensure that we emphasise research on staple foods and/or common foods that are consumed by the African people. On top of that list was cassava. 

This was done four years ago and I would have expected that by now, as a country we would not be infiltrated by wrong varieties. I get very disappointed when planting materials, not necessarily for cassava but even for maize, are taken to farmers for planting and they do not yield. For us in Teso who plant cassava, it grows but there is nothing on the roots.

Mr Speaker, today we are talking about zero hunger as a continent by 2025. This is an ambitious goal that we must be looking forward to. However, as we speak, almost 10 countries are already there; they have zero hunger. I came from Ngora yesterday and I was very disappointed, as a leader, to be representing people who take only a cup of porridge a day and wondered what we are doing. What strategy - (Member timed out.)

3.46
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank the minister for this wonderful statement. 

Cassava is not grown in that area only; we grow it in Kanungu and the entire Kigezi sub region as well. It is unfortunate that we are also affected by the same disease. It is not only affecting cassava but even sweet potatoes have been affected. So it is something urgent that your ministry has to get a solution for. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at the list, which the minister has given us on the cassava cuttings, I do not know why some of the areas such as Kigezi are not there. Our people also eat cassava especially when mixed in millet to enjoy their kalo, so when I do not find them on this list, I really get so worried. So, I think -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is kalo, for purposes of the record of Parliament? (Laughter)

MS KARUNGI: As one mingles the millet, if they want it to be nice, they have to add cassava flour, Mr Speaker.  This mixture is the one we locally call kalo, and I believe every Member understands it very well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, because the language of this House is English. We need to understand it in that context, for the future readers of this record.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I am saying is that people in my district like that mingled millet and so I would pray that the honourable minister also thinks about that area and plans for it so that the people there can also benefit from this. Thank you.

3.48
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for his statement. Today we are talking about cassava; tomorrow it may be maize, bananas or any other crop variety. Because of climate change and different diseases, a lot of work needs to be done. Changes do not take place only in human beings; changes take place also in animals and plants. 

Like one of the speakers said, scientific problems are solved by scientific solutions. Therefore, we have no other way apart from embracing biotechnology. In the minister’s statement, he said that there is a lot of biotech research going on in different institutions in Uganda. However, the minister forgot to tell the House that Ugandan researchers cannot release the different varieties because there is no law to enable them protect those varieties. 

Also, the other bigger challenge they are facing is that in this country, there is no research fund. Research on different plant species is scattered in different institutions and universities. Therefore, there is a lot of duplication on the same in different institutions. 

My humble prayer, Mr Speaker, is that we support our scientists because they are doing a very good job for this country. Indeed, like one of the Members said, they have developed different varieties that are resistant to –(Member timed out.)

3.50
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister’s office was presenting on food security - in a country where people are not food secure, nothing makes sense. In a community where food is scarce, there is no meaning in life. The role of cassava in our community in Tororo, the entire eastern and northern Uganda, and now I am even surprised to hear Kanungu - For them it could be a delicacy whereby they change once in a while but for us it is eaten every day. Cassava means a lot.

Honourable minister, thank you for this report. I actually thought you were not aware but in your first page, paragraphs two and three, we actually got 833 bags of cassava stems from northern Uganda in West Budama South under the Operation Wealth Creation programme. However, the cassava which we planted brought us problems. We had our own there and when we thought we had planted something better, it instead brought more diseases. So I wish there would be some coordination so that we do not transfer diseases. 

In our community, the lack of food is the worst kind of poverty. Let Government make a deliberate effort, and I wish - (Member timed out.)

3.50
MR RICHARD OTIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Tororo, and in particular West Budama North, does not normally have the challenge of food insecurity simply because we grow a lot of cassava. We used to have a variety called “Serere” and I assume that it was developed from the Serere Research Station. This variety stayed for a very long time without being affected by the various diseases; we never used to complain. 

However, today we receive varieties, which cannot last beyond two seasons. So we are wondering what the challenges are? Why is it that the researchers today cannot come up with varieties that are resistant to diseases for a number of seasons – maybe three or four – so that our farmers can rely on these varieties for purposes of food security?

Secondly, I have seen a document here circulated indicating the allocation of cassava cuttings – I do not know whether they are in sacks, bags or kilogrammes - for the second season. In West Budama North, we never got anything for the first season. 

If you look at Tororo District, we depend on cassava for our livelihood on a daily basis, as my colleague has said. However, look at the cassava cuttings that you are giving to the whole district – 1,140. Honestly speaking, if you are interested in ensuring food security and the Ministry of Agriculture –(Member timed out.)

3.55
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to thank the minister for his report and I want to make two points. 

The first is that it is obvious from the minister’s report that we have collective responsibility, as Ugandans, to make sure these diseases do not spread. I would like to implore every Member in this House to talk to your people and tell them how we can be part of the solution by making sure that this disease does not spread.

Secondly, as a member of the Committee on Science and Technology, I was in Nairobi last week for an African leaders’ summit on biotechnology. What surprised me most was the fact that all the scientists there and leaders from other parts of Africa were hailing Ugandan scientists for having discovered scientific solutions to diseases like these ones and very many others. 

However, we have one problem; we do not have the biotechnology and biosafety law in place. Therefore, they are hindered from distributing these solutions. I, therefore, would implore this House to support us when that time comes to make sure that we can disseminate and distribute these solutions that we have to our agricultural problems. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you too. Honourable minister, can you make responses to the issues raised quickly?

3.56
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Members, for your fruitful contributions. I am going to take up most of them 100 per cent as they have been presented; I will not subtract anything. 

I want to say that when we plant clean materials and they end up infected, the problem is cleaning up the fields. We need to assist our farmers by telling them that if they want to plant the new varieties, they should make sure that the infected old – Because the farmers do not want to lose anything, they will bring the new ones and plant within the infected gardens. So we want to enforce this together with you, leaders and local governments, so that farmers understand that this is a struggle. Unless we have food security, we cannot move forward.

The other issue is that we shall certainly move to other districts next season; this is just the beginning. I thank you, honourable members, for giving a lot of money to research in this current budget. If you can add more in the next budget, then most of these things will be sorted out. (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister from Kalungu East. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. I have looked at his submission in No.3 and realised that there is negligence at the ministry, according to what he has said here.

Secondly, in all our districts, agricultural officials set up roadblocks and check on agricultural products, basically cattle and even matooke. He knows this because we are from the same district and we have bananas and all those other crops. So, what exactly takes place with people who move these crops to different areas before they are checked at such roadblocks? 

Recently, along Masaka Road, I saw over eight trucks transporting cassava stems to Rwanda. These were coming from Uganda –(Interjections)– You cannot argue that out because I even took time off to ask where the cassava stems had come from.

As I conclude, the minister is telling us how people must prepare their fields very well, but this is not within his solutions. In fact, all his solutions are in future tense. There is nothing in his submission here that shows what he has done. He is saying, “With the people, we shall do this and that”. There is nothing they have done before until the problem was raised by the Member from Amolatar. I would like to ask the minister, who is my good friend - is the ministry taking due diligence on this matter? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minster, please do wind up.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, the only problem is that my brother came in late. He has not had time to read the statement. On pages 2 and 5 the statement says thus: “to address the above challenges, MAAIF is implementing…” and that is really very simple English; I cannot do anything. Thank you very much.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you. Mr Speaker, Ssewungu Joseph is a professional teacher. He is not only a professional teacher but was once a licensed teacher and later studied and acquired a degree in education. Above all, I am an English teacher –(Interjections)– No, I am an English teacher and I can repeat that.

In my submission, I have stated that whatever the ministry is giving is a future solution. Indeed, when it comes to No. 5, although he states that I was not around, it says thus: “to address the above challenges, MAAIF is implementing…” –(Interjections) - Leave me; I am still making my submission.

Mr Speaker, I have mentioned a number of areas – (c), (d), (e) and (f) plus No. 6 - where the minister talks about future plans through the ministry. Is he in order to impute that I mentioned some statements that I have not made in front of this august House? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you just read the paragraph that says, partially, “the ministry is implementing…” My own understanding of that language - you being a teacher of English and maybe you understand these things more than I do – is that “implementing” is not the same as “will be implementing”, or “will implement”. Honourable minister, continue. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. That is why I gave you my -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed, honourable minister. (Laughter)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Honourable members, I gave you the next sheet of paper to indicate the districts that we have found out as being badly affected and we are starting with these. The cassava stems are propagated. We know that where we supply 1,000 bags, the next season they will have over 20,000 bags to replant, to multiply and expand. Mr Speaker and honourable members, we are together on this. Certainly, if the finances could allow, we would have done much more. 

Also, please trust our people, our researchers. They are doing a good job. The Director-General of NARO is a son of this country and almost everybody in NARO. We have the best researchers in the whole of Africa, so please trust them. When the budgeting time comes, please let us try to give them enough resources to do the work. Thank you very much.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I asked a very pertinent question, but the Minister is deliberately dodging it. It concerns Sudhir’s claim on Namulonge land of up to 900 hectares, in spite of this being the only research centre for cassava in the whole of East Africa. He seems to just be walking away as usual. I would like him to affirm to this Parliament the status of that land and institute.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you rise on procedure? Have you already ruled on the matter? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I moved on a point of procedure so that through your Chair, you allow the minister to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is that pending question. Would you like to respond to it?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, at the beginning, I had said that I took up most of the contributions from the Members for further investigations and implementation. Some of them were really very good contributions and this one on Namulonge land is certainly going to be investigated. I am new in this office and it has not come to my attention yet. However, since you have brought it up, let me take it up and find out what is really going on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will allow the Member representing workers to raise a matter before we can take a statement from the minister.

4.06
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance concerning the civil servants that have not been paid their salaries, some for two and others for three months, that is, May, June and some even July. In over 50 districts and all the newly created municipalities, civil servants are languishing because they have not yet been paid their salary. Government has not yet come out clearly to inform them and the nation at large what has happened and what has caused them not to get their salary. 

The information I am giving is that I am sure that the districts I am going to mention had all not received their salary by 20 August, which was last Friday. I even cross-checked with the Ministry of Finance, and these districts include, but are not limited to: Moroto District and municipality, Kaabong, Amudat, Nakapiripirit, Abim, Kotido, Luuka, Iganga Municipality, Kaliro, Mayuge, Namayingo, Namutumba, Buyende, Kibuku, Butaleja, Bulambuli, Kapchorwa, Sironko, Tororo, Butambala, Gomba, Sembabule, Bukomansimbi to mention but a few. Also, all the new municipalities, as I have already mentioned, are affected.

Mr Speaker, I am sure all of us, including the Government, expect civil servants to give quality services to the people. We also expect that they should be at their places of work all the time. However, if they are not paid, at times the contrary happens because they must look around for how to survive with their families.

We also know that many of them have children in schools and some have children at university. We are also aware that as civil servants, they are governed by the Public Service Standing Orders, 2010, which stipulate that they must be paid by the 28th day of every month.

Mr Speaker, most of these civil servants are servicing loans and according to the regulations in the banks, when their salary is paid late, there is a double deduction and a surcharge which they have to incur for failure to remit their payments on time. This causes a lot of confusion and demotivation at their places of work. The plight of the concerned civil servants in the above-mentioned districts should be addressed.

My prayer, Mr Speaker, is that Government, and in particular the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should inform the House why these civil servants have not received their salaries and when they are likely to be paid. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, extract the minutes and inform the Ministry of Finance to make a statement to the House on this matter tomorrow. Thank you.

The Minister of Agriculture had made a request that he has to chair some meeting but he has two more statements to make; is it possible to combine the statements since they are all from Kisoro?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON SUPPORT TO KISORO DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT BY THE NATIONAL ADVISORY SERVICES (NAADS) SECRETARIAT

4.11
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, where are the copies of your statements? Please distribute all statements.

MR SSEMPIJJA: The copies are here, Mr Speaker. There are two copies. The first is about support to Kisoro and I am going to mention the support that has been given to Kisoro District Local Government by the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) Secretariat, which is on this paper.

Mr Speaker, the NAADS Secretariat is mandated to support the provision of agricultural inputs to all categories of farmers. In line with this mandate, the NAADS Secretariat supports interventions in the following areas:

1. 	Management of agricultural input distribution chains involving procurement and distribution of inputs to district local governments;

2. 	Strategic interventions involving procurement and distribution of agricultural inputs for priority commodities under commodity approach, supporting multiplication of planting and stocking materials;

3. 	Agribusiness development; and

4. 	Supporting value chain development focusing on the upper end of commodity chains.

Over the last few years, the NAADS Secretariat has supported Kisoro District Local Government with agricultural inputs as shown in the table below. For tea plantlets, the support is broken down as follows: 
Financial year 2015/2016 - Shs 18,821,511; Financial year 2014/2015 - Shs 18,143,671; Financial year 2013/2014 - Shs 15,593,793; Financial year 2012/2013 - Shs 670,000; and Financial year 2011/2012 - Shs 670,000. 

The total so far received under the tea project is Shs 53,898,975 worth of tea plantlets.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two documents; I have also received two of the same. Can you circulate both? I think that is what Members are raising.

MS NSHAIJA: We have one document and what he is reading is not what we have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, there are supposed to be two statements. You gave me two of the same. One has a table and it is supposed to be the first statement. Honourable minister, proceed with the second one, which everybody has.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The one that seems to be available to everybody is on support to Kisoro potato farmers under the partnership between Kisoro District and Kisoro Potato Processing Industries Ltd (KPPL).

Mr Speaker and honourable members, NAADS has been supporting Kisoro to promote value addition for potatoes in collaboration with KPPL. One of the key requirements for the factory was to ensure a sustainable source of good quality potatoes for processing. However, the processor realised that production of potatoes based on local varieties would not sustain the factory. 

This matter was brought to the attention of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In a letter dated 21 May 2015, the Minister of Finance requested the NAADS Secretariat to support Kisoro Potato Farmers’ Association through provision of seed in order to ensure a sustainable source of good quality potato planting material.

Consequently, the NAADS Secretariat procured and delivered 85 metric tons of a potato variety called “markies” to Kisoro District for distribution to farmers. In addition to the potato seed, the NAADS Secretariat procured and availed a package of fertilizers, fungicides, insecticides and herbicides.

The seed was intended for multiplication of planting materials for subsequent distribution to more farmers for the production of potatoes for processing. It was the responsibility of KPPL to identify land for multiplication of the seed. I have been reliably informed that indeed KPPL issued post-dated cheques in favour of the landowners for the hire of their land. These cheques are in the custody of the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of Kisoro.

The responsibility of the NAADS Secretariat was only the provision of seeds in line with the agency’s mandate. However, we received complaints about non-payments of the landowners and the matter was referred to the CAO for handling. Mr Speaker and honourable members, the response from the Chief Administrative Officer of Kisoro District is attached for reference. 

Accordingly, KPPL should honour its obligation of paying for the land and the labour hired to plant the seed. Mr Speaker, the letter from the Chief Administrative Officer, which is attached, reads as - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you going to read the letter? It is not part of your statement; it is an attachment.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, it is an attachment and it concludes thus: “To date no payment has been effected and the cheque has gone stale. The affected farmers have accumulated bank debts because of non-payment…”
	
Mr Speaker, in my view and in the view of the CAO, KPPL should honour its obligation of making payments to the said farmers in line with the memorandum of understanding signed with the individual farmers. This factory should also multiply part of the seed it harvested for continued supply to the factory for processing. I beg to present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, from your statement, who is supposed to enforce this to make sure that they are paying? We would not want you to attract a debate when you should be making conclusive statements on how this matter will be handled by your ministry. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Finance should certainly ensure that KPPL, which they introduced to us, executes its obligation to pay the farmers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this was only supposed to be for information. Now you are going to attract a debate because you have not told us what steps you are going to take to ensure the farmers are paid. This particular report should have just been brought for information, that these are steps you have taken to guarantee payment to the farmers. Now you want us to debate that, honourable minister?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I am going to take serious steps-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What serious steps?

MR SSEMPIJJA: To make sure that these people -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those are the serious steps we would like to have on record. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, this is money that has been obviously misused. The seeds were bought by NAADS at that time and given to KPPL. Government money was spent. Certainly, steps to recover Government funds must be taken by all of us who knew about it. That is the right way to go. I pledge to take the lead since I am the one presenting here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these two statements from the minister attract a debate. The purpose of this statement was to give information to the Members about what the ministry has done to make recoveries and pay the farmers and recover money for Government. However, there is some shortfall in this statement. If we are going to debate, that will be the area, so that we can conclude this matter and move forward.

4.23
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for presenting these statements. I was asking myself what KPPL was but I have realised it is Kisoro Potato Processing Industries Ltd. This is what we want - local industries. The President is always lamenting about them because he wants them; we do not want foreign investors. However, this is a local investor cheating the population. 

Government money, to the tune of Shs 85 million, for a potato variety is given to them free of charge and then they go and cheat farmers. It is written here in the letter. The community demands their money to the tune of about Shs 180 million. This is a company that issued a post-dated cheque of Shs 160 million but which bounced. Mr Speaker, this letter was written on 15 August 2016. This is a fake company. 

Mr Speaker, you asked the Minister of Agriculture what he was going to do as minister. I know the population of Kisoro wanted that potato variety so much and maybe it would help this country so much, but this company has already frustrated their effort. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like him to specify. 

In the Hansard, he has said he is going to take drastic steps to recover Government money. What about the money of the community that has not been paid? What about the matter of issuing a bouncing cheque? What steps should be taken against whoever issued it? How about the actions on those who frustrated the efforts of the population? I think this particular factory should be handled very well so that the next time a Government programme is taken to the area, it will not be frustrated. Thank you.

4.25
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement. To me it is still not very clear because he has just indicated the amount of money that is being demanded by the farmers. However, it is on record that the Member from Kisoro who raised this issue indicated the amount that was required and that the Chief Administrative Officer was addressing the issue with the NAADS Secretariat. 

Honourable minister, did the NAADS Secretariat release the money to the Chief Administrative Officer? We need to know this so that we can have a forensic audit to find out whether the money that was released to Kisoro District to pay these farmers was misappropriated or not.

Secondly, if they have bouncing cheques, why is it that they were being given to the Chief Administrative Officer when in actual sense there was no money in the account? We need that clarification - (Interjections) - General, we are in Parliament. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we should ensure that we support value addition so that we can create employment opportunities for Ugandans and at the same time increase household income. If we are to implement our vision and become a middle-income country, these are the people that we need to support - the farmers and even the factories - to make sure we continue providing what is supposed to be provided. 

Give us the details so that we can see what to do for these people because this letter is not clear. It shows that the money was sent to Kisoro but the Chief Administrative Officer diverted the money –(Member timed out.)

4.28
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the minister that when I raised this matter on the Floor of this Parliament, I indicated that on 16 February this year, the NAADS Secretariat undertook to pay to these farmers. So what you are presenting here, honourable minister, with due respect, is history. 

We realised that the investor was never going to pay - he had given fake cheques which are lying with the CAO in Kisoro - but because we wanted to encourage farmers, in accordance with the Government policy, NAADS accepted to pay and they committed themselves in writing on 16 February 2016. Honourable minister, could it be that you perhaps did not get proper briefing?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I read this with a lot of sadness in my heart. The truth is that there was a memorandum of understanding between the farmers and Kisoro Potato Processing Industries Limited (KPPL). Kisoro Potato Processing Industries Limited had to rent the land to be used to plant the potatoes and NAADS was to supply the seed. 

It is true that the seed was got from Netherlands because the seed that we have here cannot be easily processed in the machine. We had to look for a country that has done such research and produces round potatoes. We got 85 metric tonnes, which was supplied to the farmers who had rented the land.

Mr Speaker, when they got the potatoes from these farmers, they sold the potatoes but never paid the farmers. On the other hand, these people were supposed to take back the potatoes for further multiplication. It was still under multiplication but they sold them. That is what I found out, when you asked me to investigate. Thank you. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the honourable minister for giving very important information to the House. However, I would like to seek clarification from the minister as to whether he has tried his best to find out who the directors of this company are. He has been emphasising the name KPPL; it would be prudent for you, honourable minister, to know the directors of this company and find out what kind of people they are. 

We could be dealing with conmen. There are many thieves in this country. This is how they swindle funds. How can they issue a cheque of Shs 166 million and when the CAO takes it to the bank, there is no money. I would like to find out how far you have gone in finding out who the directors of this company are.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I went to Kisoro and found out that the people there had even constructed a factory. There were machines inside the factory but it was not in operation. I saw one of them and I got his name then but I do not have it now. However, hon. Bitangaro can assist me in getting the name because he knows him. 

I went and saw the place but it is not in operation. The potatoes are not there but the potatoes were received by those gentlemen and they are worth more than this money we are talking about, which they owe the farmers.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, honourable minister. Recently, there were reports in the media that Government intends to take over some potato processing plant in Kisoro. Could it be that this is the same company that Government is going to take over because of the importance of the potato processing plant? 

Also, is one of the directors of that company among the people listed for the potential bailout that is being discussed? I would like to seek clarification from the minister if this is the same company. 

MS KATALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the minister that the name of the director is Mr Tom Mugenga. During one of our interactions with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, he clearly stated that this is one of the companies that were seeking a bailout from Government. He also said that it is a good venture that Government was looking at. However, there were no plans of bailing out the company because the money was mismanaged.

I would like to know from the minister what plans they have to pay the farmers because that company cannot pay since it is bankrupt. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why I told the minister initially that the gap is big and this debate is not going to help us. Honourable minister, would you like to go back and look at this issue again so that you can come and advise us on how to proceed because there are still gaps that you do not have answers for.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, the name is Tom Mugenga. In view of your guidance, I request that you allow me go back and come back with what the Members exactly require me to do. They want me to inform this Parliament how the farmers are going to be paid.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the way to go. Honourable minister, we are people’s representatives and that is what we must do. Thank you very much; let us wait for that. When it is clearer, then we will see what direction this matter is going to take. We thank the honourable member who raised it and thank you, honourable minister, for bringing this back to us.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development here? Are we ready with this statement? 

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Mr Speaker, my colleague is preparing the document and he said he will be here tomorrow to present it.      

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it is not ready.

MS MUTUUZO: I am sure he has already written to you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We might be receiving the communication after the session but so far, it is not there. Let us wait for tomorrow. If the statement comes, we shall deal with it. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a statement on forest reserves but the information I got is that the honourable minister is travelling tomorrow. Can we receive this short statement and then we go back to the man who found the bus had already left the station - the Minister of State for Relief and Disaster Preparedness. He will be the last one to present today. 

Honourable minister, you have two statements; would you like to present them at once and then we have a debate? Do you have copies of the statement from your ministry?

4.38
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Mr Speaker, I think they were circulated to the Members. They were put in the pigeonholes of the Members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you have this statement from the Minister of Water and Environment?

MR CHEPTORIS: They are in the pigeonholes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if the statement is not here, we cannot proceed.

MR CHEPTORIS: Mr Speaker, as I came in, I saw the copies lying on the table outside.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they are supposed to be inside here. Do we have the minister’s statement on the saline water and the de-gazettement of forest reserves? We could receive them at the same time so that we can have a debate. Are those the statements? As you arrange the statements, can we receive the one from the Minister of State for Relief and Disaster Preparedness?

MS AZAIRWE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure.  We have today’s Order Paper and what the minister is going to present is not an item on the Order Paper. Are we proceeding right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was amended to include those two statements before you came, honourable member. Next time try and -(Laughter)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I would like to believe that the honourable colleagues have received the harmonised copies now. During the Prime Minister’s Question Time in Parliament on Wednesday -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you had already reached La Nina; proceed from there. We are not going backward.

MR ECWERU: Let us move to paragraph 2.3; the worst case scenario is projected following the La Nina (extended dry spelt) that has been forecast by the National Meteorological Authority over the period September 2016 to March 2017. This will result into the worst food shortages in the country with Karamoja being most affected.

Mr Speaker, severe food shortage and some deaths have already been reported in the Karamoja sub region and the eastern districts of Katakwi, Kumi, Serere, Soroti, Amuria and Kaberamaido. 

The Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries together with the United Nations World Food Programme, Food and Agriculture Organisation, UNICEF, UNDP and district local governments carried out a rapid food security assessment in all the reported affected districts. Additionally, in the month of July 2016, another joint food security assessment was carried out and this also confirmed that the country indeed is facing food shortage.

According to the joint Government/partners’ assessment, 65 per cent of the population in Karamoja sub region is in what we call an emergency-to-famine phase of food insecurity. This means they access half a meal or nothing a day. In other words, they are starving. Thirty-five (35) per cent of the population in the districts of Katakwi, Amuria, Kumi, Bukedea, parts of Serere and Kaberamaido are in a crisis-to-emergency phase of food insecurity. It means they access one meal or half a meal a day.

The assessment also revealed that 50 per cent of the people of Koboko, Yumbe, Moyo, Maracha, Arua, Zombo, Nebbi, Adjumani, Amuru, Nwoya, Gulu, Pader, Lamwo, Kitgum, Agago, Soroti, Ngora, Amolatar, Pallisa, Butaleja and Tororo are in what we call a stressed phase of food insecurity. It means they access one and a half a meal a day instead of the normal three meals. The standard dietary consumption in Uganda, and generally globally, is supposed to be three meals - breakfast, lunch and supper. Of course, the quality and quantity also varies.

The districts of Oyam, Apac, Kiryandongo, Masindi, Buliisa, Kyankwanzi, Nakaseke, Kiboga, Mubende, Luweero, Kyegegwa, Sembabule, Kiruhura, Lwengo, Rakai, Isingiro, Ntungamo, Kamuli and Kibuku are in a minimal phase of food insecurity. It means the people have some food and they can still afford meals although the stocks are running out. The districts that are listed in paragraph 2.11 from the assessment were captured to be food secure. However, from our discussions, that also depends on the conditions that will prevail from now up to the end of the year.

Mr Speaker, the total population in need of urgent relief food stands at about 1.3 million people today in the sub regions of Karamoja, Teso, Lango, Acholi, Bukedi, West Nile, parts of Busoga and some districts along the cattle corridor.

Mr Speaker, Members will note that Government and development partners, like the Minister of Agriculture said, annually engage and continue to support farmers in food production programmes including distribution of free seeds, provision of ox-ploughs in some communities, hand hoes and tractors. However, repeated erratic rainfall and resulting crops failures have led to persistent food insecurity. 

During the financial year 2016/2017, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocated only Shs 3 billion for the purchase of relief food for the whole country over a period of 12 months. This allocation is, in our strong opinion, inadequate to cover even one month of relief food and non-food needs of the country.

To appropriately address the current relief food needs over a six-month period, the Office of the Prime Minister requires relief food worth Shs 105.3 billion. We have arrived at this using a standard formula of population multiplied by the dietary intake per day and the number of days, multiplied by the cost of meals which we have moderately put at just Shs 1,800. 

Mr Speaker, there is, therefore, need to scale up annual budgetary allocation to the humanitarian assistance programme in order to effectively address the chronic relief food needs of the country. 

On 1 July 2016, my office submitted a request to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for a supplementary release of Shs 28 billion. This was to meet the short term relief food needs of the starving people. We did that early because this year, as you all know, the first quarter release under humanitarian assistance is only Shs 981 million, which is not enough to procure relief food to cover even one district. With the meagre allocation received, the Office of the Prime Minister must, besides other pressing relief demands, continue to feed over 5,000 Ugandans who were expelled by Tanzania and are now relocated to Kyaka and also the victims of the tribal clashes in Bundibugyo.

I would like this House to note that we have written several letters to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for additional funding. It is important to note that requests even by the then Minister for Karamoja, who is the First Lady, and the Prime Minister himself, drawing the attention of this ministry to the situation, have yielded no positive results. Unfortunately, this explains the current situation we are in now. 

Mr Speaker, the response that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development continues to communicate to us is that the funds are not there, that OPM should, in effect, reprioritise from within its budget. When I was sharing with colleagues in the ministry, I said it is like telling somebody who is anaemic to mobilise blood from within their system. This is what the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is telling the department. This is difficult because OPM is already resource constrained. We continue to discuss with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to look for alternative funding. However, we request Parliament to provide backup assistance in persuading the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to reconsider its position.

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, the Public Finance and Management Act 2015, under section 28 (2), provides for funding of natural disasters. Section 26 (5) of the Public Finance and Management Act 2015 states that 15 per cent of the Contingencies Fund provisions are reserved for the management of natural disasters. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development contends that Parliament was not able to appropriate money to the Contingency Fund in the Financial Year 2016/2017. My position is that the appropriation of the 15 per cent of the Contingency Fund for natural disasters is a requirement of the law and that should automatically apply to the ministry.

Honourable members, whereas we appreciate the challenges the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is facing in meeting the financial requirements of the priority development areas such as energy and roads, it is our very strongly considered opinion that nothing is more critical than saving lives. Unfortunately, that does not seem to resonate very well with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development while setting priorities for allocating funds.

It is unfortunate that some of my colleagues are not here. However, I would like to make this clear, and I am saying this for the record; the ministers of finance seem to mean well but it is sad to note that they do not seem to be in charge. This is because you will find a situation where Mr Muhakanizi, the Permanent Secretary in the ministry, can veto any decision by a minister -(Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, with your indulgence the minister was given permission to go back and prepare to come and address Parliament through this statement. Our rules are very clear; before inviting Parliament to receive this document, the minister is busy debating his own statement. Is it procedurally right for the minister to pre-empt the debate of Parliament by trying to blackmail us into his debate other than the statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to demonstrate how this blackmail is being executed?

MR MPUUGA: He is supposed to present a statement to us to debate it. Instead he has decided to start discussing the spirit of the statement, which is not his job. The spirit in the statement he is making is supposed to be exhibited by the paragraphs and meanings of the statement therein. However, before concluding it, he is leading us into debate. Is he proceeding right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my understanding of what the minister is saying is that he is explaining what he has said in paragraphs 3.10 and 3.11. That is what he is explaining and he has said it clearly. I thought it was clear.  He said the responses are negative but it seems his colleagues in the ministry, the ministers, are not in charge; somebody else is vetoing everything. That is the essence of paragraphs 3.10 and 3.11. I thought that is what he was saying. We can then receive the information and see what to do with it.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I am extremely disturbed by the statement the minister has given about his colleagues and the Government he represents. As Parliament, we know that the minister is representing a government that is one; he is not representing another government from a foreign country. He has belittled the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the ministers of finance in particular, who in themselves represent the President, who is the chief executive. 

Our understanding is that when ministers bring these statements, some of these issues are discussed at Cabinet level, agreed upon and Government is represented in this House by the Leader of Government business. Is it in order, therefore, for an honourable minister to come to the Floor of Parliament and belittle his fellow Cabinet ministers and even say that they not in charge as if he is in charge in his docket? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter on whether there is violation of the principle of collective responsibility can be addressed more by the Leader of Government Business. That will not be a matter for the Speaker. Let the minister express what he wants to and we debate.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I would like to reiterate the ministry’s commitment to addressing the suffering of the starving population in the country. However, this will only be possible when we receive funding as soon as possible. I thank you for your kind attention.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, there are things that seem to come out, which this House needs to take serious note of: One, there have been requests to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide funds and they are saying there are no funds.

Two, there is the issue of the Contingency Fund. Is it a matter of law that once the budget is passed, automatically 15 per cent of it goes to the Contingency Fund to finance such incidents or is it a matter within the discretion of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to decide whether or not to put money in the Contingency Fund? 

Those are the matters that we need to think about and have discussions on. Honourable members, the minister’s statement attracts debate and the debate will start now. 

4.55
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Minister of State for Relief and Disaster Preparedness for his statement. 

The minister has mentioned a number of districts which are food insecure and Koboko is one of them. There are two reasons for that food insecurity. Last year, we did not plant much because of the dry season. We used to plant twice a year but last year, we planted once and it was very little and it was consumed. This year, again there was a dry spell in May which destroyed the crops and we are trying to plant but they are saying very soon, it will be dry.

Mr Speaker, Uganda is endowed with abundant sources of water. We have large bodies of water. We have been talking about irrigation; why don’t we use our water to irrigate our crops? Egypt, which is getting water from us, is very rich with food because of our water. However, we are not using irrigation and year in, year out, our people are suffering. Even Karamoja should be irrigated. Let us take the issue of irrigation very seriously in Uganda if we are to stop this hunger.

The second issue in Koboko is that now with the war in South Sudan, there are so many refugees who have come in. Some of them have gone to the camps and are going to be provided for by the UNCHR and other organisations, but there are many who have settled in Koboko and yet our food is not enough. I would like to find out what the Minister of State for Relief and Disaster Preparedness has to say about those who have settled in Koboko where we are sharing this little food. 

4.58
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for this statement. I will draw your attention to bullets 2.1 and 3.1. The minister relates the food shortage we have to erratic rainfall and climatic change. In paragraphs 3.2 up to 4.1, he talks about the need for resources and ends by asking Parliament to consider allocating more funds. 

Whenever we come here for presentations, ministers complain about the lack of resources. In 2014, African heads of state met in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, and the summit focused on food security and agriculture. They made several commitments and I would like to draw your attention to commitment No. 6, which was to enhance resilience of livelihoods and production systems to climate variability and related risks. When you come here to ask for relief money, the problem will persist. What we should do as a ministry is not to plan for insecurity but we need to plan to reverse food insecurity. 

There are so many causes of food insecurity. However, we have the Malabo Declaration, where so many commitments were made to reverse food insecurity. What has been done? We need the minister to explain. We cannot only plan for disaster; we need to avert the causes of food insecurity and that is how we shall be able to move this country. However, if we are to address issues of food relief, we will still need more money because of climate change. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.00
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I have heard about food insecurity for a long time in different media. The solution is clear; it is high time Uganda applied irrigation, fertilisers and tractors because of climate change in Africa. 

Under the Maputo Declaration, ministries of agriculture of all the African countries should allocate 10 per cent of their budget to agriculture. However, when we look at our budget for agriculture today, it takes less than four per cent of the national budget. Therefore, this kind of situation will reoccur because Government has not paid serious attention to food security. I, therefore, call upon this Government to see to it that food insecurity is contained along those lines. Otherwise, this will reoccur year after year and the accusations will continue. I beg to rest my case.

5.01
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and we appreciate the statement of the minister. 

Mr Speaker, I think it was in this House that we were presented with a proposal that Government was to establish food silos all over Uganda. These silos would have been useful when Ugandans had a bumper harvest so that Government would buy food from the farmers and store it for such times as these. However, I do not think the proposal has been implemented anywhere in this country and if it has, let the minister give us information about it.

Mr Speaker, famine is not a new phenomenon in Uganda. It is not strange to us. It, therefore, surprises me that the ministry wakes up when there is a situation like this yet we know that almost every other calendar year one part of Uganda has to suffer the effects of famine. I would have expected the ministry to have planned to forestall such occurrences before they occur. The ministry is lamenting about a small budget but it does not even tell us what the small budget has done so far or whether it is exhausted and so they need more. The minister is just telling us that the budget is not enough but what has it done?

The moment there is looming famine or a disaster of this kind – the statement observes that there was crop failure the previous year; from that mere observation, you should have prepared as a ministry and as a Government. You should have asked, since crops have failed this year, what are our people going to face? What did the ministry do or Government at large? Did you provide quick ripening crops to the peasants -(Member timed out.)

5.04
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for the statement that he has made.

The honourable minister has presented different districts of this country in different situations- those which are food secure, some are food insecure, the stressed ones and those in emergency situations. I wonder where the other districts, which are not named, are; for instance, Kaliro District is not here and I would like to assure you that it is not food secure. Therefore, you need to correct your compilation and capture Kaliro among the districts which are food insecure. 

However, that said, colleagues have already talked about the need to expand irrigation in this country. There are different technologies which have been developed for purposes of irrigation, which are not really very costly. The Ministry of Agriculture needs to adopt these technologies. We cannot be a fertile country with good weather, good water and soils and then go hungry. The issue of irrigation cannot be over emphasised. 

I also expect Government to operate as a system. It is very perturbing when you come here and tell us how you have failed completely to work with the Ministry of Finance or that they have failed to give you a hearing. We wonder why these issues are not brought out for discussion in Cabinet because if they were and a common position is taken, -(Member timed out).

5.06
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to appreciate the Department of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, particularly hon. Ecweru because he has been running up and down to see to it that the people who are suffering can be helped. 

Mr Speaker, I raised this matter on 14th July. To my dismay, matters of disaster are the ones that we keep postponing for future attention and yet this is something that concerns life. From the statement, the assessment has been done. However, I had asked during the time of raising this matter that the primary schools be helped with some food because our people have failed completely. The children cannot go to school without eating something. The hunger is overwhelming. The mothers cannot provide and the elderly are the worst hit. 

In Serere, we lost one person and we almost lost someone in Usuk. It is a dire situation. Even up to now, people call me and they expect that as a Member of Parliament, I should provide for them. Mr Speaker, I beg that this House learns to consider matters of disaster as matters of urgency. They should never be postponed. Whenever they come up, they should be given first priority.

I would like to thank you and I am waiting for action, not only for the people of Kumi but for the entire country. I demand that some food be given to the people especially those who are really suffering, more so the primary school pupils.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think when the directive was made for this statement to be made there was a request that some interventions be made while we wait for the general assessment. Now the general assessment has not captured what has been done in the interim period to deal with the immediate problems faced. However, let us see how to handle that.

5.09
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 3 of the report, 65 per cent of the food-insecure people are in Karamoja.  However, how many MPs from Karamoja are here today? Only one is available and yet their sub region is the worst hit.

Mr Speaker, the reason I –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who came in after your arrival in the House today, to contribute by insinuating that Members representing Karamoja are dodging Parliament –(Interjection)- This is the insinuation from his submission! 

He is insinuating that Members of Karamoja are not here and yet we are discussing issues that affect them and yet the Members are present. Those who are absent are on official leave with your permission, Mr Speaker. They are attending to committee work in the field. Is it in order for the honourable member to insinuate that some Members are dodging the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in other parliaments, normally, the House is briefed about Members who are absent. Actually, the Members from Karamoja sub region who are here are only a few, who are supposed to listen to what is going on. The rest of them have gone for a meeting, with the authority of the Speaker, which is taking place somewhere in Kenya. Please, take note. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling. I thank the Government Chief Whip for raising the point.

Mr Speaker, in this country, I think the Government does not know about insurance. You can insure a car or other things but you are not doing agricultural insurance, to insure our people’s crops. When will Government think about agricultural insurance? Why are people crying about hunger? Some people in Uganda are waiting for politicians to bring food. I heard my friend here say that in Kaliro they are also going to die; tell your people to dig. This business of saying “put us on the list” –(Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are talking about food security in this country. Our people do the farming - they dig - but some of this has come as a result of unforeseen disasters. There was no rainfall and that is the reason there is food shortage.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi says that we should encourage our people to dig. Indeed we dig; and if you check the report the minister said that they have given out ox-ploughs, hoes and planting materials. However, because of the drought, we do not have enough food. Is he in order to insinuate that our people do not dig?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member for Budadiri West should talk about the people of his area, whose activities he is familiar with. The report stated that the reason there is food stress in the country is because of the rains that have delayed. People have cultivated but seeds have dried up in the ground and that is why we have this problem. Therefore, it is not the problem of failure to dig. Please take note as you speak.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is a digging problem and I will explain. During Obote’s time and Amin’s time, if in your home you had no granary, you would be arrested. However, today, there are no granaries in people’s homes. The reason there were granaries was because during the bumper period, you would keep your excess produce and during the hard times, you run to the granaries. Where are the granaries? It is because there is a government policy that people should not have granaries so that during – (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. As you are aware, the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, in his presentation to this House, was very clear on the reason we currently have food stress. One of the issues that he referred to was the climatic conditions in Uganda.

You are also aware that Ugandans, especially the people from the Teso sub region where I come from, are known to be very hard working. Irrespective of whether they have granaries or not, the challenge is caused by erratic climate change that cannot enable them to plan. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I wonder if a senior Member of this House, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, is in order to insinuate that the current food shortage in Uganda is because the people do not have granaries. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, in some parts of this country, if you store your food in a granary, in the morning you will not find anything in it. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason I am raising this is because I think if there was a government policy -(Member timed out.)

5.17
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the report, but it does not present anything new because it gives us the status as it was. It gives us information from our districts, which we already have. 

I come from Kumi District and the situation there is dire, like my colleague said. Of course, the most affected people are the elderly, the children and those from homes that are not stable. The situation is not good and wherever Members of Parliament go, they ask us, “What are you going to do?”, and we keep running to the Executive to find solutions. 

Honourable minister, I think what should have come here are proposals on how to address the challenge. However, you seem to have your hands tied. I, therefore, would like to request the House to help the minister by finding a solution. The right to food is fundamental. I, therefore, propose that we need to find some food for the elderly and feed these people. 

This is something we need to have planned for using our Contingency Fund. Do you need these people to die and yet we are here as a Parliament? As Government, let us try to address the challenge. I, therefore, think that as Parliament, we should resolve that the Executive finds some money and feeds the families that are most vulnerable. We do acknowledge that Government cannot feed all the people at this time because families are so many, but at least some food – (Interjections) - Let just make some quick recommendations. 

The second issue I would like to raise is that our people are very hard working and as we talk, they have gone back to the –(Member timed out.)

5.19
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. The issues raised here are matters of great importance and emergency. However, the ministry was only able to respond to this issue after questions were asked by honourable colleagues on the Floor of Parliament. Do you have structures in the countryside to monitor food security and disaster? If so, how do those structures operate? How quick do you respond to this? 

On page 3 of your statement, you stated that some deaths have already been reported; could you give us the number of people that have died? The 36 you have given is in total; please break it down for us. It not enough to say that a number of people have been killed or have died; how many people have died because of this?

Lastly, the Government Chief Whip is in the House now; this statement shows a crack in Government. One side of Government is not listening to the other. Can you go and clear your house? What the people of Uganda need is an immediate response that must take place. The people that are suffering must get food immediately. I thank you.

5.21
MR ANDREW MARTIAL (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the subject being discussed about food security, I would like to say that in Uganda we have enough food; the problem is the distribution of this food. In some regions, there is plenty of food and in other regions, there is no food. Let us ask ourselves, is the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness in position to predict areas where food is likely to be scarce? We could then go to those regions where food is in plenty and use Government machinery to reserve that food.

The African way of life is that extended families look after their elderly. It is going to be difficult for Government to go ahead to feed the elderly since they cannot even –(Interruption)

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, I would like to find out from my brother from Igara, if there is some food that is available that side; we could organise between his and my constituency and collect that food and take it to Kumi and deliver to the elderly people there. I think we could do very well in terms of sisterhood and brotherhood. People in the west, if there is any food there, we are very willing to come for it so that we can distribute to our people as well.

MR MARTIAL: Through you, Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the minister responsible for disaster preparedness and he has raised issues which I tried to recap to the House - When the Speaker is speaking, usually, the Members sit. 

He has raised the issue of contingency because it is the only way out. He said that there is a small amount of money set aside by Government through Parliament to deal with situations of this nature. He said that money is not there, according to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I then posed a question, “Is it a matter of law that when the budget is passed, automatically 15 per cent of it goes to the Contingency Fund or is it a matter of discretion within the Ministry of Finance to put that money there?”

This is what we should discuss. There are general problems that can be handled by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal and Fisheries and other ministries. However, we are talking about disaster here and this statement has come from the Minister of State for Relief and Disaster Preparedness. We need to focus our debate so that we can yield results.

There is a problem pointed out by the minister, that there seems to be no money in the Contingency Fund. Is that even possible? Honourable members, can we interrogate this matter in a scientific way. I am not being tickled by -
 
5.25
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank you for your indulgence. That is the reason why I had initially raised a procedural matter. After telling Parliament that there was no money, the minister was telling Parliament that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed him that Parliament did not allocate money. It is as if Parliament actually voted and by law gave money to all ministries and yet the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 is very unequivocal about the 15 per cent.

My view is that a statement from the Minister for Disaster Preparedness is not adequate to inform Parliament about this matter. I would rather that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes to Parliament and informs us about the fate of the Contingency Fund. In fact, the statement by the minister is an indictment on the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. He owes this House an explanation as to whether they have digressed from the command of the law relating to the Contingency Fund. Otherwise, the minister is actually coming to report that his hands are tied. 

Can I also inform Parliament –(Interruption?)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information I would like to give hon. Mpuuga is that the purpose of the Contingency Fund is for those items that are unforeseeable, which cannot be budgeted for directly. One of them is the hunger in Karamoja or in Teso. 

If we really have that 15 per cent of Shs 26 trillion, it means that we have about Shs 3.8 trillion which is supposed to supply food. That would answer the question, which my sister asked hon. Martial. Igara East has the food but they cannot give it to you free; it must be purchased. For that issue, do not quarrel with him or her; the money should be availed and food be availed to the people who are in crisis. That is the information.

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, the Member from Budadiri West has given us good information. 

I would like to remind Parliament that in 2012, we had a similar crisis. We voted and instructed the Minister of Finance then to allocate money for silos and the resumption of national food security. We were informed that in the 2012/2013 budget, money had been set aside to make sure that national food silos in every region are reinstated. This could ultimately be the solution to this lamentation. If the minister acted on that resolution of Parliament, we would not be lamenting about this.

May we also receive a report on the fate of the monies that were voted for the resumption of national silos? In fact, there were two issues - food silos and petroleum reserves. I recollect so well. However, particularly on food silos, may we receive a report on what happened to this money and whether these silos actually do exist so that we can help our people?

Finally, this statement condemns the people that have been reportedly dying and we do not seem to be getting solutions. Just as you put it, Mr Speaker, the minister is not helping with the emergencies that were reported in Teso. I hesitate to imagine that this matter is now being concluded. I hope the starving people are not either viewing or listening to us. 

I hope the minister will come back before we take leave of this matter, to inform us that he has made a telephone call and somebody has availed money. Otherwise, we would have done our people and ourselves a very huge disservice. I so submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why we needed to focus this debate properly so that we can get somewhere with these matters. There are two issues. One, people are in distress and there should be some emergency response. Two, the minister is saying that there is no money to provide that emergency response. Three, the Constitution, under Article 157, and section 26 (5) of the Public Finance Management Act, make provisions for money that should have been available by the passage of the budget.

That is why I am saying that this House should debate along these lines so that when we are leaving, we know that we have taken a decision. The debates are very interesting but they are not tackling the real issues that have been brought to the House. That is where there is a problem.

We have spoken very eloquently but we are missing the target that we should be addressing so that we come to a solution and some pronouncement. I am about to close this debate but I want the minister to respond in a more clear way about what he wants us to do, how we can proceed with these matters and what interventions he has put in place to deal with the matters that are already urgent.

5.32
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. As he states, there is a problem. This is an emergency and money must be found to save the lives of Ugandans whether through budget cuts or whatever means. 

Having said that, we need to take a holistic approach to agricultural productivity and commercialisation. Agriculture is done in an ad hoc manner; it is as if people involved in agriculture have committed a sin. There are no fertilisers; Operation Wealth Creation is giving out seeds without fertilisers. They are giving out seeds without proper rainfall forecasts. We have a meteorological authority that is not functioning. We do not have genuine inputs; when you go to Kikuubo or Container Village, you are at the mercy of the sellers. They can give you anything as agrochemicals.

There is a low level of mechanisation - actually the lowest in the region - and no appropriate funding for agriculture just as there is no storage. If we stand here and say that Uganda is a blessed country with fertile soils which feed us, very soon the so-called fertile soils are going to stop feeding us. I urge Government to take a holistic approach to agriculture and to find money to address the current crisis. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the minister and see if there are gaps and then we fill them again?

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Members for the responses that I have received.

There are a number of areas that you have guided on very well; for example, there are linkages between the ministry and other sectors like agriculture. That is why I had wanted my colleague from the Ministry of Agriculture to stay, so that he would indicate to us what the ministry is doing to solve the problem of absence of rain yet we are sitting in a country that has rivers, wetlands and swamps. When are we moving from rain-fed agriculture to irrigation? That is really a mandate of the Ministry of Agriculture. 

About silos, it is true that Parliament allocated resources but Cabinet, in its wisdom, gave those resources to the Ministry of Trade and Industry, which is supposed to put up silos across the different corners of the country. This would ensure that we not only store grain that can help us when we are in situations of emergency but also in the event of surplus, we can easily see how to sell it out of the country. Therefore, the Ministry of Trade and Industry would be best placed to answer that. However, since the Government Chief Whip is here, they can be tasked to come and explain to Parliament if they received the resources for silos and what they did with the resources.

One of my colleagues indicated that the Malawi Declaration dealt with how we can guarantee food security among our citizens. I would like, and with a very heavy heart, to report to this Parliament that in the last two days, Malawi has declared a state of emergency because they do not have food. The declaration was made in Malawi but they declared a state of emergency yesterday.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request this House and particularly the Government Chief Whip to ask the Minister of Finance to come and tell this House what happened to the Contingency Fund. There is collective responsibility. However, what I can do, if it pleases you, Mr Speaker, is to avail to this House the correspondences on this issue. When you hear me speak with that kind of authority, it is because we could have been boxed to a corner as a department. 

We have had correspondences by the First Lady, the Prime Minister and my senior colleague all communicating and attaching reports that indicate the magnitude of the problem. When we meet the ministers, I want to emphasize again that say, “this is serious and we are going to do that” but the truth is that when it reaches the Ministry of Finance, it looks like there is a powerful officer there who vetoes even very serious matters.

Therefore, the most important thing is to request the Minister of Finance to come to the Floor of the House and tell this Parliament that he did put in place a contingency fund. I want, for the record, to make it clear that the Contingency Fund is supposed to be like this: three per cent of the overall budget is supposed to be put aside for contingency and then 15 per cent -(Interruption)  

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister has presented a paper which has been critiqued. Mr Speaker, every Wednesday there is a Cabinet meeting but the minister has continued to lament on issues that would have been discussed in Cabinet. Has he turned this into a Cabinet meeting? Is he in order to continue telling us what he would have done in Cabinet? We need solutions not lamentations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a House of representatives. I do not know how to describe Cabinet. This is where any matter that touches on anybody in this country is raised and the ministers owe us responses to the issues raised. 

Part of the question that was raised by the Member for Kumi Municipality is what the minister is responding to and he is pointing out what the challenges are. He does not have the money because somebody is saying there is no money. The question was asked in July but today is the day Parliament scheduled it for debate; not Cabinet but Parliament. We are in Parliament; if the honourable member desires to sit in Cabinet, that would be for another meeting. As for now, we are in Parliament and the report that we are receiving from the minister is for Parliament. Let us debate it. 

People are dying there and if the person who is supposed to help the dying people received something – if he is saying that he does not have the means to do it, then this House must be concerned. Please, proceed.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, thank you so much for your wise ruling. If the resources are availed, if there is an indication to this House that the Contingency Fund is there, that 15 per cent will be accessed - three per cent of the overall budget is supposed to be for the Contingency Fund and 15 per cent of that three per cent is supposed to be for these kinds of emergencies - that will quickly be mobilised.

Mr Speaker, regarding what we have done so far, if you look at one of the paragraphs, I have said that even with the limited resources, we have decided to relocate the 5,000 expellees from Tanzania to Kyegegwa. We are trying to find for them a place where they can produce food for themselves but in the meantime we have to feed them every day. As we talk, this morning some food left for Kyegegwa. We have also sent some food to Serere. We discussed with the District Disaster Management Committee of Serere that much as about a half of the population of Serere is desirous of this kind of intervention, it must go to the most vulnerable because the food we have sent is very little.

Mr Speaker, I know that some Members here are going to indicate to us that apart from famine, the rains have returned to some areas, intermittently, with storms. In Terego, there is destruction as well as in other areas and we have compiled that information. The rains are stormy and are coming to a population, which has been starving. This is typical of climate change and it must be met by a number of interventions. 

One intervention is adaptation, where we can discuss long term interventions. However, there is what should be done as a matter of urgency and, like I said, this does not seem to resonate very well with some people who are supposed to be in the pipelines. Like I indicated to this House, if you are a doctor and you make a prescription saying, “My patient is anaemic” and the person in the blood bank says, “No, use the blood within the patient” - I am the doctor and I have told you that this patient is anaemic; if you are in charge of blood, your duty is to provide blood for transfusion. Honourable colleagues, there is no blood for transfusion right now and we need blood for transfusion. (Interruption)

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, I think that at this point, we need the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because hon. Ecweru has reached a point where he can no longer say anything further. Unfortunately, the people that we want to ask the questions about where money can be found are not here. I am at pains because I am stranded with the questions that I wanted to ask. We must go back home and tell the people that this issue was on the Floor and this is the resolution that Parliament adopted.

Mr Speaker, I wonder if we are proceeding rightly by continuing to listen to hon. Ecweru. We need answers and so I seek guidance on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I have asked the minister to wind up so that I can make a directive on how we will proceed tomorrow with the pending matters regarding this issue. Somebody needs to explain to us a lot of things tomorrow. Please, wind up.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, I agree that some of the answers may not be within my docket. I kindly request this House to use its powers to invite my colleagues from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that we are here together on the Floor of Parliament. When they commit themselves and are directed by this House, we shall proceed. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now request the Government Chief Whip to notify the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and explain to the House the state of the Contingency Fund; what has happened to it and what are they doing in terms of responses to requests that have been made to deal with the disasters that have happened in the country. Tomorrow at 2.00 o’clock, we expect this from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; so, please communicate. Clerk, extract the minute and also have a formal communication to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope that the statements are now available to the Members. You will present both statements and then we will see how to handle both.

5.46
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Thank you, Mr Speaker. During the Prime Minister’s Question Time on the Floor of Parliament on 13 July 2016, hon. Joshua Anywarach, Member of Parliament for Padyere, raised an issue concerning a motion tabled in Parliament for de-gazetting and gazetting some forest reserves in some parts of the country and he wanted me to clarify on the status of the matter.

Mr Speaker, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 empowers Government to hold, in trust, forest reserves for the people of Uganda. It is in this respect that the Government has committed herself to hold forests in protected areas as Uganda’s permanent forest estates.

Currently, the permanent forest estates cover 1.9 million hectares, composed of central forest reserves managed by National Forestry Authority (NFA) and local forest reserves, which are managed by district forest services under the district local governments. The rest of the permanent forest estates comprise of forests in wildlife conservation areas managed by Uganda Wildlife Authority.

Mr Speaker, since the mid-1970s, the political, social and economic problems Uganda faced affected the management of some of these protected forests. Many forest reserves were encroached on and numerous urban areas expanded to include peri-urban areas. Consequently, some urban councils namely, Mbarara, Kalangala, Entebbe, Ibanda, Nebbi, Fort Portal, Arua, Mbale, Jinja, Gulu, Kapchorwa, Kitgum, Rukungiri, Ntungamo, Kabale, Lira and Soroti have requested for amendment of the order declaring forest reserves in accordance with section 8 of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003.

The National Forestry Authority reviewed requests to de-gazette the forests and made recommendations, which were presented to Cabinet. Cabinet deferred further discussion of the Cabinet memorandum and advised me to carry out further consultations and report back in order to enable the Cabinet make an informed decision. I have since done the following:

1. 	I have reconstituted a taskforce which includes officials from the Ministry of Water and Environment and National Forestry Authority, to look at the issues raised by Cabinet which were considered contentious.

2. 	Due diligence is ongoing on parcels of land, which have been availed for exchange of the proposed forest lands. This due diligence includes a request for land search statements.

3. 	Re-survey of all central forest reserves affected to establish areas that could be considered for de-gazetting.

4. 	Consultations are still ongoing and when finalised, I will report back to Cabinet for a decision on this request, after which I will make a statement to Parliament on the same matter. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us receive both statements.

MR CHEPTORIS: Can I go to the second one?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, please.

THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Mr Speaker, this is a statement on highly saline groundwater.

Mr Speaker, during the Prime Minister’s Question Time on the Floor of Parliament on Wednesday, 10 August 2016, hon. Anthony Okello, Member of Parliament for Kioga County, Amolatar District, raised a matter concerning highly saline groundwater in the areas surrounding Lake Kyoga and Lake Kwania, thereby leading to high costs of maintenance of the water facilities due to corrosion. He wanted me to clarify the status of the matter.

My response is as follows:

Saline or aggressive water sources are due to high quantities of dissolved mineral salts. Common mineral and chemical compounds responsible for salinity include iron, magnesium, fluorides, calcium, chlorides, sulphur and bicarbonates. Areas with saline water are generally flat plains with slow or no groundwater flow movements and hence, the water has long contact time with rocks and minerals.

The Ministry of Water and Environment has identified the following regions as areas with saline and aggressive groundwater sources:

1. 	Districts sounding Lake Kyoga in the regions and districts of Lango, Teso, Busoga, Kayunga and Nakasongola.

2. 	Greater Masaka region in the districts of Rakai, Lwengo, Sembabule, Bukomansimbi and Kalungu.

3. 	The western Rift Valley in the districts of Kasese, Rwebisengo, Buliisa, Nebbi, Nwoya and Adjumani.

4. 	Greater Mbarara districts of Isingiro, Kiruhura and Kazo.

Apart from salinity in the water sources, the above areas are also water stressed as they lack surface water sources.

Ongoing Projects

Due to high salinity of the groundwater sources, the Ministry of Water and Environment is implementing a number of large piped water supply projects based on surface water sources. The projects include:

1. 	Rakai Bulk Water Supply Project phase I, which has been carried out to serve the Kagamba area. The dams have been completed. Phase II, focusing on extension for irrigation, will start at a later date after funds have been secured.

2. 	River Nyarwodho Large Gravity Flow Scheme is under construction and is in the final stages of completion. The scheme will serve up to 80 per cent of the population in Nebbi District in the Alwi Dry Corridor. The project is being funded with a loan from African Development Bank (ADB) and Government of Uganda contributions.

3. 	Construction of a piped water system from River Kahenge to Rukungiri Municipality. The system will be extended to serve Bwambara and Bugangari in the Rift Valley. The project is funded with a loan from the World Bank.

4. 	Ngora–Nyero-Kumi Water Project is to be constructed using a loan from the World Bank. Procurement of the works contract is nearing completion.

5. 	Construction of large gravity flow schemes from River Lhubirigha to Katwe-Kabatoro–Mweya Safari Lodge in the Rift Valley. Work is in progress with a loan from the World Bank.

Planned Projects

The following projects have been identified and are at various stages of preparation:

1. 	Bukedea large gravity flow schemes have been designed and are at procurement stage. The system has its water source in Kapchorwa Mountains and is to be funded with a loan from ADB.

2. 	Ntoroko-Rwebisengo-Kanara Large Gravity Flow Scheme has been designed and is at procurement stage. It is to be funded with a loan from ADB.

3. 	The ministry, with support of the French Government, has carried out preliminary studies for bulk water transfers for:
River Kagera-Isingiro–Mbarara corridor;
Lake Victoria–Rakai-Lyantonde–Masaka corridor; and 
Rakai-Kyotera-Kalisizo corridor.

4. 	Bulk water transfer projects are under design for Potika in Kitgum, Opili in Agago and Orom in Lamwo District.

5. 	River Aswa Bulk Water Project based on gravity flow has been identified and is due for design.

6. 	The ministry, with the support of the German Government, has carried out a preliminary design for Karuma-Gulu pipeline to serve the population along the Gulu Highway. Detailed designs will be completed in 2017.

7. 	River Nile-Busana-Kayunga Piped Water System: The ministry has completed designs and the project is at procurement stage with funding from Government of Uganda and possibly, ADB in future. This is a large piped water system.

8. 	Preliminary designs have been carried out for a bulk water transfer from Lake Kachera to Sanga-Kikatsi-Kanyaryeru in Kiruhura District with the support of the French Government. Funds for the projects are yet to be secured. 

9. 	Lake Kyoga-Nakasongola-Kakooge-Migyera Bulk Water Transfer Project has been designed and also River Katonga-Kabulasoke in Gomba District. 

10. 	A project proposal has been prepared for the construction of a sustainable water supply and sanitation system in the Albertine Graben oil region covering the districts of Hoima, Buliisa, Nebbi and Nwoya. The estimated water requirement is 250,000 cubic metres and the estimated cost is $337.5 million. 

Proposed Future Interventions

As already stated, the areas with saline water sources are also generally water stressed. The most feasible options are:

1. 	Construction of dams and valley tanks.

2. 	Construction of large piped water systems based on large surface water bodies like rivers and lakes. In the case of areas around Lake Kyoga and Lake Kwania, the ministry is planning to extend water from Lira Treatment Works to serve all populations between Agwata Trading Centre and Dokolo Town Council. The designs and tender documents have been prepared and completed. Government is procuring financial resources to implement the project. 

3. 	Carry out extensions to the Lira Town Water System to serve the region. The ministry is already extending water to Amach Town.

4. 	Strengthen the capacity of National Water and Sewerage Corporation for sustainable operation and maintenance.

5. 	Create new public water utility companies around the large municipalities of Gulu, Mbale and Mbarara for sustainable operation and maintenance of the extensive water and sewerage infrastructure.

According to the ministry’s investment plan, the above interventions will require additional allocation of Shs 700 billion per year above the current budget in the MTEF. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for the two statements that you have made. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi had expressed interest in speaking on the first one but both are now open for debate. It is now 6 o’clock; let us see how to close this.

6.02
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to advise the Minister of Water and Environment to get the Hansard of the last two days of the Ninth Parliament; when some Members of Parliament and a few ministers wanted the de-gazetting of forests to be done as quickly as possible, we smelt a rat. The reasons were that there were people who had already allocated themselves pieces of land, especially around municipalities. If municipalities would like to expand, they can annex areas neighbouring them but they should not go for our forest reserves. 

Members of Parliament, the land titles of forests are with Parliament and only Parliament can sign a transfer form to sell or give away forest land. I plead with you that your signatures should be treated with caution and maximum care.

Mr Speaker, the reason why I raise this is because even in that Hansard, we said we would like to see the plans about what will happen. Namanve was given to people with big plans, many of whom were ministers and civil servants. However, the Namanve land was either sold or some of the people who got the land could not develop it. In fact, the people who own Namanve are not the original people who had applied for it. You will get people like that - speculators.

Another example is people in the Ministry of Works and UNRA. When they know that a road is going to pass somewhere, because they are the ones who design them, they go and buy land in those areas so that they are the ones compensated. That also applies to forests and municipalities. Therefore, you must do maximum due diligence and investigation and - (Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give is that this Parliament debated a motion that was moved by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and indeed, a directive was given to the minister to produce a status report on all forests in Uganda before considering gazetting or de-gazetting them. I can see the minister, in his statement, going ahead with the process of de-gazetting before bringing the status report to this Parliament. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My sister, you have done a good job. The then Minister of State for Water and Environment, Flavia Munaaba, stood up here and said “No, we should not do these things in Cabinet”. When she said that, one minister wanted to almost grab her; he is still a minister now but I will not mention his name. However, she stood her ground and said that they could not do that until they had written the status report on forests. 

This was despite the fact that she knew she had lost her seat as Member of Parliament and she was not going to be a minister. However, because she loves Uganda, she said “no” to the proposal. The other minister came back and was made a minister again. I am going to make a private report on him. He was eager because he is one of those who have already either been promised or allocated pieces of land.

Mr Speaker, the reason we are raising the issue of forests is because towns world over have forests in their midst. It is not necessary for us to have tarmac. In Mbale, for example, we are still fighting for Indians’ buildings instead of building even far up to Sironko. We are still in the centre. We have Mutoto and Munkaaga. Instead of developing Munkaaga, we are still fighting.

We would like you to allocate more land to people who want to develop but we also need forests. I am told that New York and Washington are situated in forests. In fact, the United States of America has the biggest forest coverage in the world and yet they also need firewood. Many people may think that they do not need firewood but they need it more for running their systems, but they preserve their forests. (Member timed out.)

6.08
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Given what the minister has provided in his statement and aware that this Parliament has already taken a decision to have a status report on all forests in Uganda, I, therefore, request the minister to stick to what has already been decided by Parliament and produce a status report. Thank you.

6.08
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. The minister identified regions with saline water sources and I think Karamoja should have been among them. This is because although we have boreholes there, some of them have salty water and the people rarely use them; they go to the rivers. However, in trading centres, the water in the rivers has been contaminated. People bathe, wash their clothes and even dump rubbish there. Therefore, Karamoja should have been included.

Mr Speaker, it is true that Government has provided dams and water tanks for the sub region, but we still have some areas that are water stressed. I will give an example. Pokot Secondary School was started in 2001 and from that time up to now, students walk six kilometres to Amudat Trading Centre to collect water and this consumes much of their time. Amudat District Local Government tried to drill boreholes three times but because the water table is low, they have failed and so the students move long distances to fetch water. 

I call upon the minister and Government to think about Pokot Secondary School and include them among the places to get piped water. I thank you.

6.10
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of Water and Environment because the report is very technical. I was a senior water officer and before I came to Parliament, I was working as a senior civil engineer in charge of water.

I would like to advise, as Members have said, that as we wait for these large water systems, we can use the point water sources like boreholes, which are common across the country. Those boreholes should be fitted with non-corrosive materials, which include stainless steel pipes and PVC pipes instead of Galvanised Iron (GI). Secondly, I remember that we went to Kasese and iron removers had been placed on some boreholes. Therefore, in some of these areas, the issue of iron removers on some of boreholes should be raised. 

In addition to what the honourable member from Karamoja said, there are districts, which are badly off and Namayingo should be one of those with the least coverage in the whole country. We have also Nakasongola and others. I would like to propose bulk water supply for such areas. Also, there are places where there is no power; I would like to propose that Government comes in with solar systems.

Mr Speaker, you are aware of the Government policy, which states that at least every district headquarters should have water. I happen to come from Butaleja and this town does not have water. As I talk, the hospital in Busolwe does not have water. Therefore, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I raise on a point of order. In the Bible it says, “Before I tell the others, I will tell my own”. This colleague of ours has risen and said that he was a senior water engineer working in the Ministry of Water and Environment. He is now coming to lament about Butaleja, where he comes from, saying that one of the biggest facilities there, namely Butaleja Hospital, has no water. Is he in order to come and lament yet he had all the opportunities to have water in Butaleja Hospital?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That means that he did not influence anything or pedal his influence or use his office for his own purposes. I think we should be celebrating such people instead. Proceed.

MR WALUSWAKA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for your proper and clear guidance. 

As I summarise, I would like to request Parliament that when considering which ministries to give money, the Ministry of Water and Environment should be first. 

I would like to add that issues of irrigation fall under the mandate of the Ministry of Water and Environment, which handles water for production, and not the Ministry of Agriculture as someone said. Therefore, if we fund the Ministry of Water and Environment, you will find that issues of hunger and issues related to environmental diseases will be gone. I would like to request Members of Parliament to highly consider Ministry of Water and Environment. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, don’t you think we should be drawing this matter to a close?

6.15
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving this opportunity. Adjumani is among the areas identified as having saline groundwater. However, among the ongoing projects, planned projects and proposed future interventions, I do not see Adjumani. Mr Minister, may I know what special arrangements you have made for Adjumani so that it does not appear among these groups? I thank you.

6.16
MR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Mubende): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the good statement on the status of de-gazetting forests, and that is what I am going to concentrate on. Part of our discussion today was about food insecurity and to a certain extent this is because of the rapid rate of deforestation in the country. Secondly, hon. Kiwanda is aggressively promoting tourism in this country and if we continue de-gazetting, we are going to render him jobless. 

I would like to give the minister a status report. National Forestry Authority was formed in 2003 and around that time, the forest cover of the country was about 3.5 million hectares. In 2010, it was 2.3 million hectares and it had dropped from 17 per cent of the total space in the country to 11 per cent. So, in this country, averagely, every year we lose 200,000 hectares of forests. Therefore, I would like to advise the minister and Cabinet that this issue of de-gazetting should be taken with a lot of caution because we are destroying this country and we are not considering the future and our children.

We have many authorities in this country and when you look at Uganda Revenue Authority, they simply increase their collections; Uganda National Roads Authority increases on the road network; but National Forestry Authority has lost what it was given by more than 50 per cent since it was instituted. Therefore, I would like to advise the minister to assess the performance of NFA, given its mandate.

6.18
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his submission. I thank the Member who raised the issue of high costs of operation and maintenance of water facilities due to saline. 

The minister identified Nakasongola District in the first cluster of areas affected by saline. However, in addressing the matter, Nakasongola comes under the planned projects and is way behind at No. 9. The project he is mentioning at No.9 is the Lake Kyoga-Nakasongola-Kakooge-Migyera Bulk Water Transfer Project, which he says has been designed. Actually, there is no design like that in Nakasongola District. The water we have in Migyera Town Council, Kakooge Town Council and Katugo Town Council is from a World Bank funded project. The request was passed by this Parliament under a loan for small towns and the project is ongoing.

The bulk water transfer for Nakasongola District was a suggestion, which we gave the ministry, because we thought that it would solve the problems of Nakasongola once and for all. It is not only for Nakasongola but also Luweero and Nakaseke; you draw water from Lake Kyoga at the highest point and then supply all the districts at a go. Hon. Syda Bbumba can bear witness that when we were in the natural resources committee, we made strong submissions about this and officials from the ministry told us that it was impossible, very costly and not near to implementation.

Honourable minister, I move to your prayer of Shs 700 billion per year for the recurrent budget of your ministry –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us share the time.

6.21
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

My district, Kanungu, is in the Albertine Graben. We have four subcounties, which are in dire need of water, and there is a long river called River Ishasha, which could be tapped to help these sub counties access water for both domestic use and production. Mr Speaker, I would like to request the minister to include that district in his plans and use the natural resource so that those people can access water. I submit.

6.23
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I have a few remarks to make.

Honourable minister, as was the case in the previous discussion on food security, we must stop depending on God and embrace technology. In Uganda when it is raining, like it will be in a few months to come, we lose volumes of water. The rains will just cause floods in Kampala and one week later, we shall have no water. That is very shameful! 

I would like us to look at the technology adoptions we use for the construction of dams and valley tanks. We have good U-shaped valleys where water can be intercepted without excavation. Let us look at that option so that we can store as much water as possible. 

Most of these so-called dry belts have a lot of water going through them when it rains. There is a lot of water that runs through Kiruhura when it rains. We just look at this water and when it is gone, we start crying. Let us look at what we can do to intercept this running water by way of storing as much possible in whatever quality it is. Issues of quality improvement could come later.

Mr Speaker, my other point is that in the early 1980s, we did a lot of water point development but all these are dry because the catchments have been degraded. We are going to bulk water because the other water is gone. Honourable minister, we were together in Mbarara last week and you saw how River Rwizi has dried totally. Therefore, we must address the issue of catchment protection for all bulk water sources. If we do not identify these catchment areas, we shall have the Mbarara scenario on these other small rivers - (Member timed out.)

6.24
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Buyamba County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. 

I would like to comment on the bulk water project in Kagamba-Rakai. It is said that phase I was completed and indeed it was because bulk water was tapped. However, when they say that phase II is intended to transfer water for irrigation, I feel uncomfortable because we should consider providing water for domestic use rather than irrigation. I compare this project, which consumed almost Shs 6 billion, to a project in Isingiro where they used less than Shs 2 billion and transferred water within a radius of almost 43 kilometres. 

They say that phase II is intended to carry out irrigation, which they intend to carry out in a swamp. I would like to advise the Ministry of Water and Environment to reverse this plan. Instead of irrigation, they should supply water to the busy trading centres of Kasankala, Kagamba, Lwentulege and others, which are water stressed. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we give the minister a chance to make some responses? If there are gaps, we will see how to fill them.

6.26
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to state that my ministry knows that our people must access water; it is actually a human right. During my trips in this country, I have made it very clear that every area must be served with water and that even the poorest of the poor should get access to water. Therefore, the concerns of the Members are well taken and I want to assure you that as a ministry, we are aware that water is life.

I would like to request Parliament, during the next budget process, to please increase the budget for water. You are aware that when we were campaigning last year, many of our friends who lost elections did so because they did not give water to their people. This is very true. You know I was a district chairperson and I had a lot of problems because some areas did not get water and that is where I did not get votes. So I want you to take the water issue very seriously and help –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I congratulate the new Minister of Water of Environment. He mentioned the issue of people losing elections because of failing to take water to their respective constituencies. I would like to remind him that now that he is the minister in charge of the water sector, we have high hopes in him. The mandate to deliver water to various constituencies is bestowed upon the Government and my work as a Member of Parliament is to ensure that an area receives water.

I would like to give the example of Ngora–Nyero water project mentioned in your statement here. I am the chairperson of the water, sanitation and hygiene forum in this Parliament. We passed a motion here for water for small towns and urban centres under a World Bank loan. However, it is now coming to five years and every time we request for an update regarding those particular water projects, every time a presentation is made on this Floor, they keep saying that Ngora, Nyero, Kumi, Kasese, Kabatoro are ongoing projects. No one updates us on what exactly has been done so far. 

If you are to blame Members for losing elections due to failure to provide allocations in Parliament, I want you to know that these allocations were actually made before in this House. The delays arise from the relevant ministries and in this case – of course you were not there – Ministry of Water and Environment.

Mr Speaker, when the Minister was giving a statement in response to questions, I would have expected him to give updates on what has so far been done in regard to these projects - where we are currently, where we are heading, and a timeframe for completion. Thank you.

MR CHEPTORIS: Thank you, honourable member. I only made an observation; I did not blame anybody here for losing an election. I only said that the problems we faced were sometimes because of water, which is a fact.

Mr Speaker, I thank the Members who have expressed their opinions on the matter of the forests. I am very grateful to – (Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Although I add my voice to those of the Members who have appreciated the minister for the statement, I think this statement should have been more comprehensive. Areas like the Elgon zone, which have natural calamities that have virtually silted all the rivers, should have been included among the areas with saline and aggressive water sources. 

As a result of silted rivers, children from the Elgon zone do not know how to answer the question on the colour of water. This is because they do not know water as colourless; they know water as coloured because of the silting of the rivers. So, these are aggressive water sources for the people.

By the way, Mr Speaker, these are highlands, which are not borehole friendly. We should also be beneficiaries – I actually support his request to increase the budget to Shs 700 billion so that the Elgon zone and Bududa in particular can benefit from gravity flow schemes. I am also water stressed on those highlands; so we should also receive clean water through gravity flow schemes. I beg to submit. 

I am actually seeking clarification from the honourable minister as to why he was lopsided in his statement by leaving out some areas with aggressive water sources, like the Elgon zone which has silted rivers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please wind up.

MR CHEPTORIS: Thank you, honourable member. I do not know whether your water sources are aggressive. We are talking about salinity, which in technical terms means “aggressive”.

Mr Speaker, I was saying that I have noted the Members’ concerns about the forests. It is true that most developed cities are actually highly forested. So, as a ministry we are going to look at this issue very critically. We have noted, like many others have, that there was a lot of vested interest in these demands for de-gazettement. We shall visit every site and every town that has requested for de-gazettement and we shall see whether there is actually need.

It was shocking to learn, when I was in Masaka, that the municipal council wanted to de-gazette a forest in order to build a golf course. I think that is extremely out of order. Like hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, God created some of these things like forests, grass etc. for a purpose, but when you put concrete everywhere - I am sorry to say that even hon. Nandala’s place, Mbale, is asking to de-gazette a forest in order to put up buildings. So I want you to help me so that we can make decisions for the good of our people and for the good of the generations to come.

After our consultations, I will report to Cabinet, which will make a decision. This decision will then be brought to Parliament for debate. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for staying this late; it is now thirty minutes past the time we normally end. I would like to draw this matter to a close but there is a procedural point being raised.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, before you close, are we proceeding well when the minister has not committed himself on the status report as requested?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What does the Minister say about that? 

MR CHEPTORIS: Mr Speaker, the status report will be presented. I think it is even ready and it will be presented at any time. We are ready –(Interjection)- No, not now; I am not ready now. (Laughter) We shall present it next time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will extract this letter based on the decision that this House took on this. Clerk, please take note. This House took a decision on the status report on forests. Please, extract that and inform the minister that this status report is still pending so that we can receive it when it is ready. Thank you. 

Honourable members, can we draw this matter to a close now? This House is now adjourned to tomorrow, 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.39 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 24 August 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 

