Wednesday, 21 August 2013

Parliament met at 02.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I want you to join me in welcoming my voters from Naibowa Parish, Butansi Sub County in Kamuli. They are led by district councillor, Mr Kuwembula. They have come to see where I work. (Applause)

Secondly, hon. Members, we want to notify you that on the 16th and 17th of September, we are receiving the Chairman of the Peoples’ Congress of China who is coming to visit us. So in case we call upon some of you to perform some duties during those two days, I would appreciate it if you did. He is coming with a very big delegation so many of you will be called upon to go to the airport and receive them, as well as accompany them to the activities and to other meetings. So if you are called upon, I would be happy if you agreed to do that. I have strategic reasons for wanting him to be very happy when he is here.

There were some Members who had some issues: hon. Olanya three minutes, hon. Ababiku three minutes, hon. Ssasaga. The whip wants to say something.

3.00
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (MS WINFRED KIIZA): Madam Speaker, I wish to thank you for giving me this opportunity, which I would like to use to welcome back my Members of Parliament who had been suspended. I would also like to welcome the great people of Kamuli to the august House and to sincerely thank them for having elected you, Madam Speaker. People of Kamuli, you make us proud. You did not make any mistake when you voted the Rt hon. Rebecca Kadaga who is a mother to all of us. She is a Speaker of the Republic of Uganda and she is doing well in the multi-party dispensation. We want to thank you for being very democratic because even though you are NRM, you voted in a district chairperson who is a member of Forum for Democratic Change.

People of Kamuli, you are nice people who have really enhanced the democratic practices that make Uganda a good country in as far as governance is concerned. I want to thank you and I want to say long live the Rt hon. Rebecca Kadaga! (Applause) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, the Whip.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, procedure. I am sorry to interrupt with a point of procedure but so many issues are going to be raised, which are of significance to this Republic of Uganda but when I look at the Front Bench, it is empty. Maybe we are going to use the shadow ministers to respond to the issues of significance and national importance, which are going to be raised. I do not know whether it is procedurally right but if it is, we can use the shadow cabinet. After all, we are the government in waiting.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Madam Speaker, you own all the seats in this House and while you were away, some things happened but now that you are back, such things are not expected to happen.

Madam Speaker, you had allotted these chairs to hon. Niwagaba, hon. Ssekikubo, hon. Nsereko Muhammad and hon. Tinkasiimire. However right now, these chairs have been occupied by people sent in by the Sergeant-at-Arms and we do not know why they feel that while you are in the Chair, you cannot properly guide and keep discipline in this House to the extent that they are now here to enforce discipline. 

Madam Speaker, the guidance I am seeking by way of point of procedure is if it is procedurally okay for the Sergeant-at-Arms to take over, start allocating seats in Parliament and throw away the people whom you allotted those seats to, and to sit here in such an intimidating manner. Madam Speaker, I beg for your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is true that I allotted that general area to the Members but as you would appreciate, during my absence there was a threat to the mace and the Sergeant-at-Arms had to take measures to protect it. When I determine that the threat has diminished, they will return to their ordinary stations. (Laughter)

3.05
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. It was on the 7th of this month when the floods swept the market of Elego, which borders Uganda and Southern Sudan. As a result, the whole place was flooded. All the toilet systems and latrines are full of water and as we talk, Cholera has broken out in that particular area. The medical team went and assessed the situation and confirmed that three people are admitted in hospital.

Since the place was flooded and people are helpless and suffering in that particular area, I pray that the hon. Minister of Health takes a very serious step to make sure our people are helped. And I also pray the Minister for Health takes very serious precaution so that any other disease may not break out again at the border of South Sudan and Uganda. 

Madam Speaker- (Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, the hon. Members rose earlier on a point of procedure referring to the noticeable absentia of the frontbench. And right now the hon. Member who is speaking is referring to issues that concern the Ministry of Health, which needs to be represented here at the front bench. Is it procedurally right for us to continue raising issues that concern these ministers when they are absent? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I gave notice yesterday that we would sit at 2.00 O’clock in the afternoon. I was gracious enough to wait for several more minutes before coming down but the issues that Members will raise will require answers from the Executive. I will suspend the House for 10 minutes. Can I ask the Members of this side to contact their ministers to come? (Laughter) House suspended for 10 minutes. 

(The House was suspended at 3.08 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.49p.m. the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see representation from the Executive, I think we can proceed with our business. I just wanted also to inform you, honourable members, that the Malaria Forum of Parliament is inviting you for a breakfast meeting at Imperial Royale Hotel at 7.00 O’clock in the morning, to sensitise you about the distribution of mosquito nets in the country. So you can have a good breakfast and talk about malaria. 

3.50
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I rise on the matter of national importance –(Interruption)
 
MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam speaker, with due respect to the Government side, I stand on the point of procedure seeking to know why for the first time in the history of this parliament we have started parliament in total open absence of government top representation for several minutes, almost hours. 
I have been in this parliament for two consecutive terms and I have not seen a situation of this kind where a Government elected by the people to take responsibility over the whole country deliberately misses out without any explanation. In terms of procedure, Madam Speaker, is it procedurally correct that we proceed out of the blue without any formal explanation as to why these people have abandoned their responsibility in accordance with our Constitution? We need an explanation.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the presumed leader?

3.52
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, it is trite knowledge that we have got three basic arms of Government: the Judiciary, Parliament, and the Executive. To me, these are symptoms of a hard working Government. When you find Parliament busy, the Executive is busy and the Judiciary is busy. 

However, Rt Hon. Speaker, may I say that Government is winding up its work and is about to join us.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, your Parliament has always come up with a calendar. The parliamentary calendar has always guided us on when to do what and how to do it. This Parliament every time we sit it deliberates on very important matters regarding the development, regarding how we should manage our country.  We believe that the government that cares should be here to guide debate on how we are going to proceed. 
Madam Speaker, you are also aware that our Constitution indicates that we have three arms of Government: the Executive everybody knows about it, Parliament and the Judiciary. But our Constitution does not say the Executive sits outside Parliament. The Executive is expected to be here always when we are deliberating important matters, and we have very serious matters that require the Leader of Government Business, that require ministers in Cabinet.

Is therefore the Attorney General representing the Leader of Government Business or could be representing the chief whip I don’t know now which department he heads to say that the ministers are therefore busy for this sitting today? Is he in order to indicate that the ministers have found it unnecessary to appear here to lead us in business and have decided to be busy for this session? Is the Attorney General in order to mislead this House? And then later they will come in to hurry us with other businesses when they have been absent. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, when we were first elected, I think the President came to this House to request for some increment in the numbers of ministers so that business can be run efficiently. Parliament complied, we gave him the ministers and it was our belief that some of them would be available to do work in this House. So I don’t know if the Attorney General can give a good excuse for people not being here when some ministries have got three ministers, we know that. They are aware that we were sitting today. I adjourned the House to 2.00 O’clock today.

3.56
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As a social scientist, I don’t just look at the symptoms and leave them there, I go deep to try to identify the possible root cause so that the disease can be appropriately diagnosed, and the right prescriptions can be given. Yesterday in your communication, you did a lot to the poor working relationship between the Executive then represented by the Leader of Government Business and Prime Minister and the institution of Parliament. This chapter happened yesterday, and today out of nearly 80 ministers we only see two junior ministers. Whom I am sure cannot even ably stand up and commit themselves without recourse to the Leader of Government Business. 

Is it a coincidence that we just talked about this thing yesterday, and today we are seeing even the side of Government in this House with membership of nearly 300 MPs - count them see how many they are. Is it that messages have been said from the powers that be to the honourable members on the other side of the House that they should not come in order to frustrate the efforts of Parliament? I think the Executive owes us an explanation. We are here taxpayers money is going and tomorrow they will all go smiling having received payment slips. 

I think this is very unfair, that is a sign of corruption! We really wish to appeal - even extra-officios who are an extra baggage are not here! Yes, they are an extra baggage because under normal circumstances surely if you have earned that favour from His Excellency the President to serve this country, why aren’t you here? So really we should take a serious note of this misconduct - I call it “misconduct” because I know this is a well calculated move and we shall not allow the Executive to frustrate the efforts of Parliament! We shall not allow the leadership of the Executive in this Parliament to try to arm-twist the leadership of this institution called Parliament. We shall not allow it! This is something where we will all stay united under the institution of Parliament so that business is run appropriately.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, when points of order were coming in I was concluding my remarks and I was not given an opportunity to do so. I was concluding my remarks by saying that Members of the Executive, the Cabinet, have requested you to bear with them because they are winding up with some business – (Interjections) - and they will soon be with us. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, if I may finish –

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR RUHINDI: We have the Order Paper here before us and we can see Communication from the Chair, Laying of papers and the next item on the agenda is Bill's Committee Stage; The Industrial Property Bill. I am the sector minister in charge of this Bill and the chairperson of the committee is here and we can proceed with business –(Interjections)-

HON. MEMBERS: No way.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, all the issues of national importance are important but I think we can defer them until we have people who are going to answer. So I think let us proceed with the other items and when they come, I will give some 10 minutes for the Members to raise their issues.  

So let us proceed to the next motion. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I was moving a motion.

THE SPEAKER: No motion. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi.

LAYING OF PAPERS

    I) REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON APPOINTMENTS - BENCHMARKING VISIT TO THE UNITED STATES CONGRESS,  29 JULY TO 2 AUGUST, 2013

THE SPEAKER: Go to the next one.

    II) THE REPORT ON THE SECOND GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON THE GREAT LAKES REGION (ICGLR) OF THE REGIONAL WOMEN FORUM (RWF) ON THE STATE OF WOMEN IN THE GREAT LAKES REGION FROM 2 TO 6 JULY, 2013

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aol? She is not here to lay the paper. Go to the next item.

III) REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF MEMBERS FROM THE COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS ON ITS STUDY VISIT TO ARUSHA TO BENCHMARK REGIONAL HIV STRATEGIES, POLICIES AND PROGRAMMES, FROM 5 TO 13 MAY, 2013

THE SPEAKER: The Chair of the Committee on HIV and AIDS.

    III) REPORT ON THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEES (ACPAC) CONFERENCE HELD IN THE NEW SOUTH WALES PARLIAMENT, SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA FROM 10 TO 13 APRIL, 2013

THE SPEAKER: Chair of the Local Government's Accounts Committee.

4.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Rt Hon. Speaker, may I, as directed by Rule 32 (i), lay on Table a report on the Australian Council of Public Accounts Committee (ACPAC) Conference held in New South Whales Parliament, Sydney Australia from 10 to 13 April, 2013. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table. 
 
THE SPEAKER: Okay. The report is sent to the Committee on Public Accounts. They can peruse it and advise us on action areas. I thank you.

BILLS COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY BILL, 2009

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Kwemara?

MR KWEMERA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. If I may recall when we were supposed to go to the committee stage, our colleagues were saying that we did not have the opportunity to debate the report. I seek your guidance whether it would be proper now to have a debate on the report.

THE SPEAKER: If there was no debate, I think you will have to move a motion for us to go back to the second reading if there was no debate. Do you want to debate the report? You cannot debate during the committee stage?  It was presented some time back - but this matter has been on the Order Paper for some days.

Clause 1 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, before we start, I want to announce the presence of pupils and teachers of Kituga Primary School represented by hon. Tashobya and hon. Kabasharira. I think that they are somewhere up here. You are welcome. Those are your potential voters. (Applause) Thank you.

I now put the question that Clause 1 do stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. The committee proposes an amendment to Clause 2 which is a definition clause. Our proposal is to redraft Clause 2 as follows: “Court means the High Court of Uganda.” The justification is that the commercial division of the High Court of Uganda is based on the administrative structure of the High Court and any future renaming or administrative restructuring will necessitate amendment of the legislation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that the only amendment you have?  Sometimes we normally stand over the interpretation until we have done the whole Bill in case new changes come in.  I think let us stand over this and go to Clause 3.

Clause 3

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. The committee proposes amendment to Clause 3 to redraft Clause 3 (i) as follows: “The Registrar-General appointed under the Uganda Registration Services Bureau Act Cap 210 shall be the registrar of the industrial property.” The justification is to harmonise the provisions of the Act with the Uganda Registration Services Bureau Act since the law shall be implemented by the Uganda Registration Services Bureau.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kwemara?

MR KWEMARA: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. I want to thank the committee for the work done but I have a problem with Clause 3 on the registrar. My view would be that instead of providing for an incumbent, the registrar, we provide for the Intellectual Property Office or the Industrial Property Office.  

The Bill provides for a registrar who will sit in the Uganda Registration Services Bureau but I feel that we need a fully-fledged office to handle intellectual property, not just a registrar who is an appendage of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. 

Intellectual property is big business and includes copy right, industrial property and today, we are in a knowledge society or economy and knowledge is becoming lucrative business. So it would be unfair to put all this business under the Uganda Registration Services Bureau.  

If you look at the mandate of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and you look at what is involved in intellectual property, I believe the Uganda Registration Services Bureau is not competent enough to handle intellectual property. For example, if you look at the procedure that is involved in patenting there is filing, there is doing a search to see that if the intention has never been patented before or if we are not reinventing the wheel. The Uganda Registration Services Bureau can handle that but when it comes to examination to see if the patent is a real invention or if this invention is not prior art, if this invention has got an element of industrial application, or if this invention has got science that makes sense and in case of doubting the science, there should be provision for a board of appeal. When it comes to patenting micro-organisms, where are the scientists? 

Actually, if you look at what is currently done in patenting, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau only does the registration and sends the persons to Harare. So, what is this law going to change? And if you look at the staff that are needed: we need engineers, biologists, software engineers, IT specialists and so many other scientists. Where are these in the Ugandan Registration Services Bureau?

Madam Chairperson, I have looked at the functions of the registrar and more business about intellectual property is coming because we are going to pass the Plant Varieties Protection Act, at some point we may even have to pass an Act on Animal Breeders Rights. We already have the copyright law, the geographical indications all fall there and I don’t see the competence there.

Lastly, I want to observe that the committee omitted vital knowledge sources and possibly that is why they came up with the Uganda Registration Services Bureau mandating it to handle intellectual property. One, the committee did not consult the universities and they did not consult research institutions. The committee did not consult innovation platforms, the committee did not consult the informal sector for utility models and even scientists and innovators who have ever patented before to see the challenges that are involved. So, I implore the committee to reconsider that and provide for an intellectual property office rather than just a registrar. Thank you. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I appreciate the concerns raised by hon. Kwemara but we have had the benefit to interact with the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and actually, they have tried to restructure and actually create secretariats under the bureau. So, maybe what he was saying was applicable before. What we may need to do actually is build capacity and recruit more staff under the bureau than creating a different organ to deal with that, to create a one-stop centre for all these activities. So, his argument is very good and it was valid as of then but as of now, with the new development, I think it has been taken care of with actually what has happened at the bureau. That is the information I wanted to pass on to the House. Thank you. 

MR TASHOBYA: I would like to agree with my colleague, hon. Mwiru. It is true that the intellectual property business industry is very important here in Uganda and elsewhere in the world but as hon. Mwiru pointed out, the intellectual property industry is very young. If you consider, for example, at the amount of the number of patents and the number of copyrights being registered now are very few. You may find that you are registering about two patents in a month. So, for now, given our own experience here but also the experiences in other countries we have visited, I think as the member pointed out, it is important now to build the capacity because you do not have to have fulltime scientists and professors or biologists and so on; you will have a very big structure who you will pay for very little work done. So, for now, I think it is important that we build the capacity of the URSB, get the scientists over time and increase the capacity over time to enable it to discharge this mandate to discharge this business.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to supplement my colleagues who have emphasised the point that sometime back, we established the Uganda Registration Services Bureau as a body corporate and at the level at which we are now, we have really given it capacity that would sustain this kind of job.

Secondly, ever since we did that, we all know very well, including members of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs committee has really appreciated the work so far done in the URSB as far as the NTR is concerned. Actually, we are talking in terms of about Shs8 to Shs21 billion of collection vis-à-vis the original Shs2 billion. So, it is doing a good job and the only thing I wish to add is that these institutions that we create do not act in isolation of each other. They supplement, they feed and inform each other. For instance, we have got the National Council of Science and Technology, we have got the Uganda Bureau of Standards, we have the Uganda Investment Authority and so many others. These agencies inform and feed into each other. A one-stop shop is advisable but of course you know what it takes to reach there. It is a long journey but in the meantime, the existing infrastructure can work together in order to achieve the goals we set for them.

MR MULIMBA: I want clarification on the mandate of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, maybe if we are amending the Act to provide for intellectual property. That was my concern.

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, even before we had the Bill, the Registrar of Companies was the registrar of patents, trademarks, of companies, births and deaths. They were doing that work already even before that law. 

MR KWEMARA: My concern is that intellectual property goes beyond just registration. It is a continuum; you can register trademarks and even utility models but when you go to patents, it goes beyond registration, that is why I am talking about search and examination and I don’t want to agree with the argument that we have had very few people patenting. I know we may have had a few but one of the functions is to promote innovativeness. So, how are you going to promote innovativeness if you are not creating the office and you are only providing for the incumbent? My argument is that let us have the office; the office will determine the business and determine the incumbents as the business grows.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to assure the member that what he is raising is among the issues and options that we looked at. I should also inform the member that the URSB is not only looking at registration. Even as we talk, they even have examiners and when we asked them about the possibility of having new examiners, it was brought to our attention that we cannot bring in more examiners when actually the volume of work they have to do at hand is not big. So, really, the question is not personnel. First of all, the personnel to do the work are there and as we expand the industry, we can also think about more people. I don’t think we should have more institutions and organisations and spend money for no work or work to be done.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 4, I do not see adequate provision for accessible database which also includes - I see under (c): “Provide public industrial property information for technical and economic development”. But I do not see where we provide for adequate data which includes the processes – accessible data base to those who want to apply for patents and information thereof. I thought this should be covered under this clause 4. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, you cannot put every detail in the law. Once you have provided the core functions, then you have an umbrella clause, in this case (e): “To perform any other functions for the better carrying out of this Act”. To me what the Member if raising can as well fall into this. 

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I rise to agree with the Attorney General; the issue the Member was raising has to do with how to implement and disseminate industrial property to the public. The issue of setting up data bases and so on and the implementation issue will be left to the office to carry it out; it does not have to be part of the law. 

MR TASHOBYA: I suppose if the Member also looks at clause 5, it provides for the register of industrial property. That is where you would access the data and information that you are talking about. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5 agreed to.

Clause 6 agreed to.

Clause 7

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chair; we propose to redraft clause 7 as follows: “Any member of the board or employee, when a person acting on behalf of and on the authority of the registrar shall not be liable in his or her personal capacity in any civil or criminal proceedings in respect of any act or mission done or made in good faith in the performance of his or her duties”.

The justification – the provision implies that the registrar shall be personally liable for injury or loss occasioned in the discharge of his or her duties under the law –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairman, on which pages are you reading; I cannot find that provision. 

MR TASHOBYA: I do apologise, there is no amendment on clause 7.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. The committee proposes an amendment on clause 8(3)(f) at the end of the provision to add, “or thereafter as provided by weaver or extension or pharmaceutical patent and data protection, under the agreement and trade related aspects of intellectual property rights at the World Trade Organisation Council for trips granted to Uganda individually or to the least developed countries as a group so long as Uganda is so classified”. 

The justification is to provide for flexibility in case Uganda is not yet ready by 2016 to exclude pharmaceuticals from protection. And we are also proposing to add (g) and (h) to read as follows:
“ g) Natural substances, if even purified, synthesised or otherwise as related from nature, this provision shall not apply to the processes or isolating those natural substances from the original environment. 
h) The human body and all its elements in whole or in part.”

The justification is to include exclusions with respect of natural substances, plants and animals. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the amendments made by the chairperson. I only wish to add one item for purposes of complying with the TRIPS agreement that is, in (f), it says, “Pharmaceutical products until 1st January, 2016”, and the committee has added on that expression. 

I wish to add, after the word, “Products”, put there, “and test data”. Test data is that specific data used in the innovative stages and this is captured in the TRIPS Agreements and I do not see why we should be deprived of that benefit in our domestic law. 

So I wish, for purposes of stylistic consistence and flow of the amendment, it should read, including the chairpersons amendment, (f) should read, “Pharmaceutical products and test data until 1st January, 2016 or such other period as may be granted to Uganda or least developed countries by the council responsible for administering the agreement on trade related aspects of intellectual property under the world Trade Organisation.” 

I have discussed this proposal with the chairperson and other Members and we are in agreement. 

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chair, I still have a problem with clause 8(1): “For the purposes of this part, invention means a solution to a specific problem in the field of technology”. An invention must be a new solution to a technical problem. So when you just say, “A solution” an old solution is not an invention and a discovery is not an invention. There must be human intervention added. 

So I wish to amend that to read: “A new solution to a technical problem”, now a solution to a specific problem in the field of technology. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you want to add the word, “New” between, “Means” and “a” and then add technical instead of specific?

MR KWEMARA: “For the purposes of this part, invention means a new solution to technical problems” not a solution to a specific problem in the field of technology – (Interjections) – for example, an invention can be simple or complex. Like a safety pin was an invention, but it is simple. That is why we are saying, “A technical problem”, it may not necessarily be in the field of technology. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But are all problems technical? 

MR TASHOBYA: I would concede having, “A new solution -” what is important is innovation. Madam Chair, as you have pointed out, it does not have to be technical. I think the most important thing is innovation and I would concede to having “new” in respect of innovation.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chair, I have a problem with the word “new”. Suppose it is a phenomenon which has been around but has not been registered and you say “new”, can’t it be challenged on that ground? And of course there are quite a number of phenomena that have not been registered. If I am the originator and I think it is time to have it registered and it is not yet registered, why do we say “new”?

MR KWEMARA: Why we are insisting “new” is because it is this novelty or newness that qualifies it to be an invention. You might think you are the originator here but you could find – (Interruption)

ME RUHINDI: Madam Chair, I think the concerns raised by the honourable member are catered for in clause 9; because clause 9 says: “Patentable invention is patentable if it is new, involves an inventive step and is industrially applicable.” 

Before you put the question, Madam Chair, I have an adjustment to make to paragraph (g), which has been moved by the chairperson. It says, “Natural substances, even if purified, synthesised or otherwise isolated from nature; this provision shall not apply to the processes of isolating those natural substances from their original environment.” For purposes of better drafting, I propose that it should read: “Natural substances, whether purified, synthesised or isolated, from nature, except the processes of isolating those natural substances from their original environment; and…” to flow with (h). 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause (h) be amended – first as proposed by the chairperson and then as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes an amendment on clause 10(1) by adding, at the end of the provision, the following words: “Or where a theoretical person, who is highly skilled in the relevant area could not derive invention from a combination of prior disclosed art.” And the justification is to apply global standards in respect to prior art and to knowledge that is relevant to consider combination of prior art.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is a “theoretical person”; because you are talking of a theoretical person who is highly skilled in a relevant area?

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, after consultation, we have agreed that for ease of reading by an ordinary person, we can remove “theoretical”.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, now that the chairperson has proposed that amendment, wouldn’t it also be prudent to clearly explain, for purposes of this Act, what prior art consists of? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is reference to prior disclosed art; so they want to know what it is.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, I propose that we stand over this clause. There is need to harmonise one or two things.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we shall stand over clause 10.

(Clause 10 stood over.)

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chair, I think if we are to solve the problem of prior art, to define novelty, we can say, “An invention is new –”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member, we have stood over it; you will come back when we return to it.

Clause 11

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, on clause 11, it says: “An invention shall be considered as involving an inventive state if, having regard to prior art…” – although we still have issues with “prior art” – “…or a combination of prior art” should be included in between “prior art” and “relevant to the application claiming the invention”. It would not have been obvious to a person skilled in the art to which the invention relates on the date of filing of the – now, between “skilled in the art” and “to”, I would also propose that we include there the phrase “anywhere in the world”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please state that again; where do you want to put it?

MR MULIMBA: Between “prior art” – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is the second line?

MR MULIMBA: Yes, that is second line. I would propose to say, “or a combination of prior art” because it can either be one or a combination of them. And then on the fourth line, between “art” and “to”, I would also propose that we include there the phrase “anywhere in the world” because we are legislating in respect to international set standards whose application can be enforced anywhere in the world.

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chair, I think it is not necessary to put “anywhere in the world”; it makes it redundant. If you are doing a search, you are doing that globally to find out if somebody has not done that before. And what we are calling “prior art”, that is, does this invention or what we are calling an invention, exist in the body of knowledge? If it exists in the body of knowledge that qualifies it to be prior art. So putting “anywhere in the world” makes it redundant, it is obvious.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the committee goes ahead, in 10(2), to define “prior art” and I wanted to move an amendment to their definition. I think that would clarify matters because if you look at their definition on page 8 of the report, it says, ‘For purposes of this Act, ‘prior art’ consists of everything made available to the public anywhere in the world by means of written disclosure including drawings, published patent applications and other illustrations or by oral disclosure, use, exhibition or other non-written means, which shall also be considered prior art including information implied in any way, in any disclosure derived from a combination of prior disclosure where the disclosure occurred before the date of filing of the application or if priority is claimed before the priority date validly claimed in respect of the application.”

That is their proposal for the definition of prior art. The amendment I want to move to that proposed amendment is that the law on disclosure of prior art is that art must be expressly disclosed. There should be no room for implied disclosures. To introduce implied disclosures would introduce uncertainty in the law and encourage conjecture in the patenting process. This will make it even harder for the registrar to perform his or her functions.

For that purpose and reason, the only thing I propose to have deleted, in their proposed definition of prior art, is the expression, “which shall also be considered prior art including information implied in any disclosure derived from a combination of prior disclosure.” This expression starts in line five with ‘which’. You delete it up to the word ‘disclosure’; including and up to the word ‘disclosure’. If you delete that and remove any reference to “implied art” then I think we would have the definition clearly clarified.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Members, I think we should note that position but we shall come to it when we come to Clause 10 because we had stood over it. I put the question that Clause 11 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12

MR KWEMARA: I have a problem with the second line; “An invention shall be considered industrially applicable if, according to its nature, it can be made or used in any kind of industry”. There is a way the word ‘made’ changes the meaning. I do not know what the committee chairperson thinks. Suppose we left out ‘made’ and said, “if it can be used in any kind of industry or with the purpose of industrial application”?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, he would like to delete the word ‘made’ and leave ‘used’.

MR KABAJO: I am wondering; if the patent is to combine certain items into something you are making, why would you want to remove ‘made’? I still think it is better to leave the clause as it is because if you say you are only using, it implies that it is only some specific item that you are using but if your invention is to combine different items into something else, the word ‘made’ is still relevant. Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: I did not get the rationale as to why the hon. Member wants to remove the word ‘made’ because it is very key to this provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 12 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes re-drafting of Clause 13(b) as follows: “Inventions contrary to public order, morality, public health and safety, public policy, principles of humanity and environmental conservation.” 

The committee proposes to add “public policy” considering that order, morality, public health and safety, principles of humanity and environmental conservation and welfare to specify matters that reflect common sense, common conscience as well as set on public opinion relating to the duties of their fellow citizens. These keep changing with the changing economic needs, social customs and moral aspirations of the people. Public policy provides room to adopt the interpretation of changing circumstances. Madam Chairperson, we beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you are just adding the words “public policy”. Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 13 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes an amendment to Clause 21 by re-drafting Clause 21(5) as follows: “The description shall - (a) disclose the intention, the invention and all practicable modes including specification of the best mode of carrying out the invention known to the inventor at the filing date or where priority is claimed, at the priority date of the application in full, clear, concise and exact terms as to enable a person who has honorary skills in the art to make use of and to evaluate the claimed invention.” The justification is to ensure availability of disclosures most likely to reside in further carrying out of the invention.

(b) The committee proposes amendment to Clause 21(6) by deleting the words “skilled in the art” in the fourth line of the provision and replace with the words “who has ordinary skill in the art.”

The justification is that standard disclosure should not be limited to skill in the art.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the proposed amendment. I wish to clarify that the redrafted clause is in respect of clause 21(5)(a). I think he made it clear. It should not be in respect of the entire 21(5) but only in respect of 21(5)(a); and the expression “filling” in the third line should be “filing”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.
Clause 25, agreed to.
Clause 26, agreed to.
Clause 27, agreed to.
Clause 28, agreed to.
Clause 29

THE CHAIRPERSON: When you have something to say you stand. Clause 28? You will recommit? But next time you stand when you want to recommit. I put the question that clause 29 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32 

MR TASHOBYA: I had stood up, Madam Chair. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 32 by adding sub-clauses (5) to (13) which will provide as follows: 
“(5) 	In the event a patent is granted, any interested party may petition the registrar to reconsider the grant on the grounds that the patent fails any requirement of this Act.
(6) 	The petition under this section must be filed within one calendar year of the published grant of the patent and shall specify the grounds thereof. 
(7) 	An applicant can file only one post-grant opposition.
(8) 	The notice of reconsideration shall identify the opposed granted patent as well as the grounds that the opponent considers relevant to bar the grant as well as all relevant evidence.
(9)	The failure to meet the formal or substantive conditions of patentability in sections 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 21 and 25 or in any guidance from the registrar may be alleged by the post-grant opponent.
(10) 	The registrar shall give notice of the post-grant opposition in the Gazette. 
(11) 	The patent holder may within 60 days from the publication of notice of opposition file a counter statement.
(12) 	The registrar may, if he or she considers fit, grant the hearing pursuant to the regulations made under this Act at which the patent holder and the post-grant opponent may argue and counter argue their case and submit additional evidence, if available, including oral evidence.
(13) 	The registrar may reverse or revoke grant of the patent if satisfied that it fails to meet formal or substantive conditions of patentability.”

The justification is to adopt an administrative post-grant opposition procedure in line with the East African Community guidelines. Post grant opposition procedures are less costly and inexpensive, Madam Chair. We beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, you have heard the proposals.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I have carefully studied this proposed amendment to clause 32 but I strongly feel that sub-clauses (6) to (13) are procedures that can be captured in the regulations to the Act and we retain only sub-clause(5) which says, “In the event a patent is granted, any interested party may petition the registrar to consider the grant on the grounds that the patent fails any requirement of this Act,” under procedure prescribed under this Act. The rest will be covered in the regulations. 

Because as you notice, Madam Chairperson, these are important items but you notice that you will be tying the hands of the registrar if every time he has got to adjust anything there has to be an amendment to the Act. It is for purposes of being flexible and I believe that the Chairperson can concede to that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you not interested in sub-clause(10)? I thought it was innocent: “The registrar shall give notice of the post-grant opposition in the Gazette.” I do not know. 

MR RUHINDI: Still that one can be captured in the regulations.

MR MULIMBA: I want to stand with the committee on their recommendations because if, for example, you look at sub-clause (10), “The registrar shall give notice of the post-grant opposition in the Gazette.” Before I get there, I wanted to propose that even the head note of clause 32,“To grant registration, publications of a patent,” I wanted to propose that in order to strengthen this new proposal, we even add, “and post-grant opposition,” on that head note so that we strengthen the recommendations which are here under enumerated. 

But I want to strongly suggest that the issue of hiding some of these very important provisions in the regulations- we really drive into uncertainty sometimes. We need to make a law as clear as possible and I think this is the spirit under which the committee proposed to have these amendments from sub-clause(5) up to (13).  

I have fears when you propose- because now you are dealing with granting and post-grant opposition which are very serious engagements. If in sub-clause(10) you are talking about the registrar giving notice of post-grant opposition in the Gazette, I do not know how widely read this Gazette is. I wanted to add another amendment on that. Instead of saying the Gazette we say, “A widely published newspaper” because how many of us here read the Gazette as Members of Parliament? And if Members of Parliament do not have access to the Gazette or we do not have that interest, how many people out there get to read the Gazette? So, much as I agree with the propositions by the committee, I wanted to propose that in this Act, the issues of dealing with the Gazette, since this is touching private rights, we really deal with a widely published newspaper. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Members- 

MS SSENTONGO: The information I want to give is about the Gazette. The Gazette is a legal instrument for the government but publication in a newspaper is just information, which may not be legal in any way. I would think if you want to have it widely published, you should include a widely published newspaper but gazette should be maintained.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know, would you agree to add a widely circulated paper in addition to gazette?

MR RUHINDI: The only challenge I have, Madam Chairperson, are the financial implications that we create and you know the fact that we really operate on meagre resources.
If it is really giving notice of the post grant opposition why would it require publication in a widely circulated paper?
I really do not see the rationale, I think in the gazette the official Government document should suffice. But I still strongly stand by my earlier proposal that much of what is contained from (6) to (13) is purely of a regulatory and procedural nature which can be captured in the regulations. 

We want to ensure that our institutions, if you knew, if you were to do an audit and you cross check on institutions which even as of today can’t function simply because of one or two things in the Acts that establish them simply because they are thinking of possible amendments you would be surprised. These are matters of a procedural nature, which can be captured in the regulations. I would be glad if you said that the regulations should be laid on Table in Parliament. Let them be laid on Table so that whoever wishes to make a comment can make one.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I was about to be persuaded by the Attorney General’s proposal but we have had issues where we have made Acts and the regulations take a lot of time without being made and yet we are actually moving very first to have the law in place. May be would we know the time with in which the regulations will be made?

It is one thing for us to pass the Act then we forget about the regulations.
 
MR RUHINDI: Without making specific time frames, I am sure that even your committee of which you are a member must have been informed that every Act which we have brought here in Parliament in respect of the commercial reform programme already has enabling regulations made and drafted including this one. The regulations have been there.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair, I agree with the Attorney General about leaving sub clause (5) because the rest can be covered in the regulations. However, I thought that even the sub clause (6), which gives a limitation within which time somebody must file the post-grant opposition should be kept otherwise it would mean that somebody can come even after 10 years and submit a post-grant opposition.

I would propose that if we take the Attorney General’s position we keep (5) and (6) so that we have a limitation within which period one must submit the application.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 32 be amended by introducing the two clauses (5) and (6) as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 33

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I have a problem with the two months they have put. I do not know why they have made two months but I think that period is too much, I would propose that we make it two weeks to be consistent with the other laws because I always see them giving two weeks.

Making it two months to me is a lot of time and the aggrieved person may be delayed in one way or the other and may be not cared about faster. I would propose that we make it two weeks and not two months.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the upper limit is two months; you can appeal in one week but not more than two months so even your two weeks are covered.

MR RUHINDI: The nature of these appeals and court decisions vary from one to the other because she is likening this to an ordinary appeal. But this is an appeal where you have to put it in gazette first, if there opposition, if there is contestation you have got do this and that. In law we say these are distinguishable. Therefore, I agree with you, Madam Chairperson, when you say two months is the upper limit it can be done even in the two weeks that she is talking about.

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chair, on the same clause 33. I find sending the aggrieved applicant to go to court straight away not being prudent and good enough. There should be an administrative mechanism of listening to this person. Knowing our court system I believe this one is going to discourage innovation. If you look at the process people go through to patent, you do not appear, you only write an abstract, if it is a culture you send it, you put in your claim. That is the scope of the patent. 

If you look practice elsewhere there is a board of appeal. I am suggesting that let us have an administrative mechanism where this person can appeal and court should be the last resort.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, even if you were to say that, already in the court infrastructure there is an arrangement for such measures to be taken. The registrars for instance hear and determine interlocutory applications, they consider matters of this nature and this of course lessens the burden on the ordinary courts of law where you have got to proceed by way of every detail.

Let me tell you hon. Member that, for instance, in every commercial transaction the court will not proceed to hear your case unless you have gone through an alternative dispute resolution mechanism. All these are part of the justice dispensation programme and they can be justified at a later stage. We can run through a workshop to inform you how court works.

MR KWEMARA: I appreciate the learned Attorney General’s submission but I want you to look at scenario like this one; somebody is applying for a patent and in any patent, there must be a science that should make sense and the registrar says, “I am not granting this patent simply because I do not believe that this science makes sense.” But this person says, “Look, you have not understood my science.” That is a scenario where the registrar will convene a Board of Appeal where made up of scientists to prove and this man should be given a right to be heard. Why should the person run to court straight away? That is my argument.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, first of all, the member seems to be well informed of the processes of patenting and registration. It is a process that does not involve only paper work and registration. It is a process that involves science and that is why he was talking about having technical people and maybe having a technical institution to handle this type of work.  

So registration is a process that involves science and scientists and so the registrar will not come out of the blue to grant or not to grant. That is why as the honourable member was saying, sometimes some examinations are done outside the country like in Harare and elsewhere. So there are processes that are undertaken before a decision is arrived at.  

So at a point of deciding, scientific processes have been undergone and the registrar is well informed of the decisions that are to be taken.  And I think if those processes have been undertaken, it is only fair and I think even that the inventor has an opportunity to go to court if he is denied the license.

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chair, you remember very well that at the beginning my argument was that Uganda Registration Services Bureau is not competent enough to handle patents and the chairperson is saying that some processes are handled in Harare. 

We have been using Harare simply because we do not have our own offices. Now that we are putting up our own offices, what are you going to do in Harare? Let us have the scientists here and that is why I was saying the Uganda Registrations Services Bureau is not competent enough unless we provide for having the competent staff there and that is why I was arguing that let us provide for the office and not for the incumbent.  

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, if I can refer my earlier explanation, even for, look at the volume of work we have to be done in patents? I said that, for example, the URSB handles an average of two applications a month but even in Harare does not do all the work because some of the work has to be referred to WIPO in Geneva. 

So, we cannot have people and institutions and employ the scientists that the member is talking about to do very little work for now but may be at a future time because as the member must be aware intellectual property is a very important industry. In some countries actually you find that intellectual property contributes about 10 percent of the GDP of some countries but if you look at the contribution of intellectual property to our GDP, it is really more or less negligible and zero. 

So we should build the capacity as we go on and maybe at some time, a time will come where we need the people and the big institutions to do the work but for now, I think the capacity of the URSB is sufficient to handle the work that is submitted to them. 

MR RUHINDI: Can I compliment? Madam Chairperson, really to deny the registrar to take a decision would be to enact a law in futility. This is an administrative office and it is empowered and should be empowered to make decisions. And this is why those who made this Constitution were mindful of administrative decisions. 

If you look at Article 42 of the Constitution, it says “Right to just and fair treatment in administrative decisions. Any person appearing before any administrative official or body has a right to be treated justly and fairly and shall have a right to apply to a court of law in respect of any administrative decision taken against him or her.”  So, I think this provision is fitting and should be maintained.  

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chair, I think what is killing us here is legalism. To me, there is nothing wrong. What harm does it make for a person to appear before a committee before the person goes to court? And this argument of saying we do not have business - actually it is unfortunate we did not have debate on this Bill. The issue I would have raised at the debate time is funding for research. When we are talking of intellectual property, the precursor to intellectual property is research. We are not funding research in this country and that is why we are saying that we do not have business but if we were funding research, we would have the business.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Kwemara, don’t you think that by introducing another layer of justice you are really increasing the bureaucracy? It means that unless the board handles you, you cannot go to court. Are you not creating too much bureaucracy?  Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 33 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. The committee proposes an amendment to Clause 35 by inserting the words “inventive step”, “industrial applicability” or “required disclosure” between the words, “novelty” and “unless” in the fourth line of the provision. And the justification is to include the criteria for patentability.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause – yes, hon. Mulimba.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, well as I agree with the chairperson because four only included novelty at that time but did not meet all the other criteria of accountability - I think it even leaves a vacuum on how many chances one has to amend.

I would propose that at the end we also include as a way of amendment that “the applicant shall only have one opportunity to amend the claims for clarity” because you can drag and drag and somebody keep claiming, “I need to amend” and keep the process delayed.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is talking about the last sentence of Clause 35 – but in the meantime, honourable members, join me in welcoming the pupils of Erina Mangeri Mixed Day Primary School represented by hon. Bayigga and hon. Mpiima. They are up there and you are welcome. (Applause). 

Have you understood his amendment? He wants such to provide that you can only amend the claim once to prevent a cycle for amendments.

MR RUHUNDI: What is the rationale of amending because an amendment is really part of a process? Madam Chairperson, I would actually assume or I want to think that amendments will be stopped by the operation of the process. There can be a stage or process at which you cannot necessarily amend your documents. For instance, you can amend your pleadings at any time during the hearing of a case but if a case has been fully heard, you cannot say you want to come and amend. So, with all due respect, my colleague wants to be a promoter of investment, a promoter of innovation and I think he is doing it in reverse gear. Give this person an opportunity to amend his documents and any amendment would necessarily be stopped by the process itself.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 35 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 38 by deleting sub-clause 38(1)(c)and the justification is that the clause limits patents on new uses which inhibits innovation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 38 be amended by deleting sub clause 1(c).

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 39(a) to substitute the words “at least one” in the second line of the provision with the word “best” and the justification is to have the best mode to facilitate more innovation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about (b)?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. We further propose an amendment to clause 39(b) by inserting the following after the word “grant” in the second line of the provision to include “including denials, revocations, invalidations, suspensions or lapses” and Madam Chairperson, this is to provide for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 39 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes amendment to clause 40 by replacing the words “section 39” with “section 38” in the last line of the provision and the purpose of the amendment is to collect a typographic error.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 40 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.
Clause 43

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 43 by deleting sub-clauses (4) and (5) and the justification is that as members must have realised while reading the Bill, those provisions are covered under clause 41 on the rights of a prior user.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 43 be amended by the deletion of sub-clauses (4) and (5).

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 44 by inserting the words “or research” between the words “use” and “on” in the first line of the provision and in clause 44(b), to insert the word “or educational” between the words “teaching purposes” and the justification is to broaden the clauses to include research and educational purposes. 

MR RUHINDI: Just one small typographical correction in the amendment of clause 44(a) where the chairperson is proposing insertion of the words “or research on.” Since the word “on” is already in the Bill, we can only insert “or research.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 44 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, I want clarification. ARIPO stands for Africa Regional Intellectual Property Office and I know that most protocols have been called after the places where they have been ratified. Is it proper to refer to it as the ARIPO protocol or should it be the Harare Protocol on patent and industrial designs?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the hon. Member is spot on and when we come to the definition clause, I will move an amendment to that effect that this should be called the Harare Protocol. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do you want to do it here and then we conclude it in the interpretation?

MR RUHINDI: We can do that, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Because it would have to have a clear head note. 

MR RUHINDI: It should be called the Harare Protocol on Patents and wherever ARIPO Protocol occurs, it should be substituted with “Harare Protocol” and in the definition clause, I will propose that it should be amended to reflect this. Harare Protocol means the Harare Protocol on Patents and Industrial Designs within the framework of the African Regional Intellectual Property Organisation. 

MR MULIMBA: I also have another concern. Madam Chairperson, I know under the Harare Protocol, some of the advantages Uganda has in respect to waivers, pharmaceuticals are included. I am therefore of the view that we should quickly add another provision to require the registrar to reject all pharmaceutical and medicine related microbiological patents until 1 January 2016 WTO pharmaceutical waiver or as a favour extended by WTO. That clause will help us to - (Interjections) – is it there?

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is there look at clause 8. Honourable members, I put the question that – 

MS KARUNGI: Madam Chair, I want to get clarification on why we are replacing; “ARIPO” with “Harare”, I want to understand it better, it is not justified enough. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The African region has a protocol of patents which was agreed upon in Harare. Even the headquarters of African regional offices are in Harare. 

MR RUHINDI: This is the name; maybe I should first ask why hon. Karungi is called Karungi. This happens to be the name of this protocol and after all, what is in a name; it is the substance that matters and this happens to be its name. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 45 be amendment as proposed and sequentially wherever the word “ARIPO” occurs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46 agreed to.

Clause 47 agreed to.

Clause 48 agreed to.

Clause 49 agreed to.

Clause 50 agreed to.

Clause 51 agreed to.

Clause 52 agreed to.

Clause 53 agreed to.

Clause 54 agreed to.

Clause 55 agreed to.

Clause 56 agreed to.

Clause 57 agreed to.

Clause 58

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, I have a fear that when we come to compulsory licences for non-working and similar reasons – I know the committee never touched that; which means the simply okayed it – (Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, as you are aware, the Committee of Legal Affairs took about two years, with your support, Madam Chair, to do extensive work and research to arrive at some of these recommendations, many of which are very fundamental in nature. 

Is the honourable member in order to say that the committee just okayed things without taking close scrutiny to the Bill when it took us two years of work with your support, Madam Chairperson?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are out of order. I know personally that I had to facilitate this committee to go and carry out serious research on this matter. So withdraw. 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, if I used inappropriate language then I might be forced to withdraw and use the appropriate language –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you used improper language; you said they just “Okayed”. 

MR MULIMBA: Well, I withdraw that. The point intended to make here is that the issue of compulsory licencing for non-working and similar reasons – we needed to give them serious attention. For example, on 58(1): “After the expiry of four years from filing date of an application, three years from grant of a patent, whichever licence expires, a person may apply to court for a licence”. 

I want to propose that we provide for administrative procedures under this other than court. We substitute court with the “minister in consultation with the relevant ministry.” The grounds for compulsory licencing vary and they include among others when there is urgent need to permit importation where somebody is holding patent. This could be out of a crisis and if you go to court, it may delay the process. 

For that matter, I am saying that we include “the minister in consultation with the relevant ministries” so that the compulsory licencing for importation of any material – say if it relates to medicine, then it should be the minister in consultation with the ministry of health. If it is in respect to agricultural input, the same would apply to Ministry of Agriculture. I beg to propose.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think in their first report to the committee, they were of the same opinion, and we had agreed to that. I do not know at what stage it was dropped from the committee. But I do not have any objection to that amendment. 

Madam Chairperson, maybe let me say that when that is done, there will be some consequential amendments in the succeeding provisions and the technical team should note that affect them. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to take exception to the assertion of the minister that the committee has submitted one report to this House. I do not know how many reports the minister has, but I would rather suggest that we stand over this provision to allow us time to consult and then get back. 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Chair. Even if we give time for the committee to consult and come back, I have a lot of reservations on the amendment that is being floated. Knowing the type of ministers we have and how they work –(Interjections)– I am very sceptical. I would rather this power be given into the hands of the courts, in which we have slightly more trust than in the hands of the minister who has stood up –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I do not know when I will stop saying this, but let me keep saying it. A good law should be blind. When we are legislating, we do so with the hope that hon. Kassiano Wadri will one day become a minister. And when he becomes a minister, we will not have to come back and amend the law because a new minister has come up. Hon. Kassiano Wadri, are you legislating for the current executive or for the future of Uganda?

MR WADRI: Madam Chair, I am very happy that the Learned Attorney-General has come up to say that we should enact a law that is blind. I want to say this: A law that we make is not cast in stone; we are very conscious and would not like a situation whereby after two or three years, we come back here to amend the law because the Ruhindis have left the front bench. We want a law which will stand the test of time. That is the reason why I am making this humble appeal – that we leave the whole system in the hands of courts in which the public has more confidence, than the Executive, which my friend Ruhindi serves.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable members, it seems this Clause 58 deals with supervision, oversight and I think the person in charge is the minister – because it is the minister who will know that it is four years and nothing has happened. I think we will be taking away the minister’s powers if we now switch to the courts – because this is administration and the minister is administering. 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, I agree with you and that is the reason – and in any case, this is not for purposes of arbitration; it is for purposes of administration – for qualification of compulsory licence. And that is why I strongly believe that it should be under the minister. 

But, Madam Chair, I want to concur with the chairperson who is asking for more time to look into this thing in depth because if you look at this provision, it does not exhaust grounds under which compulsory licence is granted. And if you look at the EAC guidelines, Article 9 provides that “Member States should exhaust grounds for which compulsory licences should be granted.” It ranges from public health grounds and includes issues like, but not limited to, national security, judicial administration, prices, affordability and the rest. So I would really concur with the chairperson and we stand over this so that we can have more input to comprehensively and exhaustively cover issues regarding compulsory licence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, we shall stand over Clause 58, study it further and we shall return to it.

(Clause 58 stood over.)

Clause 59

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, in the same spirit, if you look at compulsory licences based on interdependence of patents, also in relation to Clause 58, I would propose that we also stand over this such that we get rid of issues which we have not dealt with here and we also exhaustively analyse this area.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, for purposes of moving on, after consulting the technical people, I want to refer to Clause 58, if you will permit me, because it may help also to resolve this issue. The issue raised by the Member is the application to the minister. And after consulting widely, including the minister, since the application is in respect of non-performing patents, I think it is okay; we would concede to the amendment that the applications can be made to the minister. In which case, Clause 58 would be added in the terms proposed by the Member. So if we do that, then the standing over he is proposing will not arise.

MR WADRI: Madam Chair, I still want to drive the point that I raised; these ministers are human beings. What if today, God forbid, that I apply for this compulsory licence after the expiry of four years and I come to my friend, hon. Fred Ruhindi and then he says, “Well, Wadri is my friend but we don’t agree with him on some issues.” And then he says that, “As far as I am concerned, you and your firm have not been performing.” What avenue of redress will I have and where is it provided for? I really want to see an institution of redress in which people can have confidence.

MR RUHINDI: I think hon. Wadri came in a bit late because before he came in, I made reference to Article 42 of the Constitution because it gives you a right to just and fair treatment before an administrative official or body. It says: “Any person appearing before any administrative official or body has a right to be treated justly and fairly and shall have a right to apply to a court of law in respect of any administrative decision taken against him or her.” So any administrative official taking a decision can never be final. But it facilitates decision making. It is quicker in the sense that many decisions could even stop there and are effectively handled rather than subjecting everything that would even be handled by such an official to a court of law, with the intricacies you know of evidence adducement, witnesses and so on. Why wouldn’t a person go there after an administrative decision has failed?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, now that the committee chairperson has agreed with the mover of the amendment, let us go back to Clause 58. I put the question that Clause 58 be amended as proposed.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, why I wanted this to be stood over is to exhaust the grounds for compulsory licensing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But are you going to put the grounds here?

MR MULIMBA: Yes, because I know we also have the EAC guidelines on grounds for compulsory licensing, which in any case, according to clause 58 as it appears, is not exhaustive. So I would strongly propose that we stand over it and we have serious interventions in this matter in order to catch up with the EAC guidelines as required by member states.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, I think my colleague is now shifting the goal posts because clause 58 is talking about the patents; the invention is not being supplied or is not being supplied on reasonable terms. That is the one we conceded to that the application can be put to the minister. Now, the Member has been with the report; if he had anything to enrich what we had proposed, he had the opportunity to do that. So I think that we have conceded to his proposal and so we should proceed. We cannot anticipate what the Member is going to come up with. He has had a full opportunity to do that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, since the chairperson has conceded to your proposal, we should accept it and move on. So I put the question that clause 58 be amended as proposed by hon. Mulimba.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, clause 60; Preconditions for grant of compulsory licences. I do not see where we put specific time for negotiation and – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which clause are you looking at?

MR MULIMBA: I am talking about Clause 60, Madam Chairperson. “A compulsory license shall not be granted unless the person requesting the licence - (a) satisfies” - I think this is now a consequential amendment – “that he or she has requested the owner of the patent for a contract license but has been unable to obtain the licence contract on reasonable commercial terms within a reasonable time.” 

Since these are two individuals dealing with their private rights, wouldn’t it be prudent to put a specific time of this negotiation?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, yes, I agree that we should provide for every detail of that sort but there are others that we can put in the regulations. If you look at clause 104, it gives you an ambit for many of these procedural issues to be put in the regulations. That clause is very open and wide and the minister may make regulations for better carrying into effect of the provisions of this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 60 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 63; cancellation of compulsory license. “On the application of an interested party, the court “- I think this also becomes consequential – “may cancel” in which case we amended 58 to refer to the minister. I think this should also be consequential that “the minister” –(Interjections)- okay, no problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So wherever “the court” occurs in this one, we shall substitute with “the minister” and the clerks will sort that one out. So I put the question that clause 63 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 83, agreed to.

Clause 84, agreed to.

Clause 85, agreed to.

Clause 86, agreed to.

Clause 87, agreed to.

Clause 88, agreed to.

Clause 89, agreed to.

Clause 90, agreed to.

Clause 91, agreed to.

Clause 92, agreed to.

Clause 93, agreed to.

Clause 94, agreed to.

Clause 95, agreed to.

Clause 96

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 96 by deleting that clause. The justification is that it is undesirable to criminalise patent infringement since the validity of patent claims is so hard to determine and since there is a general interest in competition. The patent holder has many other infringement remedies, many of which are civil, Madam Chairperson.

Further justification is provided in the write-up on page 13. We beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the minister have any objection?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I accept the proposal to delete clause 96 and also to say that any consequential amendment should be effected. An example is in clause 97 which states, “For the purposes of proceedings, other than criminal proceedings…” The expression “other than criminal proceedings” should be deleted. 

This is also to emphasise the point mentioned by the chairperson that it is not wise to handle patent dispute issues criminally. A very good example is a recent one when the two technology giants: Samsung and Apple were accusing each other of infringing on each other’s patents. There were several contradicting opinions issued by different courts in the United States and South Korea as to who had infringed on the other’s patent. Perhaps noteworthy, of course, is that the dispute between the two is being fought in civil courts in both the United States and South Korea and not in a criminal court. So, Madam Chairperson, I concede to this amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I put the question that the Bill be amended by deleting clause 96.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 96, deleted.

Clause 97

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, you wanted to delete “other than criminal proceedings” but leave the rest?

MR RUHINDI: Yes, Madam Chairperson. The rest should remain. You only delete -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Including the issues of the burden of proof?

MR RUHINDI: “Other than criminal proceedings”, that expression should be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 97 be amended as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 97, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 98, agreed to.

Clause 99, agreed to.

Clause 100, agreed to.

Clause 101, agreed to.

Clause 102, agreed to.

Clause 103, agreed to.

Clause 104, agreed to.

Clause 105, agreed to.

Clause 106, agreed to.

Clause 107, agreed to.

Clause 108, agreed to.

Clause 109, agreed to.

Clause 110, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you had time to think about clause 10? 

Clause 10

MR RUHINDI: I move as before that in the proposed amendment by the committee on clause 10(2) - it is on page 8 of their report - you delete the expression which starts with the word “Which” in the fifth line. It starts, “For purposes of this Act…” and if you go to the fifth line of that redraft, you will see an expression which starts with “Which.” So, you go with that expression up to the word “Disclosure”. I propose that we delete that expression, from “Which” up to “Disclosure”

THE CHAIRPERSON: So that it reads, “Which occurred”? 

MR RUHINDI: “…which shall also be considered prior art including information implied in any disclosure derived from a combination of prior disclosure…” That expression be deleted. The reason is that, the law on disclosure of prior art is that the prior art must be expressly disclosed. There is no room for implied disclosures. To introduce implied disclosures would introduce uncertainty in the law and encourage conjecture into the patenting process. This will make it even harder for the registrar to perform his or her functions. So, this is why this expression which puts in implied disclosures should be deleted.

I also propose that the word “filling” following “there at” should be “filing”. This is a typo. And with that clarification, the problem that some of my colleagues had in understanding this expression “prior art” would be put to rest.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we have come back to clause 10, which we had stood over. I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed, first by the chairperson and then by the minister. 

MR KABAJO: I am requesting that the minister gives some more clarification. Is his amendment only to delete the word “implied” from the sentence but leave the others? Because you could still have patents which are derived from a combination of prior disclosure which should be put into consideration also. So, are you only deleting the word “implied” and leaving the rest? What exactly are you amending? Thank you. 

MR RUHINDI: The problem is that there were some bits of repetition but the key area of amendment is on “implied disclosure.” The redraft tallies more or less with the committee’s because the redraft that I propose which is more or less in tandem with the committee’s, “For purposes of this Act, prior art consists of everything made available to the public anywhere in the world by means of written disclosure including drawings, published patent applications and other illustrations or by oral disclosure, use, exhibition or other non-written means where the disclosure occurred before the date of filing of the application or, if priority is claimed before the priority date validly claimed in respect of the application.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: You had some amendments to clause 2.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 2 by redrafting “court” to mean the High Court of Uganda. The justification is that the Commercial Division of the High Court of Uganda is based on the administrative structure of the High Court. Any future renaming or administrative restructuring would inevitably necessitate amendment of the legislation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The minister had an amendment on Harare.

MR RUHINDI: We would be defining the Harare Protocol. “Harare Protocol, instead of ARIPO Protocol, means the Protocol on patents and industrial designs within the framework of the African Regional Intellectual Property Organisation.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended first as proposed by the chairman and again as proposed by the minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.09
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (MR FRED RUHINDI): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.10
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Industrial Property Bill, 2009” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.10
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY BILL, 2009

6.11
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Industrial Property Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY ACT, 2013”

THE SPEAKER: Title passes and Bill passes.

6.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Steven Tashobya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of my colleagues, those around and not around from the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, I would like to thank you for the support you have accorded this Bill that has enabled us to tackle this very challenging area of intellectual legislation that has also enabled us to bring the report that has finally been passed by this House.

We would like to thank the Deputy Attorney-General with whom we have been working closely and his staff, the Uganda Law Reform Commission, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. And you, honourable colleagues, from the way you contributed, it gave us an understanding that you had read and internalised this law. We thank you very much and soon we shall be coming up with other reports as directed by you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. This is one of the committees which has suffered pressure from me to make sure that they do their Bills because they had very many but I really want to thank them. They have been very diligent and I think they have done most of the outstanding work. I really thank hon. Tashobya and his team. 

Hon. Members, in relation to outstanding Bills, you know the work we do here is in the public domain. Last week, I was attending a meeting at the Pan African Parliament and then in one of the presentations from someone from the World Bank, he reported that Uganda is a country which has kept the Plant Variety Bill in Parliament for many years. This was distributed from my fellow Speakers. The Committee on Agriculture, there are Bills which have been asleep there that you should be handling.

6.13
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuto County, Rakai): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the long delayed Plant Protection and Plant Variety Bill which I think was brought on the Floor of Parliament in 2007. It is long overdue and we have taken it on as a committee to make sure that we fast track the backlog so that by September, we should see this Bill on the Floor of Parliament after we have completed the policy statement.

Immediately after the policy statement, if you give us a slot, we should be having it on the Floor so that it can be executed.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you and we wish you well, honourable chair and your committee.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I have not been very active in this Bill. When I am not sure about something, I do not rush into it. I want to thank the chairman and the Deputy Attorney-General for all the work we are doing in this House, especially on Bills.

I am very open; I don’t see the Attorney-General here. It is up to you to take a decision the way you handle these Bills, we come out when we are a bit satisfied, leave a lone the other one which came about. Even your handling of that Bill was professional.

This is an appeal to the Leader of Government Business; we want to see the Attorney-General here other than us quarrelling outside there on matters of his absence here. Otherwise, you can take that advice to the President that this one can be the full Attorney-General.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, earlier, there were some Members who had some pressing issues from their constituencies and they could not articulate them because they were not going to be received by the Government side. So I want to invite them now. I want to know from the Leader of Government Business; we lost almost two and a half hours this afternoon, we did not know where you were.

6.15
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, we are very sorry for coming late but we were held up with issues that we could not leave before solving. We are sorry for coming late.

6.16
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I was raising a matter of national importance concerning the outbreak of cholera on the boarder point between Uganda and Southern Sudan.
That said, on the 7th of this month, that area was flooded and people lost property and all the latrines were filled with water. As we talk now, the medical personnel assessed the situation and they confirmed that there is a cholera outbreak in that particular area. The place is called Lego village in Bibia Parish, Atiak Sub-County, Amuru District. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Health should take very serious steps to help the people who are living in that area because all the water points in that area are contaminated because of floods. Therefore, I urge the government to be fast enough to take care of the people who are living in that area.

6.18
MR JOHNY SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance in my constituency. On the 8th day of this month, a young boy of 21 years named Gemeyi John was shot dead by the officials of the Wild Life Authority.  In that same week, his wife had delivered and I am told he went to the neighbouring forest reserve to pick the local herbs and in the process, he was got by the officials, he was asked to stop but he was scared and he took off. In the process, he was shot in his chest and he died.

When the community and his family went to rescue him, some five members who went to pull him away and take him to hospital were also shot. They sustained injuries and are still in hospital. I went for the burial but of course the community was up in arms and very many leaders feared to go there including the district officials. But I made efforts to go and calm down the community and we buried. The community requested for a dialogue between them, the Uganda Wild Life Authority and Government.

We made possible interventions and the local leadership wrote to the office of the RDC and UWA officials but to date, they have never responded. Today, at 10.00 a.m., another person was shot in the neighbouring county of Masaba. So, there is tension because communities have ganged at the sub-counties of Masaba, Zesui and Gitimwa and they have passed their own community resolutions; they do not want any UWA official to step on their land and remember these are the areas they cross over to go to the forest reserves. And they have said they should not speak to them, they should not drink from their water and let them remain in the forests - or else, the Government buys them a chopper then they can cross over to the national park.

Madam Speaker, as the government prepares to take it up, there is a very serious border boundary problem. In 1936, that place was a forest reserve and by 1993, the area was gazetted a national park but unlike in other national parks like Kibaale and Bwindi where the communities were compensated, the people from the Mt Elgon area were never compensated. They were forcefully thrown out of the forest – 
	
MS KARUNGI: Information.

THE SPEAKER: Information, hon. Karungi.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I want to give is that it is not a rumour because some people from my area were also shot some time back. There is another one who was shot dead from Bwindi Forest on the side of Kisoro District. Actually even that one, they refused to give the relatives their body. The rangers buried the person up to today they have never given the body to the family. 

And so, honourable, they have never compensated anybody that side. And more so, recently, an elephant attacked a certain lady in my area and it killed her and the child and injured the husband but there was nothing that was done to help them.  

Even the lions are killing domestic animals there and there is no compensation. So, the only issue we have here is to amend the Wild Life Act and maybe say that they should start compensating our people because the Wild Life Act doesn’t provide for any compensations. I thank you very much. 
 
THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you for the information and I think right now, it cuts across because I was raising this in respect of my place. So maybe the prayer could say that it is high time the government started looking into compensation of these communities that were thrown out of the national parks or else the problem will continue escalating.

The second prayer is that you could immediately intervene in respect of my area because much as the community is at risk, the UWA officials are also at risk. The communities have banned them from accessing the fields, their parks, the areas where they go and booze from and of course they even banned them from associating with their girls. These are officers who usually move out to pass time with them – (Laughter) - they are saying they are going back to the uncouth methods. 

Some time back, Madam Speaker, I am told in the early 1980s, the communities began poisoning the wild life officials in that area and they cut them with pangas. It would be very bad if they go back to those uncultured ways. So it is high time that Government responded immediately. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ababiku, three minutes.

6.25
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on two issues, which are affecting my district: One is under health on the spreading of Hepatitis B in my district. It is not the first time that I am rising on this issue. I was at home over the weekend and stayed for three days and attended two burials. I even came with patients to Mulago Hospital for more investigation. People have started fearing each other because they feel even by touching, they can get infected and the treatment is so expensive.

I wish to know from Government when the mass immunisation is going to be taken to my district, and also to other parts of this country because the assured way we can survive is through massive vaccination of our people.  

Two, is the issue of roads. I have a problem. Our route from Adjumani to Gulu is not tarmacked and we have been living in hope that in future, it may be tarmacked but UNRA has not helped us for the last two years. The quality of maintenance of our road has deteriorated so much and therefore we have been left with the alternative route, which is the security road from Pakele to Amuru that connects us to Gulu.  

But now, the biggest problem again is that the bridge has collapsed. Our people cannot move and I am requesting Government to come to our aid and construct the bridge. I also need clarification on why the maintenance of roads by UNRA has really deteriorated. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.28
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue which has been raised by my honourable colleague, hon. Ababiku is very important and especially the issue of Hepatitis B.  

You will remember that last week, there was an article in The Daily Monitor newspaper written by Felix Worom, The Daily Monitor Bureau Chief of West Nile. If you bother to read that article, you will shed tears. The disease has covered the whole of West Nile – he even came to the extent of indicating what percentage of people in which medical unit are suffering from the disease.  

He even went further to make it simpler to the public by way of showing them the symptoms that should make people understand that this is Hepatitis B. Whereas my honourable colleague has said it, the issue is not only the people of West Nile, but the entire country is suffering the syndrome of poverty because even to undertake any vaccination, it has become a problem. People are seeing their beloved ones dying in their hands. They cannot even raise Shs 30,000 for a single prick.

Really, let Government interest itself and come to the help of these people because the way it is and if we allow things to go the way they are, even those of you who want to run in 2016 – I do not know who will vote for you –(Interjections)– I will take that information.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Prime Minister wanted to say something. 

6.30
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will talk about the problem of roads, which has been raised. In fact, on Monday, I was in a meeting with the regional engineer from the north and we discussed extensively about the maintenance of these roads and actually, they told me that the maintenance works have started. The contractor has started work from Atiak and has done about 14 kilometres already, heading towards Moyo through Adjumani. That contractor will continue to Yumbe through Moyo, across the Nile and that is where it will go and this is a contract which is automatically going to continue for three years. 

On the issue of the security road –(Interruption)
 
MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Gen Moses Ali for accepting this information. Let us be as realistic and as factual as possible. I chair the Committee on Public Accounts and one of those vote holders who are always in red and who always gets qualified opinions of the Auditor-General is in the docket of the Uganda National Road Authority. We must admit that we have given UNRA more than it can chew. You will agree with me that a few years back, there were a number of community or district roads which because of political expedience, were hurriedly given to UNRA without resources to the extent that ever since these roads were given away, no contractor has passed there. Actually, the public is now asking what the point of giving these roads to UNRA was instead of leaving them to the districts where they will be able to harass as it were, the LC III chairman or the LC V councillor who they will reach. So, actually, all roads which were taken over by UNRA some four or five years back have closed. General, I must tell you that they have closed! I passed through that road last December when coming from – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Let’s hear from the former chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. He has information. 

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Wadri and to support the Leader of Government Business that many of such important murram roads have been considered under short term maintenance. Under this arrangement, Government contracts a contractor for three years to widen the road, gravel it or raise it so that it comes to a first class murram road. So, it is true that that road is under term maintenance but Government had not yet released money to UNRA. It has just gone there and they are to begin serious work. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It was not my intention to raise this point of order but let me do so because of the former committee chairperson. Some of us with new districts have a 100 percent roads with no single tarmac and I have raised it in this House before that the only gift you can give to new districts - leave alone Kalungu, I am talking about Gulu and Northern Uganda, Zombo, Manafwa and others, is at least getting some tarmac there.

Recently in my district, UNRA worked on their roads and they brought just a grader. I rang UNRA and asked about the process of repairing roads. You must have a grader and a compactor to produce a very good road. They said the money they have can only grade. Is the hon. Member in order to tell us that these roads are well-graded under UNRA? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I don’t think he said they are well graded; he was telling us what the government has done and how it will be done in three years and the activities that are going to be done on that road. That is what he explained. But hon. Members, how will this debate end? Hon. Ababiku wants her bridge done. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: But I have not finished. Let me finish my report about the road which has been raised. I am not responding to all; I am only responding to what was raised. The rest can be done by the –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Prime Minister. Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the Physical Infrastructure Committee. This morning, we had a workshop with UNRA and some of the ministry officials. Hon. Wafula Oguttu was there and other Members of this House. The problem emanates from the Ministry of Finance. We passed the law here which provided a levy under the Road Fund. The Road Fund does not pass money to UNRA. When we handed over the roads, we handed to UNRA based on the assumption that the money they had was going to move from Finance to the Road Fund to UNRA. Up to today, the Uganda Road Fund has failed to provide that money. This morning, we were informed that out of the vote on account that we passed where they are supposed to provide 30 percent, they have only provided a third and it was released yesterday. How do you expect UNRA to perform when you are giving a third of the money required to work on the roads? So, the problem is in us amending the Road Fund to an Act such that the money goes directly from the Consolidated Fund to UNRA and then we will see how they manage it. That is where the problem is. 

GEN. (RTD.) MOSES ALI: Thank you for the information. Hon. Wadri, you said that you were in that place in December last year but I said I had been through that road last week when we went to bury the late Gen. Mustafa. So, I have the latest information and I am just saying I met the regional engineer of the north who is in charge of this road on Monday and he told me that a contractor is already on site grading the road 14 kilometres from Atiak heading towards Adjumani and he will continue up to Yumbe. If this information is considered not true, then I am sorry I don’t have any other information to share. (Laughter)

Secondly, on the issue of the bridge and the security road, we also discussed it with the regional engineer. Actually, there are small bridges and the rains washed off some parts but small cars can still pass, although it needs attention. We even promised we would do it. 

On the issues concerning health, my colleague holding the portfolio of Minister of Health will answer the issues that have been raised concerning health. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let us clear the responses for the members of the Wild Life Authority and Hepatitis. Let us get the others out of the way first then we can take a few more. 

6.40
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to add to the submission of my colleague from Adjumani is that the problem of Hepatitis B has become so widespread. If you go to the Teso region and particularly Serere, you would think you are in the Epi-centre of Hepatitis. 

Madam Speaker, you may recall, about two years ago, the Minister of Health came here and made a presentation and also made a proposal creating hope that they were going to intervene by way of vaccinating people and creating awareness among the population. That is not happening anywhere in the Teso region – at least, in the area I am familiar with. There is no public awareness campaign and there is no vaccination going on. 

When hon. Wadri was submitting, I thought, if the vaccine was available, maybe some households, although poor, would still afford if it was at Shs 30,000. But the vaccines that are available are restricted to only health workers. So there is no vaccine out there even if you wanted to pay. Maybe for the likes of us who want to go to Kampala facilities, maybe we can afford; but not in those health centres. 

So, if the minister is coming here to submit, he should refresh himself and the whole country on what happened with the public awareness campaign. And secondly, why is there no vaccine available throughout the country?

Is the government even aware that the problem is actually countrywide? In Serere – Madam Speaker, let me give you the picture. One day, I went to bury in a family where the first case, an elderly woman had died about four months before of Hepatitis related infections. After four months, the one who was looking after her also died and it was also Hepatitis. In the same home, there was a son suffering from the same symptoms. At the burial of this old woman, the old women were coming and touching the body – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last time, I went to Ngora and I came back and reported to you that that was their biggest complaint. They said three quarters of the population probably had Hepatitis. I asked the minister to tell us what he is going to do about Ngora – so it is a big thing; also Manafwa has a problem with Hepatitis. So let us finish with her before going to the other issues. 

6.44
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I may not report that in Manafwa we have cases of Hepatitis, but as the Chairperson of the HIV Committee, we travelled to Northern Uganda and we went in particular to Arua Hospital. While there, we discovered that out of the ten tests they carry out in the laboratory – they have not decided to test for Hepatitis in every patient that comes in. The lab technician told us that out of every ten tests they carryout, three of them are positive. 

Surprisingly, even the health workers are not vaccinated. In that hospital, we found students who had been sent to do practicals; many of them were intern students sent there to do practical assignments; they were working in that hospital yet they are not immunised. 

The issue of Hepatitis is not a simple issue. Government needs to come up urgently and respond to it. If we do not do that, we are going to lose so many people. They told us that they had already lost two health workers. Two nurses died because they accidentally pricked themselves as they were taking blood samples from patients and so they contracted the disease. 

The health workers who were immunised in Arua Hospital only get one dose and you are supposed to get three doses. And if the period for getting the next dose elapses, that dose is null and void, they have to start afresh. So even health workers whom hon. Alaso thinks have been immunised have not. 

6.40
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the Leader of Government Business has said, I am taking the Floor to respond –(Interjections)– I am sorry, Madam Speaker. I am responding on behalf of my colleague, the minister responsible for health on the two: the issue of the outbreak of cholera in hon. Olanya’s area and the issue of Hepatitis B. 

On cholera, I am going to contact the minister of state who is in the country and if I do not find him, I will talk to the Director General to ensure that they check out that action being taken because that should be done. 

Having said that, I want to remind colleagues that we do get cholera outbreaks even in situations where we have no floods; like in this situation. So I ask colleagues that in our mobilisation work in the constituencies, one of the things we should include in our briefing is hygiene. 

In regard to Hepatitis B, I would like to confirm that this infection is widespread in our country. In my constituency, I have attended burials of several people due to this problem. So this is a matter of public health concern. Hon. Alaso has reminded us that some time back, the Minister of Health came here and indicated what measures were being taken to bring this situation under control. 

So I undertake that by Thursday next week, the substantive colleague, the Minister of Health, will come here and update us on the plan to contain this high prevalence of Hepatitis B and indicate to us whether we are winning or whether the situation is getting out of hand and what additional measures the Minister of Health will take in order to protect our people.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the statement by hon. Kiyonga, but this is a very serious matter. The last time the Minister of Health was here, she gave a very detailed statement. So wouldn’t it be right for the minister to make a formal statement instead of just coming to talk? 

DR KIYONGA: If I didn’t use those terms, precisely, that is what I meant – he will come with a specific ministerial statement. 

6.45
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for his statement. I want to confirm that the minister made a remark and it is written because it was a question asked by the Prime Minister at that time. And if you look into your records, you will find that statement. And I believe that a statement made by a minister is an assurance. So we should follow it up so that the ministry’s commitment is carried out.

On the issue of road infrastructure, I would like to observe that the Ministry of Works is not doing enough. I have almost become a staff in the office of the Minister of State for Works because I have been following issues of road construction, especially for Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo Road. Government in last year’s budget promised that five bridges would be constructed; yes, they are now under construction but even a lay person can see that the level of the bridge is very low and any forceful flow of the river can easily sweep it off. I have been begging the minister to go to the ground and inspect with his technical people to see if the bridges are properly constructed but up to today, he has not gone.

Although one of the members indicated that there is a problem with the Road Fund, I want to say that the problem is with the Ministry of Works – the ministers and the technocrats. Why are they not coming to the ground and why are they not supervising works?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I see this debate going into the policy statements. I think the answer has been given about what is going on regarding the road from Atiak; there is a contractor who has taken on the work. They have also said that they are going to look into the issue of bridges. They have responded on the issue of Hepatitis; it is only UWA – hon. Ssasaga’s problem which is remaining. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: On UWA, I undertake to inform the minister that this matter has been raised and she should come here to explain what is happening on the ground. (Interjections) I do not know when because I have to tell – but this is a hypothetical question because I cannot tell you when since I have not even met her yet. I have to inform her first so that she can prepare. What I can only undertake to do is to give information to her so that she is aware that she is required to come and make a statement here.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let us take the Deputy Prime Minister’s assurance – that he is going to pass on the message and that next week, the response will come. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I will inform them.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. (Interjections) But now if we open debate, we shall have to open other areas.
 
Hon. Members, we had something else we wanted to do today; that is the border dispute between Amuru and Adjumani but I do not see the Minister for Lands here. We are now going to end up with the same problem we earlier had. 

MS JESCA ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for the information that we are going to receive the long awaited report. But since we all know that we need to prepare ourselves to also have a lasting resolution to this conflict, I seek your indulgence that even in the absence of the relevant minister, we could receive the report and then debate can commence tomorrow. This will enable us to come back when we have adequate information and are ready for debate. Thank you.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I agree with the proposal that notwithstanding the absence of the Minister of Lands, we can receive the report and the proceedings – at least it will come off your list. This will leave us with only the discussion. So we could proceed. Thank you. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON BOUNDARY DISPUTES BETWEEN AMURU AND ADJUMANI DISTRICTS

THE SPEAKER: (Hon. Okupa rose_) Aren’t you anticipating his report –(Interjections)– before he has even presented? No, you are making your own comments because there is no report as yet.

6.56
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, this is in general terms. We have found a problem with us receiving statements or reports and then postponing the debate. There are a number of reports and if you fail to have the debate the following day, the next time the Minister comes here, the reports will not be there for Members to follow. The next thing that will happen could be Members who were not available at the time the report was presented to the House making comments. I have always wanted to make that comment. I think what we need to do in future is to have reports presented and debated there and then when issues are still hot and people have understood them. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, not all reports are the same; sometimes we get very lengthy reports which take four hours to present. So after people have listened for four hours, it will depend on the type of the report. By the way, how big is your report, hon. Ssemugaba?

MR SSEMUGABA: Madam Speaker, it is a big report but I will summarise it. 

THE SPEAKER: But when you are given copies, you will come back tomorrow without them. Please go ahead and present the report.

6.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving our committee this space to present this long awaited report. 

On 22 March 2012, a complaint about the border dispute between the districts of Amuru and Adjumani was referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for in-depth scrutiny and the committee was asked to report back to the House. The committee was guided by the following terms of reference, as given by you, Madam Speaker:

    1. To establish the status of the land under dispute – that is whether the land is a gazetted game  reserve, customarily owned or under any other form of ownership.
    2. To establish the official borders and boundaries of the districts of Amuru and Adjumani.
    3. To verify the implementation of a court injunction issued on 15 February 2012 at a Gulu High Court, case application No. 004 of 2004, halting eviction from the disputed land until civil suit No. 0062 of 2011 is disposed of by court.
    4. To investigate reported allegations of abuse of human rights by government agencies, namely, Police, Army and Uganda Wildlife Authority during evictions and to  recommend appropriate action to be taken by the relevant authorities. 
    5. To make recommendations on how the disputes can be resolved urgently and report back to the House. By then, it was four weeks. See annex 1 where the terms of reference are.

The committee now presents its findings and recommendations for consideration and adoption by this august House. The report is hinged on a prayer by the petitioners seeking the indulgence of Parliament to urge Government to settle the dispute using the constitutional provision of defining the boundary.

The methodology is that the committee interacted and received views from the following stakeholders as are under listed here. 

THE SPEAKER: We can read that.

MR SSEMUGABA: The committee also visited the site of the disputed border area and held several meetings with various stakeholders, officials and the community members from the affected areas of Amuru and Adjumani districts.
 
In addition, in liaison with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the committee employed a team of government surveyors to establish the boundary between Amuru and Adjumani District Local Government based on the known official boundary demarcations as enshrined in the 1962 Constitution and in accordance to Article 177(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

Background	
It should be remembered that on 8th February 2012, hon. Gilbert Olanya, MP, Kilak County, raised an issue of national concern relating to the dispute on land and the border of Amuru and Adjumani District. Consequently, on 15 February 2012, the Acholi Parliamentary Group visited the area to ascertain the facts surrounding hon. Olanya’s allegations. 

The Acholi Parliamentary Group, in its report to the House by the Vice Chairperson, hon. Lowila Oketayot, on behalf of the group, alleged that people from Adjumani, with the help of the Police, Army and Uganda Wildlife Authority, had attacked residents in Apaa and Elegu villages in Pabbo Sub-county, Amuru District. 

In addition, the Acholi Parliamentary Group alleged that:
    i. The Uganda Police, Army and Uganda Wildlife Authority Forces had mounted a roadblock on the main Amuru-Adjumani Road and several others on village paths, blocking vehicles and pedestrians from accessing their village.
    ii. People were being stopped, searched and money extorted from them. The Acholi Parliamentary Group leaders stated that they had rescued a boy whose wallet had been taken and that there was a video clip for evidence.
    iii. Several families had been forced out of their homes and were helplessly sitting at the roadside with their household property. They had been told that those who would remain in their homes would be killed by the very forces meant to protect them.
    iv. Government vehicles belonging to Uganda Wildlife Authority were ferrying people forcefully under guard and dumping them at Pabbo Sub-County headquarters’ compound without water, sanitation, housing and food. 
    v. People’s houses were being torched by wildlife rangers and the Police.
    vi. Several people had been illegally arrested and detained in dirty conditions and moved while handicapped under the command of Assistant Inspector General of Police, Mr Grace Turyagumanawe. 
    vii. School desks were being used as firewood by the Police. This was raised by the LC III Chairman of Pabbo to the Acholi Parliamentary Group and the Assistant IGP.
    viii. UPE schools and classrooms were closed and turned into an Army/Police operational base and due to that, children were not going to school. 
    ix. Water sources (boreholes) for the community had been blocked by security agencies in order to make people leave the centres. 
    x. The forces had opened live ammunition on the civilian population leading to the death of one person and disappearance of nine others who the villagers alleged were killed during the above actions and the whereabouts of their remains are not known to date.

Status of the land under dispute

There are two versions explaining the land under dispute. First, is the version as perceived by the Amuru team and the other is the version by the team from Adjumani. The committee wishes to give both versions and then give the committee’s observations regarding this particular land dispute.

The Amuru version

The committee was informed that the contested land was part of the former Kilak Controlled Hunting Area, which was gazetted as a Game Reserve under Legal Notice 364 of 1963 (later amended by Statutory Instrument No.17 of 1964). Kilak Controlled Hunting Area was later de-gazetted by the then President, Idi Amin by Statutory Instrument No. 55 of 1972. Consequently, the land was re-occupied for agriculture and other forms of livelihood by the residents. During the period 1996 to 2006, as a result of Lords’ Resistance Army insurgence in the region, residents were displaced and only returned after the conflict. 

The group also alluded to the fact that in 1998, Uganda Wildlife Authority applied to Gulu District Council, the parent district to Amuru District, for authorisation to gazette a 10KM stretch, which was to be curved out of the former Kilak Controlled Hunting Area as a wildlife dispersal area linking Murchison Falls National Park to Zoka Forest Reserve and the then newly proposed East Madi Wildlife Reserve, which was due to be created out of the former East Madi Control Hunting Area in Adjumani. 

The committee was informed that this request was not honoured by Gulu District Council. The team further alleged that the refusal to honour the application resulted into UWA making a counter application to Adjumani District Council for the same purpose. That it was upon this application that Adjumani District Council granted the application resulting in the creation of East Madi Wildlife Reserve. 

This action by Adjumani District Council was contested by the Amuru District leadership on grounds that the occupants of the area had not been consulted as required by law. In addition, it was reported that this happened at the time the people were in IDP camps. The committee was further informed that UWA’s original application to Gulu District Council was a lease of 10KM stretch of land, as you can see on Annex II; the application to Gulu for a lease offer for the 10km stretch of land. The application to Adjumani District was for a stretch of 827Km2 which was wanted for the conversion into East Madi Wildlife Reserve. 

The team argued that government was trying to re-gazette their land in order to lease it to Lake Albert Safaris Co. Ltd, owned by Mr Bruce Martine, an investor from South Africa, without consulting the residents. The team further argued that the boundary between Acholi (Amuru) and Madi (Adjumani) is at River Zoka. This, they say, was agreed in a meeting of elders, which was held way back in 1924 at Nimule.

The main purpose of the meeting

The committee was informed, the meeting was to quell the then tribal conflicts, which had claimed many lives including that of a chief from Madi called Rwot Dolli. Other claims to justify ownership of the land at Apaa Village, in Pabbo Sub-county by the residents are as follows:
    1. The existence of trees and plants – mangoes, cassia and banana plantations in the area.
    2. Graduated tax payment by residents of Lakang and Apaa to Gulu District administration.
    3. Availability of government services such as education, water and sanitation and health facilities among others which were rendered in the area under Gulu/Amuru District local governments.
    4. Population census exercises conducted in the area in the years 1980, 1990 and 2002 placed the villages of Apaa and Lakang under Labala Parish, Pabbo Sub-county in Gulu/ Amuru
    5. General elections organised under Gulu/Amuru District Local Government that used to be conducted during 1980, 1991, 1996, 2001, 2006 and 2011 in Apaa and Lakang parishes were conducted at Mr Odongo Valerino’s home which they claimed is located in the disputed area.
    6. Availability of land lease offers in the contested area having been granted by Gulu District as you can see in annex 3 - land title for late Alensio Obur. 

The Adjumani Team Version

The committee was informed that:
    1. East Madi controlled hunting area was established by a Statutory Instrument No.125 of 1964 and amended by Statutory Instrument No. 226-14 of 1964. Unlike Kilak controlled hunting area which was degazetted in 1972 under Statutory Instrument No. 55, East Madi controlled hunting area was never degazetted.
    2. East Madi controlled hunting area was originally 1,702 square kilometres from which, following a resolution of Parliament of Thursday, 2 May 2012, East Madi Wildlife Reserve was curved out with a total land area of 827 square kilometres as it can be seen in annex 4, resolution of Parliament to degazette East Madi controlled hunting area.
    3. The area (827 square kilometres of the former East Madi controlled hunting area) was on 23 September 2011 declared as East Madi Wildlife Reserve by Statutory Instrument No. 49 of 2011 cited as “Uganda Wildlife (Declaration of Wildlife Conservation Area East Madi Wildlife Reserve) Instrument, 2011. See annex 5 Statutory Instrument No. 49 of 2011.
    4. The committee was informed that the entire East Madi Wildlife Reserve stretch lies within the boundaries of Adjumani District in the newly created sub-county of Itikirwa and Okusijoni - formerly part of Ofua and Ciforo sub-counties in Adjumani District
    5. The land in question, East Madi Wildlife Reserve, formerly measuring (before it was gazetted in 1964) belonged to the Madi clans of Pajau, Eranga, Anjevu, Kiraba, Ozupi, Oyupi, Payaru, Ayerepi, Padibe and Ali. These clans were evicted by the colonial administration and relocated to Ciforo and Pekele sub-counties due to the tsetse fly infestation. The area was quarantined off then referred to as Karatini and declared a “no-go” area.
    6. The committee was informed that the boundaries for East Madi controlled hunting area were defined in the Statutory Instrument 226-14 of 1964. These boundaries are, “Commencing at the confluence of the Rive Asiya with the Albert Nile, thence following in turn to northern banks of the rivers Asiya and Ofoa to the source of the latter; thence easterly in a straight line to the top of the Arawa Hill; thence in a straight line to the junction of the Okwa and Eradzi rivers; thence along the east bank of the Eradzi River to its source; thence easterly direction in a straight line to the source of the Umuu River; thence following the north bank of the Umuu River to its confluence with Ceri River which is at this point the Madi-Acholi District boundary; thence following the Madi-Acholi District boundary in a southerly then westerly direction to the Albert Nile River; thence following the Albert Nile to the point of the commencement.” 
    7. The boundary between Adjumani and Amuru districts is shown in topographic map sheets 21/1; 21/2 and sheet 13/4 of series Y732. See annex 6 - topographical maps for Amuru and Adjumani districts which they submitted. They are there. 
    8. The committee was further informed that East Madi Wildlife Reserve is managed under a tripartite concessional arrangement which was signed in 2009 between Uganda Wildlife Authority, Adjumani District Local Government and the concessionaire Ms Lake Albert Safaris Company Limited from South Africa owned by Mr Bruce Martine. The committee was informed that due diligence was done before awarding the concession as permitted under section 14 of the Uganda Wildlife Authority Act, Cap. 200 of the laws of Uganda, 2000 and all the necessary procedures were followed. 

Uganda Wildlife Authority 

The committee was informed that Uganda Wildlife Authority had held the necessary consultation with Adjumani District administration in accordance with Cap. 200, section 17(1) of the UWA Act between 1998 and 2001, prior to the leasing of the land for East Madi Wildlife Reserve. The committee was further informed that in 2006, Government set up temporary camps (dispersal camps) in Apaa and Pabbo as the people were returning to their homes. This IDP camp was established seven kilometres inside Adjumani District and within the East Madi Wildlife Reserve. 

As a consequence, people occupied the East Madi Wildlife Reserve and began encroaching on the land. Furthermore, the opening of security roads by the government to fight the LRA facilitated movement into the area as it attracted more encroachers. Uganda Wildlife Authority also claimed that some of the encroachers were transported from far places such as Pabbo by politicians. 

The committee was informed that the conflict between UWA and the community was sparked off after the encroachers claimed that one of the tributaries of River Zoka was the boundary between Amuru and Adjumani districts. This was contrary to what Adjumani District and UWA claimed was the official boundary between the two districts. 

Uganda Wildlife Authority gave a list of some of the individuals whom they claimed illegally acquired and occupied land located within East Madi Wildlife Reserve. They include Prof. Okello Kenneth, Mr Mark (Gulu Businessman), Mr Ocaya David, Dr Abongomera and hon. Ojera Christopher (LC III Chairperson Pabbo sub-county). 

Official Boundary between Adjumani and Amuru 

According to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the common southern boundary between Adjumani and Amuru District follows what used to be the boundary between Acholi and Madi District at the time of Independence. This boundary also happens to be the boundary between Kilak (former Gulu District) and Madi counties.

The same boundary is known to separate the famous Kilak Controlled Hunting Area (in Amuru) and the East Madi Controlled Hunting area in Adjumani. This boundary is properly described in the Constitution of Uganda 1964, Vol. IX, and Chapter 32. The boundary is stated as follows: “Commencing at the point where the River Choro enters the Albert Nile; thence in a straight line in a north-easterly direction to the source of the River Ceri……” (See Annex VII Map and co-ordinates of selected points of the Amuru/Adjumani District boundary from MLHUD). I beg to lay these maps on Table.

These are some of the maps where we can find the boundary of Amuru and Adjumani formerly Acholi and Madi. 
This is a sheet of Augi; it can show the boundaries and coordinates. These maps were got from the ministry of lands and they are authentic.

This is Aweri sheet which still can show very well the boundaries and coordinates of the two districts. There is this map with a letter of the minister when the committee sat. I would like to read the letter verbatim.

“From the minister of lands Housing and urban development P.O box 7096 Kampala, Uganda on 13 December 2012.

To the chairman, committee on physical infrastructure Kampala, the map and coordinates of Amuru-Adjumani District boundary; Please receive the map and coordinates of the selected points along the Amuru-Adjumani districts boundary that you requested when we met on 11th December 2012. Gabindade Musoke, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of lands.” 

This one shows the coordinates very well as you can see because this is the disputed land. I beg to lay on Table. There are more maps and they still show the same.

These are the extra copies which show the coordinates of the boundary between Amuru and Adjumani. 

Scientific Demarcation/Establishment of the Official Boundary 

In line with the TORs, the committee liaised with the MLHUD with a view of ascertaining the actual boundary between Amuru and Adjumani districts. In August 2012, the committee dispatched the technical team of surveyors together with two observers from Parliament with coordinates scientifically obtained by following boundary descriptions in Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (for the original districts of Acholi and Madi) with instructions to carry out actual demarcation of the boundary by placing the coordinates on the ground (using mark stones).

The team was instructed to liaise with the administration of Amuru and Adjumani districts so that two technical officers namely: the District Physical Planner and Land Officer/Surveyor were assigned by each district to protect their interests and to ensure that MLHUD surveyors employ internationally acceptable standards while executing the assignment of demarcating the boundary.
 
On the 20 August 2012, as the team headed for the field exercise after interfacing with district leadership from both districts of Adjumani and Amuru and reaching a consensus that the exercise be undertaken, the two districts of Amuru and Adjumani were represented. The team was provided with security which was jointly arranged by and commended by the regional police commanders of the Northern and Arua regions.

Using the Global Position System (GPS) machines, the coordinates of one of the points on the Official boundary (as described in the Constitution), indicated that the boundary line between the two districts crosses the security road at a point beyond Apaa Village, into Amuru District, this is about 8Km from the point at which some Leaders from Amuru district claim to be the boundary. This point was very close to the boundary claimed by Adjumani Leadership. 

Unfortunately, the demarcation exercise was not concluded, after it was interrupted by Hon. Gilbert Olanya, MP for Kilak County who stormed the place with a gang of youths welding sticks. They forced the team to abandon the exercise claiming that the technical team was grabbing their land aided by the Police and the Army. These, they claimed, were known accomplices to land grabbers in the country.  

Hon. Gilbert Olanya protested and called on the youths who had remained at Apaa to come to the scene with the aim of forcing the group to proceed towards Apaa – a place where the youths had been mobilized and assembled to attack the surveying team. However, with the help of the RDC and Police, the team was able to escape the mob and went back to Amuru District headquarters under the protest of hon. Gilbert Olanya. 

This was a total deviation from the understanding which had been reached with the community of Apaa and the district leadership of the two districts. 

It should be noted that hon. Odong Kara, the Speaker for Amuru District Council attended two meetings with the surveying team prior to the actual demarcation exercise. In the scuffle that ensued, the youths got hold of pangas and axes and threatened to injure the staff on official duty on assignment by the Physical Infrastructure Committee of Parliament as per the ToRs given by the Speaker. 

The committee was perplexed by the action of the honourable Member of Parliament, even when it was on record that the Amuru District leadership had agreed to having this exercise done and had assigned one of their staff, the District Physical Planner, to participate in the exercise and to ensure that their interests were protected.  

The interruption by the hon. Gilbert Olanya and others, did not only interfere with the work of Parliament but also caused financial loss to Government resulting from destruction and theft of materials that had been procured using taxpayer’s money. The materials included: sand, cement, pick-axes, pangas, topographic maps, and GPS machines among others. 

Observations and Recommendations

The committee noted that the fact that the government was providing services under the management of Gulu and Amuru district local government is not proof of the official boundary between Amuru and Adjumani. The boundary has to be demarcated using a scientific approach. The committee noted that the said service had been arranged in the area for easy administration and delivery of services during the time of insurgency for people under IDP camps.

The committee observed that the group from Amuru led by hon. Gilbert Olanya while tracing the district boundary was using a tributary of River Zoka other than the main river where the boundary commences. This is in total deviation from what is described in the Constitution of Uganda. 

The committee further noted that the purported lease offer granted to the late Alensio Obur by the Gulu District Local Government is the only reported case brought to the attention of the committee and it should be verified to establish whether it was not issued in error. In addition, it was not easy to ascertain whether the purported land leased to the late Alensio Obur is located within East Madi Wildlife Reserve or otherwise before the proper boundary is demarcated.

The committee recommends that land ownership should always be verified and de-gazetted before it is offered to potential investors to avoid wastage of time and potential litigation with huge costs resulting from breach of agreement and court awards.  

The committee further observed that the claim by the group from Amuru led by hon. Gilbert Olanya, MP for Kilak County that UWA made a counter application to Adjumani District Council after Gulu District Council had dishonoured the same, was not true. The fact is that the application to Gulu was for a stretch of 10 kilometre passage for wildlife and it was to be curved out of the former Kilak Controlled Hunting Area de-gazetted by Statutory Instrument 55 of 1972 – in former Acholi District while UWA application to Adjumani was for a lease of 827Km2 and it was curved out of East Madi Controlled Hunting Area in Madi District. Therefore, the applications are totally different and should not be mixed up to create confusion.

The committee noted that, based on the preliminary findings with the use of the Global Positioning System machines, the readings that were taken by a technical team of surveyors from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and from both districts and from the various submissions made before the committee, East Madi Wildlife Reserve exists legally and was curved out of East Madi Controlled Hunting Area located in Adjumani District.

These findings further strengthened the earlier initiatives on which the Adjumani District Council had based its decision to gazette the East Madi Wildlife Reserve and the decision by Adjumani District Council to lease the land to an investor.

The committee recommends that Government should ensure that the official boundary for the two districts is demarcated using the official maps and boundary description that was given at the time of Independence. In addition, Government should ensure that while demarcating the boundary for East Madi Wildlife Reserve, it should be placed entirely in the former East Madi Controlled Hunting Area boundary as described in the statutory instrument that gazetted East Madi Controlled Hunting Area and not in Kilak Controlled Hunting Area.

Implementation of court injunction 

The committee confirmed that there was a standing court injunction stopping any activity to be undertaken on the contested land pending determination of court judgment on Civil Suit No.0062 of 2011 filed in the High Court of Gulu (See Annex VIII court injunction). 

The committee further noted that since civil suit No. 0062 of 2011 was still active in court at the time of compilation of the report, the case was scheduled for hearing on 20 February, 2013. This matter is subjudice. This is in line with Rule 64 of the rules of Parliament which bars any Member of Parliament from referring to any matter whose court proceedings are in the opinion of the Speaker active and whose discussion is likely to prejudice its fair determination by court.

As a result, the committee is of the view that reference and making a resolution on this matter by the House, is prejudicial to the determination of civil suit No. 0062 of 2011 and therefore should be stayed until court has pronounced itself on it.

How to resolve the disputes

The committee noted that the court is still in the process of resolving these matters. In the spirit of respect for the doctrine of separation of powers, the committee could not pronounce itself on how the disputes can be resolved urgently. In the meantime, this matter should be left with court to determine. The committee could not make any recommendation to this effect and wishes to advise that this House allows court to pronounce itself on civil suit No. 0062 of 2011.

Allegations of human rights abuse

The people of Adjumani made several allegations of human rights abuses committed against the people of Apaa Village by UWA and the security personnel during the eviction exercise. The Amuru district leadership had claimed that the evictions were characterised by looting and destruction of property, burning of houses, killing of one person and several injuries. In addition – 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow the chair to finish the report?

MR SSEMUGABA: In addition – did I misread? I am sorry. The people of Amuru made several allegations of human rights abuses committed against the people of Apaa Village by UWA and the security personnel during the eviction exercise. The Amuru district leadership had claimed that the evictions were characterised by looting and destruction of property, burning of houses, killing of one person and several injuries. 

In addition, it was alleged that at least three protestors had gone missing. 

During its meeting with the people of Apaa, the committee requested for witnesses who could testify before it and to avail names and particulars of persons who had been claimed to have disappeared but no information was availed to the committee. 

The committee further demanded for a Police report and file number under which this complaint was registered and nothing was availed to the committee. 

However, during their interface with the committee, the team from Uganda Police Force and UPDF acknowledged that during the scuffle that ensued between the youths of Apaa and the security team, one person lost his life. 

The committee was informed that due to presence and involvement of a number of forces at play, it was not easy to identify who could have killed the person. 

The committee could not ascertain and prove the allegation of a dead person as there was no grave seen by the committee during its field visit. 

In addition, the committee did not establish any demolished property and there was no evidence of human rights abuse proved then.

Involvement of Uganda Police and the UPDF

The committee was informed that the re-enforcement/involvement of security agencies was as a result of the Amuru youth vigilantes who out-numbered the UWA team and as a result, they were over-powered during the eviction exercise that had been agreed upon between the communities and UWA.  

The committee was further informed that the Uganda Police Force was involved as a result of a Cabinet decision to secure life and property and to stop encroachment into East Madi Wildlife Reserve as well as halting the ferrying of persons into the contested area. 

Consequently, the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces was called upon as a backup force to stop the confrontation between the two communities of Amuru and Adjumani.

General Observations and Recommendations 
The committee notes that despite the good intentions of creating new districts namely, to bring service nearer to the population, this has resulted into a number of unresolved land disputes due to unclear district boundaries across the country. The committee strongly recommends that Government should come up with a deliberate policy with a requirement that before any new district is created, any disputes and conflicts surrounding the boundaries should be resolved and any request for creation of new districts should be accompanied with agreed upon boundary descriptions. 

The committee commends the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for the co-operation and the technical support rendered in ensuring that boundary coordinates are scientifically obtained and documented. Madam Speaker, what remains now is to have these co-ordinates placed on ground to demarcate and mark the contested boundary between Amuru and Adjumani districts. The committee recommends that Government should ensure that this exercise is urgently undertaken without any further delay.

The committee urges all stakeholders to cooperate so that the boundary is demarcated as known and described in the Constitution of Uganda 1964, Vol. IX under Chapter 32; while the same provision is emphasised in Article 177(2) of the 1995 Constitution. It states that “Commencing at the point where the River Choro enters the Albert Nile; thence in a straight line in a north-easterly direction to the source of the River Ceri……” The boundary between Amuru and Adjumani follows a common southern boundary between Adjumani and Amuru districts, along what used to be the boundary between Acholi and Madi districts, which also happens to be the boundary between Kilak and Madi Counties. In addition, adequate sensitization to all stakeholders should be conducted before the demarcation exercise is done to avoid politicisation.

The committee was informed that survey and demarcation of district boundaries was under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Local Government. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development only comes in to provide technical back-up when required. The committee recommends that Government should provide adequate funds to the Ministry of Local Government to enable it attend to all district boundary disputes so that they are resolved once and for all. In addition, the committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government should expedite the exercise of demarcating all national boundaries to avoid possible conflicts with our neighbours.

The committee recommends that UWA earmarks adequate funds to re-establish and demarcate all its Wildlife Reserve boundaries countrywide to avoid controversies and any form of encroachment. The encroachers should be evicted from the game reserve to avoid setting precedence where other encroachers clamour for protected land. However, the government may consider seeking alternative land to resettle the occupants, where they are found. 

The committee recommends that Government should establish a comprehensive project to survey and demarcate all the district boundaries. Adequate security should be provided to the technical staff assigned to undertake the surveying and demarcation of the district boundary to avoid loss of lives and destruction of material as witnessed in the past.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee was concerned with the interference of hon. Olanya Gilbert, MP for Kilak County and hon. Odongkara, Speaker of the Amuru District Council, which led to the abortion of the technical demarcation exercise leading to wastage of taxpayers’ money. The committee noted that this behaviour tantamounts to sabotage of parliamentary work since the honourable member was fully aware that the exercise was to be undertaken as requested by the Acholi Parliamentary Group, in their report made to this House. It should be noted that hon. Odong Kara had participated in a meeting held at Amuru District headquarters and chaired by the LC V Chairperson of Amuru District Council which resolved to support this exercise.

The committee recommends that Parliament resolves to condemn in the strongest terms the conduct of hon. Olanya Gilbert, MP for Kilak County for obstructing the work of Parliament and the subsequent wastage of government resources as a result of the destruction and theft of materials which were meant for the demarcation exercise on the 20 August 2012 in Apaa. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this House adopts the report and discusses it and passes the necessary recommendations or resolutions. I beg to lay this report on Table together with the minutes. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, for the work done. It has taken a bit of time but I think it is a detailed report and as we agreed, for today, we are just receiving it. I think we shall debate it tomorrow. So, I want to adjourn the House to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow. But I remind you about the invitation from the Malaria Consortium to go for a breakfast meeting from 7.00 O’clock at Imperial Royale Hotel and then you can come back here for the afternoon work. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.46 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 22 August 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
