Wednesday, 5 August 2015 

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I hope all of us have been able to pray for today so that we can move forward with a matter that is pending before us, which is urgent and which we should do in good time.

I communicated yesterday that this Parliament will be receiving H.E Uhuru Kenyatta on Friday morning but there has been a change in that. This change is to the effect that that particular special sitting will not be on Friday but will be on Monday at 10 o’clock.

Honourable members, let us be here and receive H.E Uhuru Kenyatta to address us on various subjects and interact with us on matters of the region and also international issues. Let us be there on Monday at 10 o’clock. It has been confirmed and all the arrangements are in place. The meetings are going on to receive H.E Uhuru Kenyatta, so please be there. Thank you very much.

2.08
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I would like to raise an issue that is affecting my constituency. The Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports transfers teachers without replacement; an example is Karamye Secondary School where they transferred someone and there has been no replacement for the teacher. 

It is the same case with Kanaba Secondary School where the head teacher was transferred and there is no replacement and that is causing a lot of problems in my constituency. There are also cases where they transfer all science teachers and replace them with arts teachers. That has affected the performance of our schools.

I would like to know from the Government side if they are doing it deliberately or there is some problem which they should tell us about and we resolve.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports or is it the Ministry of Local Government that is responsible for this?

MR KWIZERA: This is a secondary school; so, it is the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports because the transfers are being done by the Commissioner for Education.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have an answer? It is not Prime Minister’s Question Time; he is not there today, so -

2.09
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kwizera for raising that very fundamental matter. 

I would like to request you to allow me return to the ministry and come with a ministerial statement highlighting the policy on transfers of teachers and also giving a record of how we have been transferring them. However, I would like to apologise in case the officers transferred teachers erroneously without replacing them. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we may not have time to receive a ministerial statement and debate it. What can you say about it briefly?

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: What I am saying, Mr Speaker, is that in case what the honourable Member of Parliament is reporting is accurate, it is not in order. A ministry transfers teachers and replaces them with teachers who can teach similar subjects. Therefore, there is no way a ministry can transfer science teachers and replace them with those teaching arts. 

We have a policy of transferring teachers, like after every three years in a school. This is done with a view to rationalising them in terms of their numbers and also the subjects that they teach. I would like to undertake to go and check out what hon. Kwizera has reported and correct the issue with the officers in the ministry. Thank you.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has a way of putting us off. About a month ago, I raised an issue of school grants which had been withdrawn from schools - the USE money - both from public schools owned by Government and the private ones. The minister promised to come back and inform us, but it is now a month and the minister has not come back. 

The issue is that some private schools, which were offering USE, have been advised to close and the Government has not given any remedy and never gave them warning. Even government schools in my constituency which used to get - for example Muterere Secondary School used to get about Shs 23 million but they received Shs 1 million for running the school and yet it is a complete government-owned school with USE students.

Therefore, Madam Minister, when you promise us all these things, you should come back and inform us, so that we can go and explain to our voters what exactly you are doing.

MS AJOK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister, if she is listening to me. I have had teachers in my district that have taken over 30 years in one school and some of those schools are run down.  At one time they had over 1,000 students but now you will be lucky to find 200 students. What is happening? 

Would it be helpless for us, leaders, to also have information on any remittances to these schools, so that we can compare and get the accurate picture of what is coming from the ministry and what the school is telling us? I have had a situation where in one of my secondary schools, those under USE and those that are not under USE are paying the same amount of fees and this is a public school. 

We need to do what UNRA tried to do, whether it is clear or not, because so much money has been remitted to these schools. While the parents are also suffering, we are having so many children from rural schools dropping out because of this USE or the school capitation grant. Thank you.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Mr Speaker, I will start with what the Leader of the Opposition has said - different figures in terms of money that is sent to schools. Occasionally, the ministries of finance, education and public service, who concurrently handle this, make mistakes. However, I would like to appeal that when there is a mistake, for instance if less money is sent to a school than the amount which is envisaged, it should be reported very quickly to the DEO and Inspector of Schools so that it is corrected. It has been corrected in some instances. An additional amount of money can be sent or the figure can be corrected if it was sent wrongly.

On the issue of school fees, there is no paying of school fees in UPE and USE schools. Government sends Shs 10,000 for all primary education children under UPE. For USE, Government sends Shs 41,000 for purely government schools and Shs 47,000 for PPP schools. Therefore, what the member is reporting – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not intend to disturb my minister. However, she is raising a very pertinent statement here that Government sends Shs 10,000 to UPE schools. I went to court to stop Government from reducing the capitation grant for children in UPE from Shs 7,000 to Shs 6,500; is she in order to mislead this House that Government is sending Shs 10,000 for the UPE children?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should be very clear about our procedure. How do you expect me to rule on factual matters like that? It is not to my knowledge. If you are rising on a point of clarification, raise a clarification so that the person can respond. If you ask me to rule on a matter which is within your knowledge and not mine, how do I rule on it? 

If it is a procedural matter or a point of order, it has to be within my knowledge. It has to be something that is either judicially noticed or something that has been discussed before in this House. Do not ask me to rule on facts, especially facts which are not about what is happening in the House but something you know and I do not know.

MR SSEWUNGU: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. However, we are the ones who passed the budget here, including that for the Ministry of Education -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not remember myself pronouncing the figure of Shs 6,000 when we were passing the votes. Please, let us be clear about how we use these procedures. You cannot rise on a point of order and start stating facts in your village which I do not know and expect me to rule on it. It is not fair to me. If you want clarification, raise it properly. If you want information, give it properly. Don’t draw the Speaker into facts which are not within his knowledge.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, you recall that last year we raised the issue of government-sponsored students against privately-sponsored students. It is coming to a year and the minister has never clarified. I raised the issue that fully sponsored students by Government are still paying more than Shs 500,000 in Kabale Nursing School. The ministry promised that they would come here and explain. It is coming to a year and they have never come. I want to be convinced -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not a point of clarification. The matter that you raised was different and has been dealt with. Let us not enlarge this matter. 

MR TANNA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence. We have a methodology that we have been using in this House. It is the agreed modus operandi that when as a Member of Parliament I have something to raise, I shall first write to the ministry seeking clarification or raise it as a written question or as an oral question. In this instance, the minister has been asked a question; wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to give her a timeframe within which to give us a comprehensive response on this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am the one who requested the minister to respond. Given the timetable I have as Speaker, I am looking at a time when we may not be able to receive a ministerial statement on this matter. That is why I asked her to give us a preliminary response so that Members can understand what is going on. That is why she did that. 

It is, of course, a normal thing that the minister comes with a ministerial statement on this subject to clarify on some policy issues and factual matters that are raised. However, for now I thought it was proper for the minister to respond to them because these matters are urgent and they are happening right now.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Mr Speaker, I would like to set the record clear on the figures for UPE. I laid a policy statement here during the budget time. Hon. Ssewungu, who sits on the Committee on Education and Sports, knows that the UPE capitation grant was raised from Shs 7,000 to Shs 10,000. It is in the policy statement. We approved it in the committee and also approved it here in Parliament.

The capitation grant for secondary education students is Shs 41,000. It is also in the policy statement, which this Parliament approved. Shs 47,000 is given for those in PPP schools. Those are the correct figures in terms of capitation grant for children. What is very clear is that I enforce a policy where there is no paying of school fees by the parents in the delivery of UPE and USE. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we close on this matter, honourable members? I will take Samia Bugwe North on another matter.

2.22
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Mr Speaker, I rise on three issues of national importance.

Firstly, last year I presented a petition on behalf of the Sugar Manufacturers Association to the effect that a Bill or a law be urgently drafted and brought here to regulate the industry. I recall that the minister of the sector then pledged to present that Bill. Actually, she told us that it was before the First Parliamentary Council and was expected to be here within three months. This year, I raised this matter and the minister again pledged to come back to this House and give us the development accordingly. 

Mr Speaker, matters of national importance are not being given the urgency they deserve. Now that the minister is here, I would like the minister to come forth and come alive on his commitments.

Secondly-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is only one.

MR MULIMBA: I just beg you kindly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, only one. 

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr David Wakikona): Thank you, brother, for bringing up the matter of sugar again. 

Mr Speaker, at that time we had written to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for certain clearance. Until today, that clearance has not been given. I request through you, Mr Speaker, that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs hurries up with that clearance so that this sugar Bill can come up as soon as is required. We had told the committee that we would hurry with it -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now moving a formal motion?

MR WAKIKONA: The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is here. Maybe he will clarify more on the speed at which that clearance is taking and when it will reach us so that we proceed with it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, any knowledge of this matter?

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, the Bill is undergoing due scrutiny. It will be finalised sooner than later. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When these matters are raised, honourable minister, you should assist the members so that they are also relevant with the issues of their people because when they raise them and nothing happens, it is as if they have not raised anything. We need to support each other on this matter. Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Recently, two Bills were sent to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, namely a government Bill and a private Member’s Bill -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what subject?

MR ANYWARACH: It was the Children (Amendment) Bill. These two Bills have been considered on their merit by the committee. I am a member of the committee and as we speak, Mr Speaker, our report is extremely ready. Would it not be procedurally right, looking at the schedule of the business in Parliament, for the minister who is present to give us his position on when our report can find its way to the business of the House, so that the urgent matters of violation of rights of our kids are really considered? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that there are still two Bills in the committee? How can a committee proceed on two Bills on the same subject?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, it was the first of its kind and it was even pronounced by the Speaker who was presiding then.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I had a discussion with the minister. Honourable minister, what did we discuss?

2.27
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, indeed two Bills were presented here. One was by a private member and the other by the minister. However, after discussion with stakeholders including you, Mr Speaker, we have now harmonised that at an appropriate moment I will be coming here to withdraw the Bill by the minister so that the private Member’s Bill can proceed and we have the children’s law in place. I hope the opportunity will come so that before we go for recess, we shall have the Children’s Bill enacted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have granted you leave to present that motion for withdrawal tomorrow afternoon. (Laughter)

MR MURULI MUKASA: Much obliged. Thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, during the debate on counties, a false statement was attributed to me by the minister and I was not given the chance to correct the record of Parliament. I seek your advice on how I can proceed to correct the record.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In what way - Can you explain?

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, the minister said that I approached and informed him that the leaders of Mitooma had withdrawn their petition. This was not true because I never approached the minister with that intention since I did not have that information.

Mr Speaker, with your permission, can I now correct the record?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, go ahead.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and members. In 2012, the Mitooma District Council passed a resolution and submitted a petition for two new counties. However, as we are all aware, Cabinet offered only one new county. Thereafter, some leaders from Mitooma came and submitted their petition to the committee and the committee made their report.

Last week, I had an opportunity to attend a meeting with the Minister of Local Government but I do not see him here, Mr Speaker. As we were waiting for others to come in, I approached the minister with an intention to argue and make a case for two new counties. The minister told me that he could not change the position of Cabinet and the certificate of financial implication as there were no resources.

Later at that meeting, the chairperson of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service, hon. Grace Freedom Kwiyucwiny, informed us who were at that meeting that she had been working with the leaders of Mitooma and that very morning they had withdrawn their petition in a telephone conversation. Following my earlier dialogue with the minister and this new information that was coming in, I then lauded the leaders of Mitooma because their fear was that they did not want to jeopardise the one county that had been proposed by Cabinet. However, I added at that meeting that this must have been done with pain because the best solution would have been two new counties since the one county proposed and passed at that time leaves one county with nine sub-counties and the new one with three sub-counties.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to correct the record that I did not tell the minister that the leaders of Mitooma had withdrawn their petition. I appreciate the minister’s motion that was passed yesterday and also the committee for their thorough report that was not debated. I hope in the near future, the current Ruhinda County will be considered for a new county because it deserves one. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My recollection is that the communication was given by the chairperson that the petition was withdrawn. At least from the House here, we heard it from the chairperson and not from any other person that it was withdrawn by the petitioners in the committee. That is how they reported. Let the record show that it was not you who made this statement to the House that this petition was withdrawn, but it was the chairperson of the committee.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural point I am raising is that in the event or circumstance that the chairperson of the committee or the minister presented a lie that the Member of Parliament from Mitooma had approached him -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think the matter has been resolved. Please, let us leave it like that. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.34
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation to the Inter-Parliamentary Union Global Conference of Young Parliamentarians that took place in Tokyo, Japan on the 27th and 28th of May 2015. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, time allowing, we will be finding opportunities to have discussions on such reports, so that we can know what happened there and we might pick one or two things from them. Thank you.

2.35
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I beg to lay on the Table a report of the delegation of the 132nd Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) Assembly held in Hanoi, Vietnam from 27th March to 1 April 2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, just like the first one, we will also find time to have discussions on those reports. Thank you. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that what was left for us to do was to take a decision. Let me be very clear about what we are required to do by the Constitution.  Article 262 says, “A Bill for an Act of Parliament to amend any provision of the Constitution, other than those referred to in Articles 260 and 261 of this Constitution, shall not be taken as passed unless it is supported at the second and third readings by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament.” 

The amendments proposed now do not fall under Articles 260 or 261 of this Constitution. That means if I put the question that the Bill be read the second time, that motion must be carried by two-thirds or more of all Members of Parliament. It cannot be less. That also means that if we go to third reading, the same requirement applies - two-thirds of all Members of Parliament voting in favour, not against it. If out of the 250 members one member votes against it, then it will still collapse. We need two-thirds votes to pass the amendment. 

Honourable members, the whips and all of us should now constitute ourselves into whips to seek out friends and colleagues who are not here so that we can all come and take this decision. If by the close of business today we are not able to raise the sufficient number to take this decision, we are going to be compelled to take extra measures to ensure that we are able to take this decision. I will be communicating the extra measures at the end of the sitting should we not be able to raise the number that is required to take this decision. As of now, we are not properly constituted to take this decision. Let us now go to the next item. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was informed that this motion was moved and the report of the committee was also presented. I was also told that it was due for debate. If that is the correct position, then this would be the proper time for us to debate this motion. 

Debate begins now. I propose the question for your debate that the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2014 be read the second time. Was it debated? I am now advised that the debates were actually completed. However, there was a matter that needed the opinion of the Attorney-General. An amendment had been proposed that required his advice. If that advice is ready to guide the House on how we proceed, this would be the proper time for the Attorney-General to give that advice.

2.41
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fredrick Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, it is a tall order. I hope I will manage to go over this. I was consulted on this matter and I also interacted with the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

I would like to say that the issue before us is a policy issue. Whichever direction you want to take, it is us to debate and see whether we want to take that direction. There are challenges of turning this pension fund into a financial institution. You have got to address issues like to whom it will be accessible for that kind of facility. All those are policy issues. 

From a purely legal technical point of view, this is going to be an Act of Parliament. The other one under which we are making reference to is also an Act of Parliament. There is no way Parliament can bind a succeeding Parliament. For as long as it is not the Constitution, any succeeding Parliament has the latitude of saying, “notwithstanding a provision in the earlier Act…” and then it provides for the current position. One Parliament cannot bind another Parliament in law. 

Therefore, I think the challenge before this House is simply a policy issue - the issue of how to handle and manage this pension fund as far as the proposal is concerned. If it so requires, you may have to engage in further consultations with some other stakeholders. I wish to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the briefing I got was that this particular issue rose from an amendment proposed by the member for Bunyole East, hon. Emmanuel Dombo. That could have been made at the time when we were at committee stage so that we handle it at that stage and solve it then. Right now, we are discussing the principles of the Bill and the motion is for second reading of the Bill. I do not know why that could stop us from taking the decision on the motion for second reading. 

After that, we could move forward to where the amendments can be proposed and those kinds of discussions can be held. They may have been improved upon or not or they may be withdrawn; I do not know. I do not see how hon. Dombo could have proposed an amendment at the Bill’s second reading. It would have been highly irregular, but I suppose he was giving notice that he was going to give an amendment at the committee stage.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Attorney-General for giving the advice which had been the popular view debated by Members when we were here in the House. 

It is true that at the time of adjournment, this matter had gone to the committee stage -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Already?

MR DOMBO: Yes, already. We had reached committee stage but there was some mix up in the document by the mover of the motion. Hon. Nandala raised a procedural issue that the document we were following was not correct and this matter was therefore deferred so that the documents could be put right. 

The second issue on which the Speaker commented was that now that we were adjourning because of the wrong documents, the Attorney-General would intervene and find out whether the provisions in the Retirement Benefits Act would prevent Members of Parliament from proceeding with an amendment that was being proposed by Members. This was because every Member who stood up to debate was in support of the proposition. 

Now that the Attorney-General has guided, Mr Speaker, I think it is appropriate for us to go to the committee stage so that the substantive amendment can be moved, for the support of this House. Honourable members, I believe that you will support the amendment. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the correct position?

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true there was an issue as to which Act we were quoting, as to whether we were quoting the 2007 Act as amended or not. I, therefore, would like to clarify to the House that it is true the Parliamentary Pension’s Act 2007 was amended in 2013 and what we are using is the amended version. What we were quoting were the clauses as amended. 

It is also not true that the numbering changes when a law is amended. You can only go into a, b, c of the same section. Therefore, what we are quoting here is the amended Act. It is also not true that we are quoting any clause that refers to the 2007 Act, which was amended in 2013. We were therefore in line with the law as amended.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were we already at committee stage of the Bill?

MS AKOL: Yes, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the decision was taken at the second reading and we were at committee stage.

MS AKOL: Yes, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then we should have gone straight there. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have political leaders from Bukhooli Central, represented by hon. Wafula Oguttu and hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. No signs are permitted in the House. (Laughter) 

In the public gallery this afternoon, we also have pupils and teachers of Lugo Church of Uganda Primary School in Mityana, represented by hon. Vincent Nyanzi and hon. Sylvia Ssinabulya Namabidde. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, in addition to what my senior colleague stated –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we go to committee stage?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I am of the view that it would not be proper to proceed with the committee stage before we carry out the consultations as we agreed when this matter was adjourned, to look at the provisions that we are supposed to address here. The reason is that the articles which we are supposed to look at are so fundamental to the amendment Bill that after consultations, we thought we needed further and thorough stakeholder consultations because those provisions relate to financial and monetary policy. 

It is true that we gave an opinion, as my senior stated here, but all the parties agreed that given the importance and the significance of this matter, we should not continue with the Bill until all the stakeholders - that is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the movers of the motion and all stakeholders - have had thorough consultations and agreed on a way forward.

I therefore beg, Mr Speaker, that we stand over the matter until we carry out the consultations as we all agreed and when we come before this House, we return with a resolute decision on what we would like to do and where we would like to go.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, we need to be guided by one Attorney-General and not two in this House. We have a senior Attorney-General who has given us guidance and now his junior has come to nullify what the senior has said. Is that coordination in Government? We do not want that, please. Honourable Deputy Attorney-General, we have been guided and if the Government is coordinating properly, we should have heard one voice from one Attorney-General, not from two. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Bill does not have only one clause. What has stalled the progress of this Bill is an amendment which was not part of the Bill. Can we proceed with the rest of the Bill?

If you want to stand over the proposed amendment, then you do it but let us finish with the Bill. Is that okay? We should go through the other amendments from the committee and if this particular amendment poses further issues that require further consultation, then we go by that. However, we cannot stop at this stage before we have even touched one clause of the Bill; that would not be acceptable to the Speaker.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL 2014

Clause 1

MR BAKKA MUGABI: Mr Chairperson, we have an amendment in clause 1(a) paragraph (iii) on the definition of the term “member”. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment on the proposed deletion of clause 2, paragraph (a) which seeks to include staff of the secretariat of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme as members of the scheme.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the amendment is as proposed by the committee. Can I put the question to that amendment in clause 1 of the Bill? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR BAKKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete clause 2, paragraph (a). The justification is that where employees are employed on contract basis as opposed to permanent and pensionable, the appropriate retirement scheme for such employees is a provident fund like the National Social Security Fund.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR BAKKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete the entire clause 3. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mover of the Bill, do you agree with the deletion of clause 3?

MS AKOL: I concede, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 3 be deleted from the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4

MR BAKKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete the entire clause 4. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Akol, deletion of clause 4 -

MS AKOL: I concede, Mr Chairman, because it is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that clause 4 be deleted from the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

MR BAKKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, we again propose to delete the entire clause. The justification is that voluntary contributions are suitable where the retirement scheme is a provident fund like the NSSF. The voluntary contribution requires an establishment of a different fund where members will have an option of either being paid their benefits in lump sum or purchasing an annuity.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, we are only trying to introduce options to members because the current contributions by members are mandatory. Therefore, we are trying to introduce voluntary contributions where it is up to a member; if a member wishes to make additional voluntary contributions to the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme, they would be free to do that. 

However, if it is the view of the House that it is not necessary –(Interjections) – Yes, it is okay because this sector is being liberalised and NSSF will also be like any other scheme and it would be better that members make voluntary contributions to their own scheme. Therefore, this clause should stand part of the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I do not know why the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme should have voluntary contributions. If you want to do voluntary contributions, there are other schemes you can go to like the banks, SACCOs. This is not necessary. This is just being overzealous. If I want to invest, I can go for fixed deposits or anything. This should be basically the members’ contributions and the Government.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The compulsory one.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I suggest that this should be deleted.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, this is in line with the Uganda Benefits Retirement Authority (UBRA) Act and I do not think it will be injurious. Since it is voluntary, this pension scheme is not only binding to the current members but it is also binding to future members. I think we should leave it open for a member to choose. It will not be binding to those who do not intend to make voluntary contributions but if a member wishes to, this is an opportunity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But how will you manage the balances or other things like that? 

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, there is already a law governing this and that is the UBRA law. As to how it will be governed, in voluntary contributions a member can contribute and also decide that at the end of the five-year term, they can receive those benefits or – (Power surge)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a very strong objection – (Laughter)

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, it is upon terms agreed between the member and the secretariat- voluntary contributions.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I would like to support the deletion and I do not support the option put forward by the chairperson of the committee.  The terms and conditions -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The chairperson is proposing deletion

MR KAKOOZA: He is saying that there is an option of -  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The chairperson is hon. Baka and he has proposed that it should be deleted.

MR KAKOOZA: I support that for the following reasons: First of all, the terms and conditions of Members of Parliament cannot be the same as for those people who want to contribute to the scheme. The UBRA Act says that anybody is free to choose where to go but you find that the Members’ contribution is mandatory - 30 per cent and 15 per cent from the members. Our terms and conditions are totally different from someone who will come from another group to join us, and he or she can default and the measures to control that will be very difficult for the scheme.

That is why I support that we delete the option that it should be voluntary. The Parliamentary Pension Scheme, as the law stands, is a contributory scheme by Government and also the members whose terms and conditions are known.

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to support the deletion and object to hon. Akol’s decision because in economics, we look at spreading risks. We do not see why we do not spread risks by saving in other areas like the Parliamentary SACCO. We do not want to dwarf other areas because we are strengthening the pension scheme. Let the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme stand alone and our saving in a voluntary manner remain in areas like banks and the Parliamentary SACCO. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MWIRU: Mr Chairman, I have interacted with many people in this country and realised that there is no saving culture in this country. The intention of such a scheme is that at a particular point in time where you do not have enough energy to work, you have a saving. However, the danger of not making this compulsory is that it will lose meaning. If it is like one’s bank account where a member operates the way he or she wants – 

I would like to support the position of the mover to give meaning to this. The culture of saving even amongst our colleagues here is a very difficult issue. I think the view of the mover is well thought out. Also, it is not that we are losing autonomy by saying “why are they tying us to one position?” It is well thought out and I invite all my colleagues to oppose the position of the chairperson and go by the position of the mover. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question for the deletion of clause 5 as proposed by the committee. The effect of that is to remove voluntary contribution by members.  I put the question that clause 5 be deleted from the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, there is a proposition in the Bill for the amendment of section 7B and this is the section where there has been a lot of debate for which I wish to propose an amendment. Should I proceed, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Proceed.

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, we do propose an amendment that section 7B in the principal Act be deleted. Section 7B in the principal Act restricts the use of scheme funds to certain areas and it deprives the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme of investment avenues where we could have been making money and we are failing to make it. 

Honourable members, I will give you an example; when I was a commissioner, Government proposed to borrow money from the pensions fund for the benefit of members’ vehicles and at that time the interest rate was 29 per cent. Everybody, including the banks, would have run to lend Government money for the benefit of the members. At that time we were investing our money and were only earning 13 per cent but because of this restrictive law, we failed to hit a deal with Government. The Secretary to the Treasury had offered and said, “Can we pick money from the Parliamentary Pension Scheme for the benefit of the members?” and at the time of the budget we put it back at 29 per cent -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the amendment you are proposing?

MR DOMBO: The amendment I propose is deletion of the restrictive section 7B and then we substitute it with the following amendment: “Notwithstanding any provisions of any other law, the retirement benefits under this Act may be loaned to members of the scheme or used as security for a loan in accordance with scheme regulations as shall be developed by the trustees.”

The effect of this will be - Mr Chairperson, there are two restrictive areas. One, section 7B restricts the use of the funds to prevent the scheme from loaning this money to the members. Two, there is a section in the Retirement Benefits Act which also prevents the scheme from doing that. However, if we deleted this section and also excluded any other section preventing members of the scheme from doing it, it would enable the members of the scheme to borrow from the fund at a good rate but also it would enable the fund to earn better interest rates.

Mr Chairman, I would like to give you an example which I laid before the House the other time. I have a section which I had compiled –(Interjections) - The Deputy Attorney-General is interrupting - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Proceed.

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, the effect of the restrictive provisions have prevented the pension fund from earning the money that it ordinarily would be earning if these funds were being invested by loaning to members of the scheme. Right in front of me here, - I laid this on the Floor the other time. This session of Parliament alone - the small contribution we had extracted - Members of Parliament and staff had borrowed about Shs 205 billion and we had paid back over Shs 320 billion. Therefore, within the session we have donated over Shs 120 billion which money our pension fund has not been able to earn. Why should we make a law that prevents our money from earning and then we open up to banks so that they keep depriving us of the interest that we are supposed to earn?

Mr Chairman, this provision is in direct contravention of the objectives of the Bill. If we amended this section - By the way, Mr Chairman, the Deputy Attorney-General talked of consultation; I have been a trustee and I am a member of the investment committee of the fund. I know that our money is earning paltry interest rates because I sit on the investment committee. We are basically donating money to the banks, contrary to what our money should be earning. Why should we restrict ourselves? 

Since 1996, there is no Member of Parliament who has failed to honour his obligations with any bank. Those who have failed have done so with these microfinances – the money lenders - who charge interest which is abominable. Why should we close an area and open it up only for banks and then the same law allows us to invest this money on the stock exchange? Pension funds internationally have collapsed because they have been investing on the stock exchange. Is this what you would like our pension fund to do? 

HON. MEMBERS: No!

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, hon. Dombo, for giving way. Recently – and I am not going to mention the bank – a bank asked me whether I have connections with the pension scheme so that they can borrow money from there to lend to us when we go seeking for loans. I think you are right; we need to support your provisions so that we borrow our own money rather than giving it out to the commercial banks. Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: If all members would agree with hon. Dombo - Some of us have taken loans from the banks. I borrowed Shs 250 million and within the last three years, I have donated Shs 125 million at an interest rate of 17 per cent, which fluctuates thus making me pay more money. I can imagine if 300 Members of Parliament donated Shs 125 million each in three years, how much would it have been if was within the pension scheme and it comes back to us to so we share that dividend.(Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have you finished, hon. Dombo?

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, I would like to repeat for the record that section 7B be deleted from the principal Act and should be substituted with the following: “Notwithstanding any provisions of any other law, the retirement benefits under this Act may be loaned to members of the scheme or used as security for a loan in accordance with the scheme regulations to be developed by the trust fund”.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, I think this is a matter that is fundamental to the survival of the pension industry in this country. As it has already been said, it is a policy issue as to whether we want to develop this industry or not.

When we start lending Members money from this scheme, this fundamentally changes the substance of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme. It can no longer – (Interjections) – Members, listen. It can no longer be a pension scheme. It will either be a financial institution of some sort or something nearer to a SACCO because this touches on the very sanctity of this pension fund.

Mr Chairman, investment managers are provided for in the URBRA Act, which also governs this scheme. An investment manager is the one supposed to invest these funds and not the trustees, as proposed by hon. Dombo. (Interjections) I need your protection, Mr Chairman.
The moment we say that members of the Board should lend this money, we are exposing this scheme to additional risks; risks of fraud by the staff or any other person in the scheme and also other risks of non-payment, which are currently –(Interjections)– I need your protection, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members! Can we have some order? 

MS AKOL: Let us listen to each other so that you know what I am talking about. There are risks of non-payment. Mr Chairman, I am aware that the SACCO to which we contribute right now has some members that have been taken to court because they do not want to pay the money they have borrowed at just 1.5 per cent per month. Now, what about the scheme lending at the rates we are talking about; above 20 per cent? This is an additional risk.

Mr Chairman, I would also like to say that as the board of trustees, we have a fiduciary responsibility or role in this scheme, which comes with obligations. Where trustees take a decision and the fund loses money, we are personally liable to the extent of any trustee’s property. I do not think that there is any trustee that is willing to take on this responsibility once we make this scheme able to lend. I do not think there will be any trustee willing to do that.
Mr Chairman, it is not true that we are lending these monies at a paltry amount of money. Hon. Dombo was a trustee and he is part of the board that approved the investment policy that we used for the investment of our funds. Therefore, the interest that we earn, as a pension scheme, is dictated by the economic environment and also what is pertaining in the investment environment within the East African region. 

Mr Chairman, once we adopt this amendment, we have to go back and review the Act and remove all the restrictive clauses. We even have to redefine or remove what we call the board of trustees or redefine the role of the board of trustees. Therefore, just amending this does not solve the problem. 

Honourable colleagues, I would like to request you or beg your indulgence that this is your money. It is meant to protect you when you are out of employment as a Member of Parliament and therefore, it is very important that we put all the necessary restrictive clauses to protect this fund, Mr Chairman. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I know that the mover of the motion is the past chairperson of the pension board of trustees. To show you that it is a very good place, she even became a member after she left the chairpersonship.

Mr Chairman, all of us know that we borrow money. When you borrow the money and they say that your interest rate will be 20 per cent per annum, the effective rate is about 29 per cent. What this means is that at the end of every month, the interest is computed and it becomes the principal on which you must pay interest. Members of Parliament have become habitually broke because they do not have access to cheap money yet they have their money in the scheme, which is being lent to them at a higher interest rate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You rose on a point of procedure, did you not?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, is it procedurally right for a person who knows that all of us here are broke –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, in such references, you should be specific to yourself because you know yourself better rather than generalising.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I know what you are saying because if you have 100 oranges and 80 are rotten, it means that the bigger sample is rotten so all of them are rotten. I know my colleagues and what they are going through and I feel sorry.

Is it procedurally right for the commissioner to come here and speak on behalf of the banks that are milking us as if we came to work for the banks and yet most of these are foreign banks, which carry away all the money? Is she procedurally right to be the person to speak on behalf of the banks?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as we debate these matters, we should not attribute blame or improper motive to Members. I think it is the decorum of this House not to do that. Hon. Akol has sponsored this Bill and she has every right to dispend it with the last blood in her veins. If the position is not acceptable to her, she has every right to do that. She can only be doing it because she has sponsored the Bill and not for any other reason. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please, let us respect each other when we make these contributions. 

I think the point being raised here is, if I got hon. Akol correctly, can we leave this money to be borrowed by members without some kind of protection? Can we leave this money in the fund to be directly accessed by members and therefore recovered from the members directly without some buffer of somebody taking responsibility for dealing with - I am just posing the question; without somebody taking the responsibility to deal with the members while that person insulates the fund from any risks?

These are questions that we need to answer properly because this matter may be very popular but we need to think about it properly also.

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, I have been a member of the pension board of trustees and we undertook a study. During debate on this matter, the board of trustees hired a consultant from South Africa to find out whether this is a good practice or whether it is being practised anywhere. The consultant wrote a report, which I laid on this Floor. It was adopted by the Pensions Trust Fund chaired by hon. Rose Akol. The consultant from South Africa, who is an actuary, said, “Yes, this is practised elsewhere.” Therefore, that is no longer an issue that is debatable.

Secondly, Mr Chairman, in the proposed amendment, the board of trustees will have to go back to develop guidelines. For instance, when we borrow money from banks, we pay for insurance so that when a Member of Parliament dies, there is an insurable cost that the insurance company pays back to the fund – (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Dombo. I would like to supplement your submission by saying that if a pension fund has a professional fund manager, as a member of the fund, I would be interested in investing my money where I can get a high return for it. In addition, with the URBRA Act, which is the overall supervisor overseeing all the schemes in the country, if you do not run the fund professionally, that scheme will be stopped. 

There is no way you can say that any scheme, which has developed its own guidelines and is run professionally runs a risk. Once it runs a risk, there is a stop gap measure whereby the URBRA Act will come and say, “Please, we have checked you and found that you are not running the scheme professionally.”

We have a professional fund manager and if he is running it contrary to the guidelines and is not professionally investing the money and getting returns, it will be checked and stopped. All over, investments are run like that. You cannot tell me that I will risk my money or the money, which is under a fund manager when the fund is supervised by the URBRA Act and that I should continue to get a lower return because I am donating money to other institutions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Dombo, can we now hear from the Attorney-General? I think you have made the point.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have been listening to the debate and I am not very comfortable with the outcome because the outcome of this debate is already predictable in the sense that there seems to be a general opinion that Shs 100 billion be made available for members to borrow. This is the general impression that I am getting.

Mr Chairman, sometimes experience can be an asset but it can also be a liability. I happen to have been the Chairperson of Uganda Development Bank, which is an investment bank and since we last discussed this matter, I have been able to source for information to find out whether it would be prudent for Parliament to make this money available for members to borrow. The good point is that it is our money, we would probably get it at as low a rate as possible and we would ensure that repayment is the first call.

The unfortunate thing is that it is not always the policy, system or guidelines that run down a fund. I would like people to feel free to look for information. What normally runs down a system is the human being that manages the system. We have very good intentions but you need to assure me and Parliament of Uganda that we are now going to convert ourselves into some kind of commercial institution to supervise those people you are talking about and the staff.

However, do we have the capacity to do it? As far as I am concerned, this pension money is supposed to be insulated, guaranteed and assured. This pension money is not only a contribution from Parliament; there are also contributions from Government. Therefore, we need to understand and read the mind of the government. Will they be willing to continue contributing to the fund, should they sense any risk? We would like that assurance. Please, I am advising you correctly. 

I started by saying that the outcome is predictable and therefore, let us go back and decide when we are sure of the other side. Can the government give us an assurance that they will continue to support this pension scheme and continue to contribute even if it is made available? (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Honourable member, the Parliamentary Pensions Fund is a contributory scheme to which, according to the law, members and Government contribute. That is guaranteed by the law. Therefore, Government is not going to abdicate its responsibility. 

Mr Chairman, I would like to hand over this statement to you so that you can read the objectives for which this fund was set up. When we prevented the area where we make more money, it was contrary to the objectives in the law. Let me read it and then hand it over to you, Mr Chairman. 

The objectives of the fund – and I read them the other time - the first one; 9(a) in the Act states, “Collect contributions of members. (b) Ensure the grant of reasonable retirement benefit to members.” That reasonable benefit comes out of the investments. Right now, members are now earning paltry sums because we are investing in the areas – Members, if I had time, I would tell you the full story of what the investment managers are doing to us. 

The law requires us to get an investment manager but the agreement is that the investment manager is paid a percentage of the total fund, not a percentage of what he has earned. Even when he makes a loss, we still pay him according to the percentage of the fund. Why should we continue donating our money in such circumstances and I continue benefitting simply because I am a trustee and earning an allowance? It is painful.

Mr Chairman, the final objective is optimise returns of investments on members, contribution. How do we optimise –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, did you rise on information? I am asking you whether you rose on a point of information or whether you are now debating again. 

MR DOMBO: No, Mr Chairman, I was on the Floor and –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you were not on the Floor. It is hon. Ogwal on the Floor.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are at Committee Stage and when the honourable Attorney-General spoke on the Floor, he gave guidance that there is no legal battle as regards what we are doing. However, at Committee Stage, I see that we have gone into debate. I am wondering whether we are proceeding rightly or whether we should deal with the clause and Members suggest amendments rather than opening up a debate.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I hope you have been sitting in this House. There is an amendment that has been proposed and it is being spoken to and debated. If you have been here then there is a little problem of -

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Chairman, if giving information is going to turn into making a substantial contribution then I would have lost my point. I would want to sound a caution – not a warning but caution. I know that Members want to borrow this money. However, I have had interface with our SACCO and they are experiencing problems with us, Members of Parliament. Banks are also experiencing problems with us. (Interjections)

Mr Chairman, I always restrain myself from making a statement on this microphone unless I have crosschecked it because I know that even my great grandchildren will read this and it would be very disgraceful for me to make a statement that I have not checked. It would be very unfortunate. 

Mr Chairman, the savings are mine –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for yielding to a point of clarification. I heard you say that the banks have problems with Parliament – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: With the Members.

DR BARYOMUNSI: With Members. To the best of my knowledge, and having worked as a commissioner of this Parliament, usually Members sign an undertaking with a bank that there is a guarantee from the Parliamentary Commission, through the accounts section and that the remittances to the banks will be deducted monthly at source before even a Member is paid. As far as I know, our accounts section has been doing this religiously and there have not been any cases of default with commercial banks.

Therefore, the clarification I am seeking from you is, where does the problem come from? As far as I know, before payment is made to Members, the accounts section offsets what is due for the banks and it is remitted and there hasn’t been any problem as far as members’ payments to the banks are concerned. We thought that this would work for the scheme also. I would like that clarification from you. I speak as a former commissioner of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, please conclude then we listen to – 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Chairman, I allowed him the platform because he is a fellow orphan; we lost our mothers at the same time. Otherwise, I would not have allowed it. (Laughter)

I just want to conclude by saying that we must be fully informed and we must be aware that there are human weaknesses. We must be aware that there is no way we are going to vaccinate the staff and the so-called trustees against any impropriety. There is no way you are going to make a law or come up with regulations that will ensure that these people do not misuse our funds.

As far as I am concerned, Mr Chairman, if there was a convergence point, I would ask the commissioners and the leadership of Parliament to find funds somewhere – I know the Chinese and Indians would be able to give us interest-free loans – (Interjections) - I am the one on the Floor and I am about to close.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please close. Order, members! Order!

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Chairman, subjecting this money to risk makes me feel very uncomfortable because I know Parliament is about to state its position on this loan and we are aware that this Shs 100 billion does not belong to the Ninth Parliament only. It belongs to members of the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments as well. Therefore, for us to agree on a matter, which is not totally ours – 

Mr Chairman, I am very uncomfortable and I would like to suggest that we give this matter more thought in order to arrive at a decision because we have vested interests in this loan. It would be very unfair to know that we have passed this law because as Members, we wanted to borrow the money. It is not fair, Mr Chairman.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman and honourable members, we must take a decision, well knowing the decision we are taking and why we are taking it. The decision we are about to take oscillates between two extremes. 

In 2011, this same Parliament enacted the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority Act. In that Act, section 68, which Members have referred to as a restriction, imposed total restrictions on retirement benefits being used to give direct or indirect loans to any person. (Interjections) Wait, that law was made by this Parliament.

However, hon. Dombo and some other Members are saying, “No, we the Members of Parliament should benefit from this fund, notwithstanding what we put in this law.” From the Attorney-General’s chambers, we have said, “Look, it is up to you. You made this law and you can change it and provide for any way you want to go.” 

However, now I am not talking as the Attorney-General but debating as a Member because as we said, this is not a legal matter but a policy one. It depends on what we, as Members of Parliament, want to do. That is why, Mr Chairman, I said that this matter required further consultations. However, since the mood is that we must decide on the matter now, let us ask ourselves, why did we, in the first place, restrict the funds in this law? (Interjections) Wait, wait. I say, we have the power to change this law and make provisions in another law differing from the provisions in this law. That is our legal advice.

Very good reasons were given by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, if you cared to listen to her. Retirement benefits have to be cushioned and protected. This practice is not only peculiar to this Parliament or to this country. World over, retirement benefits are not available for direct lending; they are not. There must be some cushion to avoid a possibility of the funds being squandered so that at old age, a beneficiary can access the money.

If we cannot adjourn for further consultations, I would like to propose a win-win situation. The win-win situation would be not to expose the entire fund but to consider just a portion of it and we ensure that there is a portion that is completely secured. 

Two, we should not go for direct borrowing, even for that portion that we decide to put out for lending but go through some other recognised institutions.

Mr Chairman, I have this proposal for amendment, assuming that you are not willing to allow –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you mean the Members? 

MR RUKUTANA: Pardon?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You said, “assuming that the Chairperson is not willing”. It is as if I am the one referred to. (Laughter)

MR RUKUTANA: The preferred option would be to stand over this particular clause so that we do thorough consultations with evidence, facts and reasons, which we cannot generate on the Floor of this House. Mr Chairman, you said that we should deal with other provisions and when we come to this one, we shall stand over it and carry out thorough consultations. That was my original understanding. 

However, it seems that the mood in the House is that we proceed and we make a decision. If that be the mood, I would like to propose a win-win situation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Proceed, honourable. 

MR RUKUTANA: The win-win situation, as I stated earlier, is not to expose the entire amount –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Make the proposal, honourable.

MR RUKUTANA: Okay. To cushion a percentage of it so that the percentage we cushion remains exactly like it was originally provided.

I would therefore propose that we substitute section 7(b) with the following. “7(b) Restriction on use of scheme funds:
    (1) We maintain that the funds of the scheme shall not be used for speculative investment;
    (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 68 of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority Act, a portion of the fund not exceeding 30 per cent may be loaned to members of the scheme through the Parliamentarians Cooperative Savings and Credit Society Limited and the Parliamentary Staff Welfare Fund.” 

In that way, we have cushioned 70 per cent of the funds and we have ensured that even the 30 per cent is not being lent directly but through some other institutions. There are good reasons as to why we need to have these funds protected and cushioned. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. There is something that Members, including the Deputy Attorney-General, are debating with limited knowledge. I would like to tell you that this law allows this money to be invested on the stock exchange. However, there is nothing more risky than the stock exchange. The things that you are hearing about in Greece and the US about the pension funds collapsing – (Interjections) - Just a moment. 

Mr Chairman, the stock exchange, which this law allows us to invest in – you can go to the stock market and buy stocks at Shs 1,000 but you cannot guarantee what the price will be tomorrow because it can change to Shs 100. Therefore, the stock exchange that this law allows –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, what do you say to the amendment?

MR DOMBO: On the amendment, I would like to propose as follows. According to guidelines, we wanted the board of trustees to sit with professionals, develop guidelines and they bring them to us. We cannot provide for guidelines here.

Secondly, we cannot refer. Although the Parliamentary SACCO has done a good job, it was not created by law. We can choose to go to the Parliamentary SACCO or create an internal vehicle, depending on what the board of trustees will set out to develop.

Mr Chairperson, I would like Members to listen to me attentively. The possibility of this fund collapsing would only be if there was a nuclear bomb that went off in Parliament when all Members have borrowed. 

First of all, every time we borrow money from banks, we pay 2 per cent as insurance and it is fully guaranteed; 100 per cent. By the way, let me give you further information on what the Parliamentary SACCO has been doing. If we lent Shs 100 billion to Members and created a loan protection fund of 2 per cent, on day one when we lend that money, we shall have Shs 2 billion as loan protection. 

Whichever Member of Parliament absconds or dies, we would just pick from that money and replace it. That is why when you go to Crane Bank, every business, be it insurance, interest or mortgage is done internally because they want to save all the money internally.

In this proposition, the investment policy allows Members to diversify the investment first of all – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us have the members for Kyankwanzi, Kakuuto and Kassanda. Briefly please.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have been dying to speak on this. It is your office that appointed me to investigate two sectors; Umeme in the energy sector and the NSSF and so I have been dying with information. What is more risky? As this Parliament was still debating the ad hoc committee report on energy, the pension managers of Parliament went and invested money in Umeme on the stock exchange. What is more risky? Is it us borrowing money internally? 

When we were investigating NSSF, we found out a lot about the stock exchange. Members, are you aware that the stock exchange in this country is owned by individuals and private entities and not public entities? All pension funds have an investment policy with clearly stipulated guidelines on how much is lent out at a time so that there are always monies in the fund to pay members.

Mr Chairman, the first day I signed to be a member of the pension fund when I came to this Ninth Parliament, I read that the objective was to save. While I save, I must earn interest. What is the interest today? You will find that many pension schemes in this country are failing to invest money even out of that small percentage that they are mandated to invest. Why? It is because of risky businesses. I will give you a scenario of NSSF. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, wind up.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, NSSF invested money in the stock exchange of Uganda Clays and they have made losses. They have to continue to bail it out. What is more feasible? Is it borrowing my own money as guaranteed by Parliament – (Interruption) 

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to allay the fears and to build the confidence of honourable members that if the pension fund opens up for an internal home-based approach, it will not be the board of trustees that will sit together with the management team to pay or to dish out money to members. We must put a lending policy and an investment policy in place. The good thing is that we are the general assembly of the pension fund and we shall take the final decision regarding the investment policy. 

I have just said that I am the Chairman of the Parliamentary SACCO and I want to allay the fears of my senior citizen Atat. We are here to solve problems and we solve problems based on the level of trustees. If we are sure that we can recover almost 100 per cent because of deductions at source then there is no better way than to access this fund to help Parliament avoid risky borrowing from outside and the various embarrassments that we go through when we borrow from money lenders. I hope that in the Tenth Parliament, it will be the policy. I look at this as the best direction.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would be the last person to go against this very popular motion but I want to raise two issues: Hon. Dombo raised very good points based on very strong moral philosophy of, “This is our money so why should we take it somewhere else? We can borrow it ourselves.” I will respond premising my argument on the same moral philosophy. 

Are we trying to segment the financial sector into two: one where we the MPs can legislate to get cheap money? Money has a price and that is the first moral point I am raising and that one – (Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is saddening to me to hear an honourable colleague and a minister saying that we are here to legislate to disadvantage other players in financial institutions or sectors well aware that we have different laws governing operations of all the financial institutions. We are also aware that we have the Office of the Attorney-General here represented by two -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, on what point did you rise?

MR ATIKU: On a point of order.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Raise it.

MR ATIKU: Is the honourable minister in order to insinuate that this Parliament is trying to legislate and particularly amend this law to favour MPs? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thought that is exactly what we are doing.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: This raises another point; the economic point. Loanable funds have a price and we know very well that whenever you manipulate prices, you affect allocative efficiency of the resource you are talking about. What will happen to taking credit if we pass this popular amendment? Assuming that we can get loans at a slightly lower rate than others, this may affect allocative efficiency of the said -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that has not been the proposal. Nobody has suggested, at least throughout the debate or even from hon. Dombo, that the rate will be lower. In fact, what they were proposing is even higher except that you are lending your own money so you have another way of gaining from it. That is what they are saying so it is not that it is less.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I withdraw my second argument but I want to remain on record on the first issue about morals. Thank you very much.

MR TANNA: I thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity. I stand here to support the motion on principle but I would like to raise two concerns. I would like this to be on record and I would like to request the mover of the amendment to concede. 

One, in the proposed amendment, it was not written that there shall be a policy as proposed by the chairperson of the fund or the trustee of the funds; a lending policy presented to us in this House to be agreed upon.

Secondly, like you said and like the honourable minister was trying to insinuate, if we go and lend at a lower rate, we may distort the financials. It is important that we benefit from the interest accrued, as understood by you, which interest we will again divide because it will be profit earned by ourselves. That, on principle, must be well documented.

At the moment, the fund is sitting in the region of between Shs 100 billion and Shs 110 billion. By the time we end this term in Parliament, we will be sitting at close to Shs 120 billion. If at all this House today allows that - by the way, I do not agree with the Deputy Attorney-General that we are exposing the fund because the fund is already exposed. You can lose in the banks where you are investing, you can lose in the stocks, you can lose in fixed deposits and in all the instruments so you are exposed.

However, Shs 120 billion is a big amount. By the time we finish the next Parliament, we will be sitting at close to Shs 350 billion in Parliamentary Pension Funds. I am talking of the next five years. I would therefore like to request hon. Dombo and honourable colleagues to concede that we accept the amendments but at 50 per cent of the funds. We should ring fence 50 per cent and create a vehicle, which will give us guidelines on how to lend that 50 per cent to ourselves because even at 50 per cent -(Interjections) - allow me to complete, please. 

At the beginning of this Parliament, Mr Chairman, each member was allowed by the banks to borrow a maximum of Shs 200 million. At 385 members, that is about Shs 75 billion, which vehicle we can create because we will be at Shs 120 billion. We will roll to Shs 150 billion and we will be able to create that own funding for ourselves.

I would therefore like to request honourable colleagues that we allow up to 50 per cent and a policy shall be created so that, that money can be lent to ourselves and our colleagues. Hon. Ssekikubo, I will take your information.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I would like to thank hon. Sanjay Tanna for giving way. I am glad that we are building consensus on this amendment. However, I am seeking clarifications as well as giving information to hon. Tanna that what is at stake now is the fact that Members of Parliament want to get maximum returns from our Pension Fund as well as the ability to access it.

The point I would like to raise is, cushioning a given amount or ring fencing can best and appropriately be handled under the investment policy. For us to sit here and we hedge a given percentage is very dangerous. That is administrative and the best way you can do it is presenting it under the investment policy, which shall be ratified and the regulation thereto. 

It is not proper now to put it under the law. It will be appropriately covered under the regulations and the investment policy. I thank you.

MR TANNA: I thank hon. Ssekikubo for that piece of information. However, honourable colleagues, what hon. Cecilia Ogwal said is that the money that is in the fund belongs to Members of Parliament who were previously in this House and will belong to some of us who may not be able to make it back to this House. Therefore, there will be other MPs who will also join the fund. 

Honourable colleagues, this fund is growing bigger. The amendment that we are debating is for today and for the future as well. Please concede on up to 50 or 60 per cent - (Interjection) I would like to request, if we can, to lock it in the law and then the other one can come in the policy. Hon. Dombo, please concede.

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, I informed this House that I have been a member of the board of trustees for some time and right now, I am a member of the investment committee. One thing that the fund has is a rigorous investment policy, which has been developed by professionals -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, what do you say about what has been said?

MR DOMBO: What I want to say is that there must be a lending policy, like my honourable colleague is saying, which must be adopted by us. I would rather that the guidelines on how much to lend and not to lend be left to the regulations because if tomorrow lending becomes lucrative and is making better investments, it may not require us to come to amend an Act. The regulations can be reviewed within the general assembly. That becomes better but there should be a portion that is reserved in order to diversify the portfolio and that can be put within the regulations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we need to take a decision on this matter. I think we have spoken long enough.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Before we take the decision we are about to take, it very important that we hear the position of Government especially on guaranteed interests because these guarantees were to the effect that this fund was protected to the extent that it is protected now.

Mr Chairman, because we are going to open up this fund to lending and there will be direct contact to this fund by the board of trustees, assuming we adopt this, and members of the secretariat, I want to say that today that you have angels there but I cannot guarantee that tomorrow, there will be angels there.

Therefore, Mr Chairman, we should have subsequent amendments to cater for this. Where there is fraud, who guarantees the fund to pay back these funds? I need to know that because currently, Government guarantees –(Interjections)– Members, listen, this is your money. Currently, Government guarantees interest whether the performance environment is such that we get eight per cent or less - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we have never made a law to guarantee fraud and as we speak, there are people who are stealing. Moreover, I am not sure whether, as we are sitting here, this same pension fund is not being stolen. Stealing does not mean directly. Some of you negotiate lower interest rates or higher interest rates and pay us lower ones. Kickbacks in the system are happening and we know this. Mr Chairman, is it in order for a member to come and tell us that we should make a law guaranteeing fraud? Is she in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, what the honourable member was saying is that there should be a mechanism that in case there is fraud, the fund is not hurt.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, as we proceed to make this amendment, I just want us to be clear that the current amendments are still okay for us to proceed with the way they are. What hon. Dombo is proposing is a new amendment so we can proceed with what is currently in the Bill and then his amendment will come after.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, he had proposed to replace clause 6, to deal with what is in clause 6 and replace it with what he is proposing. Isn’t that the substance of the amendment?

MS AKOL: For the benefit of members, I would like to read clause 6: “Amendment of section 7B of the principal Act 
Section 7B of the principal Act is amended by substituting for subsection (2), the following-
‘(2) Notwithstanding section 7 and subsection (1), a prescribed proportion of the benefits accruing to a member may be assigned and used by the member to -
(a) 	secure a mortgage or a loan for purchasing a residential house from any institution and on such terms as may be prescribed in regulations made under this Act;

(b) 	pay for medical treatment in respect of a member, or pensioner on recommendation of the Uganda Medical Board.’”

Mr Chairman, this amendment was meant to align that section with the provisions of the URBRA Act, which Parliament passed. Therefore, I believe it is still okay for us to proceed with this amendment and the one of hon. Dombo comes in as maybe a section.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal from the committee was to delete clause 6. Is it clause 7?

MS AKOL: Clause 6.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you do not have any amendment on clause 6.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, let me clarify that clause 6 seeks to align section 7B of the principal Act with section 70 of the URBRA Act to provide for early access of benefits for medical treatment. That is the basis for the clause we are looking at now.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do we have any objection on clause 6 as it stands now in the Bill? 

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, the proposition is to amend section 7B, which in effect we want to delete by my proposed amendment. We would rather deal with my proposition because the way it is provided here does not address the principles and issues that we have raised. This is clause 6 and the effect of clause 6 is the amendment of section 7B. That is why I am bringing my amendment under clause 6 but to delete section 7B and replace it with my proposition. Once we do this, the rest will just –(Interruption)

MR BAKKA: Mr Chairman, the sponsor of the Bill wanted the inclusion of this. The committee thought this is okay. However, the amendment by hon. Dombo is also fine. Therefore, we can accommodate both – to delete what is currently provided for in the Act that bars MPs from borrowing but also provide for this because it is also very important.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it clearer now, honourable members?

MR BAKKA: Let us proceed and adopt what is currently provided for in the Bill and we also adopt hon. Dombo’s proposal to delete section 7B that we wanted to remove from the principal Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If you delete section 7B, what would you be amending in (2), which is in the Bill?

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, in our amendment, 7B is on restrictions on the use of scheme funds. The amendment I have introduced seeks to give exceptions. We are trying to say, “Notwithstanding what is here.” This is to bring it in line with the URBRA Act. 

I do not know whether when we say we delete it here, we will also delete it in the URBRA Act. We are only trying to amend to conform to the URBRA Act. This Act requires that if there are any contradictions or sections that are not in tandem with the URBRA Act, we should amend these other laws. Therefore, what we are doing here is to introduce this amendment to provide for medical treatment that you can draw your money to cater for your medical treatment. You can also draw part of the funds as a mortgage or loan to acquire property.

The amendment by hon. Dombo can maybe only be part (c) of this amendment but you cannot delete it as it is being proposed. My proposal is that we proceed with the amendment in clause 6 as it is in the Bill and let hon. Dombo introduce his as part (c). (Interjections) Honourable members, this does not change anything from what you have been proposing.

What is here is providing for the fact that in case you are sick, you can access your pension funds to treat yourself. In (b) you can also be able to access this money to purchase property. I do not know whether that is bad for you as a Member of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please, I need the chairman to guide on this. Are the two proposals conflicting?

MR BAKKA: There is no conflict, Mr Chairman. The original provision in the Act was that MPs cannot borrow. As a result, the sponsor of the Bill proposed two exceptions. The first one would allow a member to borrow against their contribution where one can go to another financial institution and secure a mortgage or a loan for purchasing a residential house from any institution and on such terms as may be prescribed in the regulations. That was their innovation.

The second one is that you can access medical treatment earlier than the time when you are supposed to retire. Hon. Dombo comes in to say, “We should actually borrow”, which is acceptable. 

Therefore, the three provisions just enforce to help members. The first one is that you can secure mortgage or loan for purchasing a residential house from any institution on such terms as may be prescribed. The second one is to pay for medical treatment in respect of a member or a pensioner on recommendation of the Uganda Medical Board. The third one is to allow MPs to borrow from the fund. There is no contradiction.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am not sure whether the author of the Bill included the mortgage and medical treatment based on evidence that these are the critical needs of the Members of Parliament. What about education – if my child is being chased from school? My understanding is that if we adopt hon. Dombo’s proposal, it accommodates all the priorities for which a member is borrowing without limiting the reasons for borrowing. (Applause)

The earlier comment I had wanted to make is that it is wrong to create an impression that if you open up this fund to be borrowed by Members of Parliament you are introducing a risk. That is a wrong impression we are creating in the public.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we have passed that stage already.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Therefore, my position would be that we adopt hon. Dombo’s proposal so that the fund can lend to members to address different priorities, which the members have other than limiting it to these two areas.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable, the issue of borrowing from the bank - The proposal is that you can use it also to be as security for you to borrow from anywhere else. Would that conflict with your right to borrow directly? You know, borrowing is a choice.

MR BAKKA: Mr Chairman, additionally, you have heard that we have Shs 120 billion now. If every member borrowed Shs 200 million you have about Shs 75 billion that has already been injected. However, remember MPs can borrow up to Shs 500 million. Therefore, you can borrow Shs 200 million from the fund and use it the way you want but also you have another opportunity under (a) to borrow from another institution using your contribution as security. Therefore, you are not limited in other words. All the channels are opened - channels (a) (b) and (c).

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, we can achieve the same objective addressing hon. Dombo’s amendment by removing the clauses for purchasing residential houses from any institution and we say, “Secure a mortgage or a loan on such terms as may be prescribed in the regulations made under this Act”. That covers everything.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. That is securing but the proposal by hon. Dombo is that you should borrow directly instead of using it only as security.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, what does securing a loan mean? It means borrowing. (Interjections) Yes! Literally speaking, securing a mortgage or a loan - (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, I have been a member of the Board of Trustees and I know this specific amendment on medical treatment may be coming up because of the experience we had with the late hon. Odit. He was a pensioner who had his money in the Pension Fund. He could have accessed his money to go for medical treatment outside the country but the law then was restrictive. Actually, it became a very hard thing when we proposed bending the law; they were threatening us as trustees and finally, hon. Odit passed on.

Whereas we are talking for ourselves as Members of Parliament who are here, we know the scheme is also for members of the scheme who are not here.  I would like us to synchronise that and find out for the other members who are not here, who are pensioners and may want to access their money either in advance because of various reasons; how we would consider their interests? That is the experience we may want to put our heads together to consider without undermining my proposition, which would want us to earn better money when we lend to ourselves.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you adopt hon. Dombo’s proposal that would be for borrowing directly from the fund. My understanding of the remaining provision, secure a mortgage- The interpretation of the Attorney-General is that if you use the word “secure” it is the same as obtain or acquire but not guarantee a loan. If that is the correct interpretation, then there would be no need to enlarge it. 

However, if to “secure” means to use it as security, we would like to avoid that ambiguity by being clear. If you use the word “secure” it can mean you are using it to guarantee a loan but it can also mean the process of acquiring a loan. In that way, you are also securing a loan. That word “secure” is ambiguous. Therefore, it has double meaning and we cannot import that in the law; ambiguity is one of those things we try to avoid if we can.

Therefore, can we be clear what the purpose is? Is it to secure or guarantee you to be able to borrow money from somewhere else or it is actually to borrow the money? If it is both, then you have to make them two.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, (a) is to secure a mortgage or a loan which means that the fund can utilise part of its members’ contribution as guarantee for a mortgage.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: As security.

MS AKOL: Yes, as security for a mortgage or a loan from another institution. That is the purpose of that part. Then (b)-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If that is the understanding that in fact, it can be used as security to obtain a loan from a bank, that this would be the interpretation, then that means it cannot accommodate what hon. Dombo is proposing.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, my proposal is that for clarity, we have sections (a), (b) and then (c) for hon. Dombo because those are three different options and exceptions to the general rule, which in the law does not allow this fund for any other purpose. However, we are now giving exceptions and these are the three exceptions for which a member can utilise this fund and they are very clear. For clarity, we need to separate the three.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we need to understand this. Why would (b) be necessary? If you are now allowing borrowing under what hon. Dombo is proposing, do we have to designate the purpose for which you are borrowing? You can say it is for medical expenses. The substantial differences would only be two: the first one is to be able to borrow the money directly and secondly, to be able to use the money you have in the fund as security for you to borrow from elsewhere. Those are the only two scenarios. Are we clear on that? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, can we then make the proposal properly?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, if we take hon. Dombo’s proposal, then we do not need (a) and (b) because it covers both. It says, “Notwithstanding any provisions of any law, the retirement benefits under this Act may be loaned to members of the scheme or used as security for a loan.” In which case, both (a) and (b) are covered. You can use it as security but you can also borrow. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, let us listen to the chairperson.

MR BAKKA: Mr Chairman, if we leave out (b), which allows a member to get treatment, it will leave out the pensioners who are not Members of Parliament because the provision by hon. Dombo is targeting only sitting MPs and the provision in (a) is also different. Therefore, (b) will cater for those who are not in Parliament but want it specifically for medical treatment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we then have all the three as proposed and move on? The first one is to be able to borrow directly from the fund; the second one is to be able to use it as security to borrow from elsewhere and the third one is to obtain the money for medical treatment. Those will be the different aspects. Please, can we take a decision on this and move? 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I agree with the way you have guided the House. It actually captures the idea to address both the sitting and the former members who are now pensioners.

There is something, which I want to implore my colleagues to pay attention to. I am also coming from the perspective of a former commissioner. I also sat on the Pension Fund Board for some time. That is the proposal. It may sound unpopular. I think that we need to tag hon. Tanna’s proposal to this proposal that we are making on how much of the fund we can avail for those three purposes. 

We are confronted with two very difficult scenarios here: one is the timing. Right now as a Member of Parliament, I need all the money I can find. The moment you open it up to 100 per cent, I will borrow. (Applause) I can assure you I was in this House as a commissioner. I watched my colleagues almost grounded having put us under a lot of pressure as the Pension Board to give them money. We stood our ground here and advised them not to take that money. Today, they come back here to thank us. 

Secondly –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The Speaker has already guided. We are not passing a law for members to recklessly rush, pick money and go away. There will be a Board of Trustees and guidelines on how to get money from the fund. 

Is the honourable member in order to talk like, tomorrow, the Member of Parliament for Agago will go and pick money and go home without even signing anywhere? Is she in order to mislead the House? What are you talking about? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member for Serere, there will be guidelines. 

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I thank you that there will be guidelines. You know that on things that are extremely important, even the Constitution makes entrenched provisions and I thought this would be one entrenched provision. 

Imagine that we are making this for those of us who are here. What about our colleagues who are out there? If in the event that we borrow all the money and somehow, whatever it is - (Interruption)

MR PETER LOKERIS: I would like to thank hon. Alaso for giving way. In financial handling, there are arrangements in which you look at the risks. These risks embody the dos and don’ts.

Therefore, when they bring the guidelines, there will be protections, which will state how much you can borrow. Even in banks, there is something called the “liquidity ratio.” You do not just borrow and dry up all the coffers. Otherwise, you are not doing anything called financial prudence. You cannot dry it with frugality. In financial handling, you develop very stringent methods so that the diligence is done and people’s money is protected. (Applause)

MR RUHINDI: At one point, Mr Chairman, you guided well. You said that even if the interest rates are high, there are accrued benefits, which come to the members. When you reflect on that more seriously, that would mean that the accrued benefits are not only for those members who will have borrowed or who are eligible to borrow but for all the members past, present and future. 

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I would like to conclude. I am going to tread the path of a very unpopular motion. I would like that to be thrown. I intend to move an amendment, after all those purposes, for which we have stipulated the use of the fund, I am moving a proposal that not more than 50 per cent –(Interjections)– it is my right. You cannot say no. You have been here.

Mr Chairman, I am shocked that close to six months to end this term of Parliament, there are still members here who do not know that I have a right to move an amendment. Can you imagine? Down the road, five years, they do not understand my right to move an amendment. I have a right and, therefore, my amendment is to the effect that not more than 50 per cent of the fund will be made available for those stipulated in (a) (b) and (c). I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the amendment has been seconded. I want to put the amendment to question. I think we have debated these matters enough. The first proposal came with 30 per cent. The new proposal is not more than 50 per cent. It is not something we have not heard before. We have heard the principle. I am going to put the question on the amendment of 50 per cent -

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I wanted the members to vote with this information. We consulted with the Deputy Attorney-General who came over here. I thought members would benefit from this interaction so that we can make an informed decision. 

On the amendment, which I had proposed, he feels that we would make a proposition to say, “This will be reviewed after every five years.” That will bring comfort on how the law is being implemented so that we can debate it here. 

The proposition by hon. Alaso will come in the regulations because it will go as a study. We cannot take a decision here because it requires a study.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Surely, hon. Dombo, what has that got to do with my move to put the question on the 50 per cent? Honourable members, I will put the question to the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I will put the question to the amendment -

MR BAKKA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to second what hon. Alaso has stated; besides that, I would like to amend by saying that the loan granted should not exceed five years. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a proposition that not more than 50 per cent of the fund should be subjected to this. I will put the question to that motion.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I will now put the question to the amendment in those three areas: one, to be able to borrow from the fund; two, to be able to use your standing in the fund as security to borrow elsewhere; three, to be able to use it on medication grounds. Those are the three propositions. I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7 

MR BAKKA: Mr Chairman, before you proceed to clause 7, I would like to correct a typographic error –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we have order in the House, honourable members? Order

MR BAKKA: The section referred to, is section 7B and not section 7 if you look at the Bill: “Notwithstanding section 7B…” and not section 7. Just correct the –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that in clause 7?

MR BAKKA: That is what we have just completed. I was just correcting the typographic error.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are we on clause 7? I have already put the question. That is allowed under rules of correction. I am on clause 7; if you have an amendment on clause 7, please bring it forward.

MR BAKKA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we delete the entire clause 7. The justification is that it a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to delete clause 7. I put the question that clause 7 of the Bill be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7 deleted.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10 

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, clause 10 proposes that section 12A of the principal Act be deleted but it is to do with retirement as a consequence of another Government appointment in the main Act. I would, therefore, like to say that we retain section 12A as it is in the original Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, we delete this clause.

MS AKOL: What is in the Bill should be deleted. The amendment here is to delete what is in the main Act but to me –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing that clause 10 in the Bill be deleted?

MS AKOL: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal from the mover of the Bill is that clause 10 be deleted. I put the question –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, according to what the clause is saying, we repeal it. What it meant here is that any member who joins another department will defer his payment. Many Members of Parliament, when they come – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, are we on the same page? We are talking about clause 10 of the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. I am talking about the principal Act in clause 10 -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The principal Act is section 12A.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes; “retirement as a consequence of another Government appointment.” It means that you will defer your money but if I retire and get another appointment, assuming I were the Speaker, then I become a Vice President, I should be given my money in the scheme. If I come back, I start afresh. By deleting it, it means that if somebody gets another appointment, he should be able to get his money immediately. I would propose that we maintain it as it is in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? Is it clear now? Do we need to delete it?

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, members of this scheme are both Members of Parliament and members of staff. In the original Act, it says: “The benefits of a member who retires or ceases to be a member as a consequence of another Government appointment with a retirement scheme shall be deferred until the member retires or ceases to hold the new appointment.”

The intention of this part of the law is, one, to preserve a member’s contribution; two, to avoid incidences where a member or member of staff will retire just because there is an accumulated fund that a member is looking for and he decides to resign just to pick his money.

Honourable members, the purpose of the pension scheme is to preserve your pension until you retire. If you resign, you can get your money but if you are going to join another scheme – what we are saying here is that let your contribution be deferred. However, on retirement or appointment to another job, then you can have your money. In essence, we are trying to preserve the monies of the members.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think the mover of the Bill is a bit confused.

MS AKOL: I am not. Honourable member, I am very clear and certain in my mind and I know what I am talking about unless you are the one who is confused. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, the mover of the motion is not confused but she is mixing issues. I would like to give an example of Members of Parliament. There are those members who were working somewhere and as soon as they are elected as Members of Parliament, they went to NSSF and got their money. If they get employment and go back, you will again contribute.

This repealing means that if you, as a Member of Parliament, go away and have attained age 45 years, you get your money. If you return, you start contributing again. That is what I am saying. If we want to delete that point to allow a member who has made 45 years and has got another appointment to get his money – By the way, you are group employees; you are not on permanent employment.

If you go and get something in Dubai, you should get your money and go away. Why should you stay here? That is why I would like it to be deleted.  At the time the mover of the motion was thinking well, that is why they repealed it. Now, there is a problem that she is confusing facts, that is why she wants it retained. I propose that as she said that we repeal it, we need to repeal it so that people can get their money if they leave Parliament.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, we need to be consistent. It is to be consistent even with what happens to a Member of Parliament. If you are a Member of Parliament and your voters decide to retire you, if you are above 45 years, you will be entitled to a pension.

However, after five years, when you come back, the monthly pension you would be getting will be deferred. You will stop receiving it until you retire as a Member of Parliament because you are in active employment as a Member of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, this is just for consistency. This amendment was not mine but the drafters of the Bill inserted it because they thought it benefited them. It was not mine. It is the reason I am seeking that it should be deleted.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I would like to support the argument of Hon. Mafabi. When we brought the liberalisation Act of all schemes which we are in, we said in the law that somebody must have a free choice of where to go and where they think the scheme services provide the best interest rates.

When you do what hon. Akol is saying, you are restricting my choice that when I retire, I cannot transfer any money to any scheme I consider the best. It means that you are restricting me not to have a choice. I cannot be able to transfer money in the best scheme I want, as the amendment is saying. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal from the sponsor of the Bill is that clause 10 be deleted. The effect of deleting clause 10 is to retain section 12A in the principal act. Are we together on this? I am now going to put the question that clause 10 in the Bill be deleted. I put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 11

MR BAKKA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 11 to amend section 13 (1) by inserting the words “the year” between the words “before” and “2010.” The justification is for clarity.

 THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 12 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, agreed to.    
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR BAKKA: We propose to insert a new sub section (1)(a) immediately after section 18(1) as follows; “The members elected under sub section (1)(b), (d) and e) shall have qualification or substantial experience in the field of Finance, Accounts, Statistics , Economics, Actuarial Science or Law.

The justification is that the Board of Trustees is the engine of the scheme, which has to make fundamental decisions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question -

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: Clause 19 is dealing with amending the principal Act to deal with accounts. We recently attended the Annual General Meeting (AGM) in which the Chairperson told us that it is only the Board, which can determine meetings or special general meetings. I, therefore, would like to move an amendment that we make a provision if the law is not clear that the AGM can determine anything, which is not against the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which clause are you talking about?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 19 is dealing with the functions of the Board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. Clause 19 is about the amendment of section 24 and it has to do with statutory instruments.

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: Okay. Mr Chairman, I will move some amendments at the end after the clause.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that clause 19 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is a proposal for a new clause.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to make a proposal of a new clause. Before the new clause –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The new clause?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, the new clause, that the Annual General Meeting (AGM) which is the supreme body, can determine anything to be done as long as it is not against the law. I would like to make the clarification before I make the case that the AGM shall have powers to determine special general meetings.

The justification is that not only the Board should be the one to determine a special general meeting or members are applying but the AGM can call for a special general meeting any time it wants.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you have a draft with you? Can you read the draft?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to say that the drafting should be that the AGM shall have powers to determine – (Interruption)

MR ODONGO-OTTO: Mr Chairman, I am persuading my former Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, to abandon the submission he is making because the AGM determines the Board members. The moment you elect the Board members and then you want to do the role of the Board members, that is anarchy. I, therefore, will plead with him - these days you have problems - to abandon that thing so that we can move in order.  (Laughter)

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, just to comfort the Secretary General of FDC party, hon. Nandal-Mafabi, in our regulations, regulation 27 provides for special general meetings of the scheme: “1. The Board may whenever, it deems fit, convene a special general meeting of the scheme.
2. The Board shall on the requisition in writing of at least one third of all members, convene a special general meeting of the scheme.”

Therefore, whenever, any member wishes to have a special general meeting, it is required by our rules of procedure and that is the regulation that at least one third of all the members should sign and forward it to the CEO. This is already provided for.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, I take it that hon. Nandala- Mafabi has dropped the proposed amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you do not know, we have passed even guaranteeing the tenure of this Board up to July 2017 and this is very dangerous.

Under clause 20, we have passed that all these terms of this current Board will end on the 31 July 2017 and yet each of us knows that the Board members can be elected by the AGM. This is very dangerous. I never knew that this Board wanted to make sure that their term is fixed in the law. Mr Chairman, at an appropriate term I am going to recommit that we delete it, because we cannot prescribe for the current Board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I take it that you have dropped the other amendment. So, can we go to the Title?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I have dropped it but, Mr Chairman, just some simple clarification I want –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. Let us go to the title, please.

MR BAKKA: The committee proposes creation of a new section 21A after section 21 of the principal Act and the headnote will be “Bi-annual reports to Parliament”.

The details are that clause (1) of that section will be: “The Board of Trustees shall at least once in every six months submit a report to Parliament on the performance of its functions.
(2) Parliament shall consider the report submitted under subsection (1).”
The justification is to involve Parliament in the monitoring of the scheme, to ensure that members achieve financial security at retirement.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to insert a new clause to the Bill in the terms proposed by the chairperson. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New section 21A introduced.

Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.08
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.09
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, the House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2014” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.09
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

5.10
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, we have just passed clause 20, where we were inserting a new clause and we wanted to say that, "The current term of members of the Board elected under this shall end on 31 day of July, 2017.” I would like to ask for recommital - why should we make a law to safeguard a few individuals who can die; there is going to be an election next year in February they might not be here and we are passing that for them even if you have lost being a Member of Parliament, you are still our Board member according to the law. Yet one could even be a thug; this law has protected them.

Mr Speaker, I would like to recommit that we delete this situation for making a law safeguarding people’s jobs who may not be in those offices.

5.10
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, I need to clarify this to hon. Nandala-Mafabi. With all boards, there is always a provision for continuity. Continuity is about staggering the term ends for members to the extent that, not all the term of all the members should expire at the same time.

The provision here is for members of the Board elected under section 18 (1), (d) and (e), and these are: “18 (1) d) One member of staff elected by the members of staff of the Parliamentary Commission.

(e) The two pensioners elected by the pensioners, one of whom is a former staff of the Parliamentary Commission and the other a former Member of Parliament.”

This is just to provide for staggering and institutional memory of the Board; it is not the whole board.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, is that clearer?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have the principal law. It says, “18 (d) Two members of Parliament elected by Members of Parliament.” My sister is reading to justify one of the member of staff, which is not a problem but we are interested in Members of Parliament. What does it cost us to change at that time when their term has ended? It does not carry sense; we must renew – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: We are going to have new MPs before June or July next year, why should you elect two MPs that even if you have a new Parliament, you cannot remove them, even when they are former MPs? The essence of electing two MPs is to represent the interest of the Members of Parliament. When the term of Parliament expires, they should also expire.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, even if they are retired Members of Parliament, I am sure by next year there will be more Members of Parliament who will retire here. They should be those who should benefit other than saying we make sure we tie one to stay there permanently until 2017. I do not think this is fair.

Mr Speaker, we should delete this. I know even the mover might be one of those to retire we can bring her as our representative for retirees. I am begging that we recommit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for recommital.

MS AKOL: Before that, Mr Speaker. Just to clarify to members. Honourable members, this is about the current pensioners: the two pensioners who represent staff and former Members of Parliament. Our term as current members of the Board of Trustees as Members of Parliament is surely going to expire when the term of this expires. We are talking about the former who are there by virtue of the fact that they are not even serving anyway as Members of Parliament and one staff.

Let us have reason in this matter, that what we are seeking for is just about continuity and institutional memory –(Interruption)

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much, hon. Akol, for giving way. Mr Speaker, it takes time to train someone to go to the standard of understanding pension issues. As a former Board of Trustee who went through some form of training to understand what actuarial studies means, it was not an easy thing. Therefore, for the purpose of continuity, we are talking about members of staff and former Members of Parliament.

I agree with the position of hon. Akol. It would not cost us much. I am of the view that the House adopts the position being forwarded by hon. Akol because we are not talking about - when we end the Ninth Parliament, we will not be having you serving in that position because your term will have ended. You are serving as the member of the Board of Trustees by virtue of being a Member of Parliament. Once you lose that seat, you automatically cease being a member of the Board of Trustees and we shall elect new ones; there will not be any vacuum anywhere. Therefore, I think the position being muted by hon. Akol is acceptable to all of us.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, section 18 of the law that this clause we have just passed proposes to amend, 18 (1) (d) and (e) – 18(d) is “One member of staff elected by the members of staff of the Parliamentary Commission” and (e) “two pensioners elected by the pensioners, one of whom is a former staff of the Parliamentary Commission and the other a former Member of Parliament.” I do not see where the honourable member finds the provision of current Members of Parliament in this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you have a point. I had the two laws: I had the old one and the new one. Now I have got the new because if you look at the old one, (d) “Members of Parliament to elect….” In this one, you are right. However, what I am trying to say here is that even this, there is no reason to say one member of staff the staff are here; the pensioners, people will become pensioners tomorrow, those who retire, why do you depress? This is for good governance. 

Therefore, the experience you are talking about, if we are going by experience then those who were one term Members of Parliament should be allowed another one term to make two because they have learnt the first five years; they should be allowed the next five years. However, many of them will be retired tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue is, should we re-commit this matter? Can I put the question to the motion for re-committal? I put the question for the re-committal of clause 20 of the Bill, which we have just passed?

(Question put and negatived.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

5.18
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2014” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2014”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations honourable member, chairperson and the committee and members for processing this through. (Applause)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that we had adjourned this matter for one reason only to take a vote and as I had guided, this vote has to be supported by two thirds of all Members of Parliament. That means 250 Members of Parliament have to vote in favour of the motion for second reading; that is when it can pass. I am going to suspend the House for 10 minutes and ring the bell. Do we have quorum?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, when you suspended for five minutes, we lost. Therefore, learning from what happened yesterday, I would like to suggest that probably we first take roll call. When members who are in their offices watch on their screens that you are taking the roll call, they will come in as the rest of us stay inside. (Applause) I beg to request, Mr Speaker, that we take a roll call right now and if we do not have the quorum, then we will know the way forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. The purpose of the roll call we are going to take is not for a vote as of now. We are voting but we just want to ascertain members who are in the House and members who have registered present who are here. Please, let us do the roll call.

Roll Call

    1. Hon. Alex Aadroa Onzima -
    2. Hon.Jesca Ababiku – present
    3. Hon.Christine Acayo –
    4. Hon. Joy Ruth Achieng –
    5. Hon.Remigio Achia –
    6. Hon.Terence Achia -
    7. Hon.Sarah Opendi Achieng – 
    8. Hon.Manoah Achile Mila – present
    9. Hon.Christopher Achile – 
    10. Hon.Lilly Adong –
    11. Hon.Gabriel Ajedra –
    12. Hon.Lucy Ajok –
    13. Hon.Judith Franca Akello – present
    14. Hon.Lucy Akello -
    15. Hon.Rose Lilly Akello- present
    16. Hon. James Akena – 
    17. Hon. Rose Akol – present
    18. Hon. Maxwell Akora –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as yesterday, we were ordering free sitting. Please, sit on either side because this vote will only require us to do roll and tally. Please, I am using Rule 9 to allow members sit freely so that we can accommodate everybody; take a seat anywhere. 
                          
(Roll call continued.)

    19. Hon. Alice Alaso 		- Present
    20. Hon. Margaret Aleper 		– Present
    21. Hon. Simon Peter  Aleper 		- 
    22. Hon. Tom Alero Aza 		- Present
    23. Hon. Proscovia Alengot 		- 
    24. Hon. Moses Ali 		- Present
    25. Hon. Andrew Allen 		-
    26. Hon. Alum Santa Ogwang 		-
    27. Hon. Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo		- present
    28. Hon. Caroline Amali Okao 		- Present
    29. Hon. Amama Mbabazi 		-
    30. Hon. Susan Amero 		-
    31. Hon. Monicah Amoding 		- Present
    32. Hon. Cyrus Amodoi 		- Present
    33. Hon. Judith Amoit 		-
    34. Hon. Betty Amongi 		- Present
    35. Hon. Christine Amongin Aporu 	- Present
    36. Hon. Jacqueline Amongin 		-
    37. Hon. Rebecca Amuge Otengo 		- Present
    38. Hon. Patrick Amuriat 		-
    39. Hon. Maj. Gen. Charles Angina 	- 
    40. Hon. Evelyn Anite 		- Present 
    41. Hon. Joshua Anywarach 		- Present
    42. Hon. Betty Aol Ocan 		-
    43. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara 		-
    44. Hon. Aronda Nyakairima 		- Present
    45. Hon. Hellen Asamo 		- Present
    46. Hon. Wilson Mpongo 		- Present
    47. Hon. Bernard Atiku 		- Present
    48. Hon. Beatrice Anywar 		- Present
    49. Hon. Joy Atim Ongom 		- Present
    50. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal 		- Present
    51. Hon. Juliana Auma 		- Present
    52. Hon. Anne Auru 		- Present
    53. Hon. Ahmed Awongo		- 
    54. Hon. Ayena Krispus 		-
    55. Hon. Michael Ayepa 		- Present
    56. Hon. Tonny Ayoo 		-
    57. Hon. Baba Diri Margaret 		-
    58. Hon. Babirye Veronica 		-
    59. Hon. Fred Badda 		-
    60. Hon. Vincent Bagiire 		- Present
    61. Hon. John Bagoole 		- Present
    62. Hon. David Bahati 		- Present
    63. Hon. Martin Bahinduka 		- Present
    64. Hon. Stephen Baka Mugabi 		- Present
    65. Hon. Charles Bakabulindi 		–
    66. Hon. Mukasa Bakaluba 		- 
    67. Hon. Mabel Bakeine 		-
    68. Hon. Betty Bakireke Nambooze 	- 
    69. Hon. Christine Bako 		– 
    70. Hon. Edward Baliddawa 		- 
    71. Hon. Sulaiman Balyejjusa 		-
    72. Hon. Moses Balyeku 		-
    73. Hon. Anifa Kawooya 		- Present
    74. Hon. Henry Banyenzaki 		-
    75. Hon. Beatrice Rusaniya 		- Present
    76. Hon. Andrew Baryayanga 		-
    77. Hon. Chris Baryomunsi 		- Present
    78. Hon. Michael Bayigga Lulume 	- Present
    79. Hon. Syda Bbumba Namirembe 	- Present
    80. Hon. Ignatius Besisira 		- Present
    81. Hon. Julius Bigirwa 		-
    82. Hon. Jalia Bintu 		- Present
    83. Hon. Stephen Mukitale 		-
    84. Hon. Ephraim Biraaro 		- Present
    85. Hon. Mathias Nsubuga 		-
    86. Hon. Medard Bitekyerezo 		- Present
    87. Hon. Emma Boona 		-
    88. Hon. Tress Bucyanayandi 		- 
    89. Hon. Prof. Gilbert Bukenya 		- 
    90. Hon. Businge Rusoke 		- Present
    91. Hon. Mary Karooro Okurut 		-
    92. Hon. Bwambale Bihande 		- Present
    93. Hon. John Byabagambi 		– Present 
    94. Hon. Byamukama Nulu 		– Present 
    95. Hon. Abraham Byandala 		– 	
    96. Hon. Byarugaba Grace Isingoma – 	 
    97. Hon. Benjamin Cadet 		– Present 
    98. Hon. Stephen Chebrot		–  
    99. Hon. Lydia Chekwel 		– Present 
    100. Hon. Abdi Chemwaswet 		– 	 
    101. Hon. Phyllis Chemutai		– Present 
    102. Hon. Daudi Migereko 		– 
    103. Hon. Emmanuel Dombo 		– Present 
    104. Hon. Dr Martin Drito 		– Present 
    105. Hon. Fred Ebil 		– Present 
    106. Hon. Ecweru Musa 		– 	 
    107. Hon. Egunyu Nantume 		– Present 
    108. Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya 		– Present 
    109. Hon. George Ekuma 		– Present 
    110. Hon. Ibi Florence Ekwau		– Present 
    111. Hon. Sam Engola 		– 
    112. Hon. Dr Francis Epetait 		– 	 
    113. Hon. Eriaku Peter Emmanuel 		– 
    114. Hon. Hussan Fungaroo Kaps 		– 
    115. Hon. Yahaya Gudoi 		– Present 
    116. Hon. Hood Katuramu 		– Present 
    117. Hon. Iriama Margaret 		– Present 
    118. Hon. Rose Iriama 		– 	 
    119. Hon. Iddi Isabirye 		– Present 
    120. Hon. Jacan Omach 		– 	 
    121. Hon. Evelyn Kabuule 		– Present 
    122. Hon. Tophace Kaahwa 		– Present 
    123. Hon. Olivia Kabaale Kwagala 	– Present 
    124. Hon. Flavia Kabahenda 		– 	 
    125. Hon. Kabajo James Kyewalabye – Present 
    126. Hon. Kabakumba Masiko 		– 
    127. Hon. Naome Kabasharira 		– 
    128. Hon. Kaddumukasa Ssozi 		– 
    129. Hon. Michael Kafabusa Werikhe– Present 
    130. Hon. Kafeero Sekitoleko 		– Present 
    131. Hon. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire – 		 
    132. Hon. Hellen Kahunde 		– 	 
    133. Hon. Aston Kajara 		– Present 
    134. Hon. Henry Kajura 		– Present 
    135. Hon. Kakoba Onyango 		– 	 
    136. Hon. James Kakooza 		– Present 
    137. Hon. Kamanda Bataringaya 		– Present 
    138. Hon. John Kamara 		–  
    139. Hon. Jovah Kamateeka 		– Present 
    140. Hon. Saleh Kamba 		– 	
    141. Hon. Stephen Kangwaje 		– 	
    142. Hon. Gerald Karuhanga 		– 	
    143. Hon. Elizabeth Karungi 		– 	
    144. Hon. Matia Kasaija 		– Present 
    145. Hon. Stephen Kasaija 		–		
    146. Hon. Mathias Kasamba 		– Present 
    147. Hon. Fred Kase-Mubanda 		– 		 
    148. Hon. Moses Kasibante 		– 		
    149. Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki 		– Present 
    150. Hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba 	– 		 
    151. Hon. Robert Kasule 		– 		
    152. Hon. Kataha Janet Museveni 		– 	
    153. Hon. Kataike Sarah Ndoboli 		– Present 
    154. Hon. Col. (Rtd) Phinehas Katirima 	– 		
    155. Hon. Katoto Hatwib 		– Present 
    156. Hon. Gen. Katumba Wamala 		– Present 
    157. Hon. Abdu Katuntu 		– 		 
    158. Hon. Oliver Katwesigye 		– Present 
    159. Hon. Yorokamu Katwiremu 		– Present
    160. Hon. Kawuma Mohamed 		- 		
    161. Hon. Kayagi Sarah Netalisire 		- 		
    162. Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi 		- 		
    163. Hon. Justine Khainza 		- Present
    164. Hon. Edward Khiddu Makubuya - 		
    165. Hon. Margaret Kiboijana 		– Present 
    166. Hon. Ronald Kibuule 		- Present
    167. Hon. Ernest Kiiza Apuuli   		- Present
    168. Hon. James Kiiza Rwebembera 	- 		
    169. Hon. Winifred Kiiza 		- Present
    170. Hon. Kikungwe Issa 		- 	
    171. Hon. Florence Kintu 		­- 		
    172. Hon. Kitatta Aboud 		- 	
    173. Hon. Godfrey Kiwanda Ssubi 		– Present
    174. Hon.  Asuman Kiyingi 		- Present
    175. Hon.  Kenneth Kiyingi 		- Present
    176. Hon.  Deogratious Kiyingi		-   
    177. Hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga		- 
    178. Hon. Margret Komuhangi 		- Present
    179. Hon. Peace Kusasira 		- 
    180. Hon. Sam Kutesa 		- 
    181. Hon. William Kwemara 		- Present
    182. Hon. Freedom Kwiyucwiny 		- Present
    183. Hon. Eddie Kwizera 		- Present
    184. Hon. Amelia Kyambadde 		- Present
    185. Hon. Hussein Kyanjo 		- Present
    186. Hon. Harun Kyeyune 		- Present
    187. Hon. Xavier Kyooma		- 
    188. Hon. Capt. Suzan Lakot		- 
    189. Hon. Sarah Lanyero		- Present
    190. Hon. Ruth Lematia 		- Present
    191. Hon.  Peter Lokeris		- Present
    192. Hon.  Samson Lokeris		- Present
    193. Hon.  John Baptist Lokii 		- Present
    194. Hon.  Peter Lokii 		- Present
    195. Hon. Rev. Fr. Lokodo 		- Present
    196. Hon. Micah Lolem		- 
    197. Hon. Oketayot Lowila 		- Present
    198. Hon.  Godfrey Lubega		- Present
    199. Hon.  Lubega Sseggona		-
    200. Hon. Kenneth Lubogo		- Present
    201. Hon. Amos Lugoloobi		- Present
    202. Hon. Tim Lwanga 		- 
    203. Hon. Dr Sam Lyomoki 		- Present
    204. Hon.  Sulaiman Madada 		- 
    205. Hon. Julius Maganda 		- Present
    206. Hon. Rapeal Magyezi		- 
    207. Hon. Margret Makhoha 		– 
    208. Hon. Amos Mandera 		- 
    209. Hon. Joseph Matte 		- Present
    210. Hon. Stephen Mayende 		-
    211. Hon. Michael Mawanda 		- Present
    212. Hon. Amama Mbabazi 		- Present
    213. Hon. Fredrrick Mbagadhi 		- 
    214. Hon. James Mbahimba 			- Present
    215. Hon. Kezekia Mbogo 			- Present
    216. Hon. Robert Migadde 			- Present
    217. Hon. Lt. Col. Mpabwa 			- 
    218. Hon. Beatrice Mpairwe 			- 
    219. Hon. Dorothy Mpiima 			- Present
    220. Hon. Mathias Mpuuga 			- Present
    221. Hon. John Bosco Mubito 			- Present
    222. Hon. Baka Mugabi 			- 
    223. Hon.  Mugema			- Present
    224. Hon. Roland Mugume                		- 
    225. Hon. David Muhumuza 			- Present
    226. Hon. Maj. Gen. (Rtd.)Muhwezi 		- 	
    227. Hon. Jennifer Mujungu 			- Present
    228. Hon. Kyamadidi Mujuni 			- Present
    229. Hon.  Muruuli Mukasa 			- Present
    230. Hon. Michael Mukula			-	
    231. Hon. John Mulimba 			-
    232. Hon. Patrick Mulindwa 			-  Present
    233. Hon. Simon Mulongo 			- 
    234. Hon. Irene Muloni 			-
    235. Hon. Henry Musasizi 			-
    236. Hon. Yona Musinguzi 			-
    237. Hon. Maria Mutagamba 			-
    238. Hon. Joseph Balikudembe 			- 
    239. Hon. Dr Mutono 			- 
    240. Hon. Rose Mutonyi 			- Present
    241. Hon. Florence Mutyabule 			- Present
    242. Hon.  Muwanga Kivumbi 			- 
    243. Hon. Milton Muwuma 			- Present
    244. Hon. Dr John Muyingo 			- Present
    245. Hon. Sarah Mwebaza 			- 
    246. Hon. Adolf Mwesige 			- 
    247. Hon. Col (Rtd.) Mwesigye			- Present
    248. Hon. Paul Mwiru 			- Present
    249. Hon. Robbinah Nabbanja 			- Present
    250. Hon. Agnes Nabirye 			- Present
    251. Hon. Flavia Nabugere 			- Present
    252. Hon. Brenda Nabukenya 			- Present
    253. Hon. Teopista Nabulya 			- Present
    254. Hon. Sempala Naggayi 			-
    255. Hon. Rosemary Najjemba 			-
    256. Hon. Patrick Nakabale 			- Present
    257. Hon. Patrick Nakabale			- Present
    258. Hon. Nakabira Getrude Lubega 		- present
    259. Hon. Nakadama Lukia Isanga			-
    260. Hon. Nakato Katusiime 			-			
    261. Hon. Sarah Tunde Nakawunde		-
    262. Hon. Connie Galiwango 			- Present
    263. Hon. Mariam Nalubega			- Present
    264. Hon. Mary Nalubega			-
    265. Hon. Susan Namaganda 			- Present
    266. Hon. Grace Namara 			- Present
    267. Hon. Florence Namayanja 			- Present
    268. Hon. Rose Namayanja Nsereko 		- Present
    269. Hon. Stella Namoe 			- Present
    270. Hon. Benny Namugwanya 			- Present
    271. Hon. Nathan Nandala Mafabi 			- Present
    272. Hon. Anne Maria Nankabirwa			- Present
    273. Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa 			- Present
    274. Hon. Rosemary Nansubuga 			- Present
    275. Hon. Idah Nantaba			- 
    276. Hon. Caroline Nanyondo Birungi	- Present
    277. Hon. John Nasasira			- 
    278. Hon. Rosemary Nauwat 			-
    279. Hon. Alex Ndezi 			-
    280. Hon. Florence Nebanda			-
    281. Hon. Babrah Oundo Nekesa		 	- Present
    282. Hon. Ronah Ninsiima  			- Present
    283. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba 			-
    284. Hon. William Nokrach 			- Present
    285. Hon. Patrick Nsanja			- 
    286. Hon. Muhammad Nsereko 			- Present
    287. Hon. Dorothy Nseija			- 
    288. Hon. Harriet Mutabazi 			- Present
    289. Hon. Annette Nakecho 			- Present
    290. Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro		- Present
    291. Hon. Vincent Nyazi 			- Present
    292. Hon. Prof. Nyiira Mijumbi 			- Present
    293. Hon. Sarah Nyirabahitsi 			- 
    294. Hon. Peter Nyombi			-
    295. Hon. Nyombi Tembo 			- Present
    296. Hon. William Nzoghu 			- Present
    297. Hon. Jacob Oboth 			- Present
    298. Hon. Denis Hamson Obua			- Present
    299. Hon. Obua Ogwal  			-
    300. Hon. Angeline Ossege			-
    301. Hon. Sam Otada 
    302. Hon. Innocent Oula 			- Present
    303. Hon. Maj.Jim Oweyesigire 			- Present
    304. Hon. Fredrick Ruhindi 			- Present
    305. Hon. Alex Ruhunda 			-
    306. Hon. Rukutana Mwesigwa 			- Present
    307. Hon. Maj. (Rtd)Bright Rwamirama 	- Present
    308. Hon. Jack Sabiti			-
    309. Hon. Nelson Sabila			-
    310. Hon. Saphia Nalule  			-
    311. Hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba 			-
    312. Hon. Isaac Ssejoba 			-
    313. Hon. Ssempala Mpuga  			-
    314. Hon. Ssezi Prisca Mbaguta 			- Present
    315. Hon. Baker Ssali 			- present 
    316. Hon. Isias Ssagaga 			- Present
    317. Hon. Latif Ssebagala 			- present 
    318. Hon. Ssekandi Kiwanuka 			- Present 
    319. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo			- Present
    320. Hon. Anthony Ssemuli 			- 
    321. Hon. Vincent Ssempijja 			- present 
    322. Hon. Samuel Ssemugaba 			- Present
    323. Hon. Ibrahim Ssemijju			-
    324. Hon. Joseph Ssewungu 			- present 
    325. Hon. Steven Ochola 			-
    326. Hon. David Ochwa			- Present 
    327. Hon. Fox Odoi 			- Present 
    328. Hon. Odoo Tayebwa 			-
    329. Hon. Samuel Odonga Otto			- Present 
    330. Hon. Phillip Oguttu Wafula 			- Present 
    331. Hon. Rev.Jacinta Ogwal 			-
    332. Hon. Peter Ogwang			- Present
    333. Hon. Anthony Okello			- Present
    334. Hon. Maj.Gen. Julius Oketta 			- Present
    335. Hon. Okeyoh Peter 			-
    336. Hon. John Okot 			-				
    337. Hon. Felix Okot-Ogong 			- present 
    338. Hon. Reagan Okumu 			- present
    339. Hon. Sam Okunzi 			- present
    340. Hon. Elijah Okupa 			-
    341. Hon.  Gilbert Olanya 			- present
    342. Hon. Hudda Oleru 			- present
    343. Hon. Geoffrey Omara 			- present
    344. Hon. Peter Omoro 			-
    345. Hon. Dr Keneth Omona  			-
    346. Hon. Stanley Omonya 			- present
    347. Hon. Onek Hilary 			-
    348. Hon. Kenneth Ongaro Obote 			-
    349. Hon. Jacob Opolot 			- present
    350. Hon. Henry Oryem Okello 			- present
    351. Hon. John Ssimbwa 			-
    352. Hon. Sylvia Ssenabulya Namabbide 	- present
    353. Hon. Kevinah Taaka  			-
    354. Hon. Tanna Sanjay 			-
    355. Hon. Stephen Tashobya 			-
    356. Hon. Tete Chelangat 			- present
    357. Hon. Linda Tibigamba 			- present
    358. Hon. Barnabas Tinkasimire  			-
    359. Hon. Richard Todwong 			-
    360. Hon. Frank Tumwebaze  			-
    361. Hon. Dr Elioda Tumwesigye 			– present
    362. Hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine 			-
    363. Hon. Mary Paula Turyahikayo			- present
    364. Hon. Dr Twa-Twa Mutwalante		- present
    365. Hon. Femiar Wadada  			-
    366. Hon Kassiano Wadri Ezati 			– present
    367. Hon. Waira Kiwalabye Majegere 	-
    368. Hon. David Wakikona 			– present
    369. Hon. Wamukuyu Mudimi 			– present
    370. Hon. Wamanga Wamai			- present
    371. Hon. Jacob Wangolo			– present
    372. Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma  			-
    373. Hon. Joy Ruth Ocheing 			- present
    374. Hon. Fred Bada 			– present			
    375. Hon. Judith Mary Amoit 			- present
    376. Hon. Jacan Omach			- present		
    377. Hon. Suleiman Balyejusa			- present
    378. Hon. Daudi Migereko			- present
    379. Hon. John Ken-lukyamuzi			- present
    380. Hon. Irene Nafuna Muloni			- present
    381. Hon. Sam Engola			- present
    382. Hon. Maria Mutagamba 			– present
    383. Hon. John Amos Okot			– present
    384. Hon. Grace Byarugaba 			- present
    385. Hon. Christen Acayo 			- present
    386. Hon. Sam Kutesa			- present
    387. Hon. Lucy Ajok 			– present
    388. Hon. Veronica Babirye 			– present
    389. Hon. Tanna Sanjay			- present
    390. Hon. Stephen Kagwera 			– present
    391. Hon. Freda Mubanda 			– present
    392. Hon. Frank Tumwebaze 			– present

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have taken the roll call of Members present and we have a total of 219.

MR MWESIGWA-RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I propose that we do a headcount. I cannot believe that we are only 219. If you authorise me, I could do a physical headcount. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, can I have a confirmation? Can we do the headcount quickly? I can see honourable members coming in. I am going to ask our honourable members who do not have a vote in the House to do for us a quick headcount. Do we have any Ex-Officio member here? Hon. James Baba, can you help?

If there are any Members who are outside this Chamber – in the Lobby or anywhere else – please come into the Chamber even if you are standing. We would like to do a headcount. Please, proceed to count. Honourable James Baba, are you counting?

    1. Hon. Musa Ecweru	-	Present
    2. Hon. Hillary Onek	-	Present
    3. Hon. Roland Mugume	-	Present

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Proseve Educational Centre in Kenya. They have come to observe the proceeding of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them.

Honourable members, I need to make this announcement though I made it earlier. On Monday, 10 August, at 10.00 a.m., President Uhuru Kenyatta, the President of the Republic of Kenya, will be addressing this Parliament. Therefore, I appeal to you to come on Monday at 10 O’clock in this number to receive His Excellency, President Uhuru Kenyatta.

Honourable members, we have additional Members who came in which I hope the Clerk has indicated in his list, but the counting from hon. James Baba reveals a total of 224 Members of Parliament. Honourable minister, there is nothing that you are going to say that will add numbers. (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I think we are in a crucial period where the numbers are very much necessary. I am begging that the committees, especially those that have been given permission to travel abroad be recalled today, so that at the next sitting the House is fully composed, because we have committees like that on National Economy, which is abroad.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we were at the Business Committee, we agreed that all other activities will cease when we are dealing with the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015. However, it has come to my attention that several members are out of the country and some are up country. I am therefore going to make the following directions on how we are going to proceed.

In the next four Sittings of this Parliament, there will be no other activity of any committee of this House. Therefore, all Members are directed to come and be in Parliament. I am directing the Clerk to Parliament to issue notices in all forms of media to call Members to come on Tuesday, 10 August 2015, at 2.00 p.m.

On Monday, we have a special Sitting; we cannot combine it with the normal business of the House. So, on Tuesday, at 2 O’clock, we will be doing just this one business of taking the votes and seeing how far we can go with this Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015. 

The Clerk, therefore, must make all forms of communications including reaching out to Members who are out of the country and upcountry so that we designate Tuesday afternoon for us to be able to take this decision. I so accordingly order that it should be done as I have stated.

Meanwhile, we have other businesses that we have to continue with and tomorrow is a parliamentary sitting day and Private Members’ time mainly. So, we will be sitting tomorrow also to proceed with other business that is not related to the Constitution amendment. 

Therefore, this House, the ordinary Sitting of Parliament will be adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock and there will be a special Sitting of the House on Monday at 10 O’clock. I urge Members to attend. If all of you could come and then just the next day, we do the votes on the Constitution amendment. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.32 and was adjourned until Thursday, 6 August 2015, at 2.00 p.m.)











