Tuesday, 18 August 2015

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You recall that last week, I had indicated that there was a possibility of adjourning Parliament today. I had actually made a pledge that it would happen but when you look at the Order Paper and the pending business that has already been approved by the Business Committee, if we try to stop today, it would hurt the business that has already been approved.

I am going to seek your indulgence, honourable members, that instead of stopping today, we finish with business that is before us. If we finish before Thursday, the time we finish, we will go on recess. In any event, we will still go on recess on Thursday. However, if we are able to finish business today or tomorrow, we will go for recess, whichever happens first. 

Therefore, let us use the time and maximise speed not compromising quality and depth of our discussion on matters. Let us deliver on what is on the Order Paper before we go on recess, which might be long or short depending on the circumstances that will be obtaining. Thank you.

2.09
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Recently, I raised a matter of national importance regarding 27 Ugandans who are reported to be languishing in an Abu Dhabi prison, United Arab Emirates. They badly need assistance in terms of law, freedom and the Minister in-charge of Foreign Affairs promised that within seven days, he would have a comprehensive report to tell Parliament what is happening.

Under the principle of state responsibility, Uganda has a duty to protect its citizens wherever they are. That is why we are partially in South Sudan to ensure that Ugandans are safe. Would the minister in-charge present that report now because the time is long overdue?

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To add on what hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi has said, some time back, many Members raised issues to do with disasters and the Minister in-charge of Disaster Preparedness stood on the Floor of this Parliament and said that he was compiling the list of all areas that had been affected by disasters and that he would bring a comprehensive report and the action he intends to take.

It is now more than two months but nothing has been done. Our people are wondering whether we care about them or not.

The Minister in-charge of Disaster Preparedness should come and give us an update so that we go back and tell our people what Government is planning for them. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I remember I gave guidance on this issue and the Government Chief Whip who is just coming in had indicated that there would be constant communication and reminder to ministers who make undertakings about statements that state actions that Government is taking to deal with certain issues.

It would be good if those matters are heeded to so that when Members raise issues, they are dealt with immediately so that we do not have any backlog of issues that we need to handle. I made this communication very clear.

2.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true this matter came on the Floor of the House and Government committed to come here with a report and brief Parliament on the progress we are making.

We are sorry that this report has not come but I would like to commit, as the Chief Whip settles in, that we are going to follow up so that communication to this effect will come before we break off for recess. (Applause)

2.12
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Last month, Government through the Minister for Kampala, established new village urban councils in Makindye Division.

The Electoral Commission is currently going on with the electoral process, mostly for the youth, elderly and people with disabilities. However, the Electoral Commission has denied a chance to more than 900 youth to pick nomination forms, for the elderly and people with disabilities within this new zone.

This is denying a right for the people of Makindye within these new urban councils to take part in the electoral process. 

Mr Speaker, Statutory Instrument No.33 containing the new village urban councils that were established was laid on the Table of this House. This was also published in the Uganda Gazette of 10 July 2015 but the Electoral Commission has refused and denied a chance to these young men, elderly people and people with disabilities to participate in the electoral process.

May I, therefore, request the Government department that is concerned to ensure that the Electoral Commission receives this information so that our young people, the elderly, women and people with disability also participate in this electoral process? (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ssimbwa, I know what you are talking about but can you kindly educate me about this matter. Is it the case that was ruled, where there was creation of LCs and now you are talking about urban councils - is there a difference between those two so that I can exactly know what you are talking about?

There was a case that was ruled on about Makindye, where one of the former RDCs created those councils and some members went to court and they said they were null and void. Could you help me know that so that I can learn from you?

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, I allowed him because I knew what he was going to ask. The ruling was made on 6 February 2014. Thereafter, Government went through the process as guided by Court and in July 2015 established, as per law, new village urban councils in Makindye Division.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Ssewungu that a Statutory Instrument was laid before this House last week and the Gazette of 10 July 2015 informs you about what was legally done by Government.

That is why the people of Makindye, after following and abiding by the law, want to exercise their powers of voting and electing the people they want within these new village urban councils.

Mr Speaker, I beg to request Government to ensure that these new village-urban councils get their leaders as the law now prescribes.

2.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ssimbwa has told us that the Electoral Commission has refused to allow the categories of people he has mentioned to pick forms and he has not given us the reasons why the Electoral Commission has refused. Therefore, I would like to suggest that this afternoon, after House has adjourned, hon. Ssimbwa and I go to the Prime Minister’s Office and meet him and try to sort it out.

There must be a reason the Electoral Commission is doing that. The Rt hon. Prime Minister is around and I am going to step out and request him to give us that appointment after the House has adjourned.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, the chief whip, for the information you have given. However, the Prime Minister is the Leader of Government business. A Member of Parliament has raised a pertinent issue here and the Chief Whip of Government is stating that she wants to take a Member of Parliament to the Prime Minister’s Office yet he is supposed to be here. 

Are we procedurally moving well when we have a member of Parliament raising a matter here and the Chief Whip states that she wants to take him to the Prime Minister’s Office other than requesting the Prime Minister to be here to solve the matters here because it is a parliamentary affair? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we raise issues in this House not for formality but for solutions. Therefore, wherever the solutions lie, we seek them out and solve them because it is not a ritual that we raise these matters here. We want solutions to them and if that is the best process the solution can come through, so be it so that we are updated on the progress.

2.18
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance. It has come to my attention and that of my constituents that the country is witnessing various militia groups being trained in the country side as they gear up to the next election.

At the centre of these militia trainings is a one infamous Major Kakooza Mutale now holed up in the jungles of Luwero; he is all over the media, print and electronic, threatening the public especially the Opposition that the militias he is training will be ready to confront the Opposition. They are in the media holding clubs; I do not know whether they have pangas and guns and his threats are obvious: he is saying that whoever comes up against what he calls his principal or his commander, he is up against him.

Mr Speaker, we all know where electoral violence has actually brought this country and also know the kind of suffering that was meted out by the same person through his infamous Kalangala Action Plan in 2006 elections. In my constituency, we still have victims of his notorious activities and right now, he is in the jungles of Luwero training militias and he has vividly explained that what he is doing is official. I would like Government to answer whether they have surrendered internal security to militias because – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give is that last week, I watched on television a team taking food and charcoal to the former Prime Minister demanding for promises. Within the same time, another group came back to retaliate and both were wearing yellow. The one which came to attack and the one which was fighting the ones who were bringing food fighting each other and Police did not interfere even though they were there. We have the militias and they are there.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you for the information. Mr Speaker, Parliament is aware of how overzealous Police is when it comes to the Opposition. The media is quoting the police authority about these incidences especially in Luwero saying they are aware but they do not know what to do. We know how electoral violence almost brought our neighbours Kenya to its knees and we are here, preparing the country for an election and violence.

I would like Government to come out and explain to our people especially victims of the same person and his violence and brutal actions as to whether we are safe. Otherwise, my people are very ready to also prepare themselves since they were not helped in 2006 when they were brutalised. This time round, they have enough forests to get clubs to defend themselves in the face of the reluctance of Government to offer them security.
The worry, Mr Speaker, last Wednesday I asked the Prime Minister to explain as to who funds and maintains the so-called crime preventers. Of course, he gave a haphazard response, which was not convincing but that is part and partial of the worry in the countryside as to what Government is up to as we gear up to these elections?

Having seen the President pass out crime preventers draped in yellow T-shirts, in such a politically charged environment - Masaka Municipality demands an equivocal response as to what is going on in the jungles of Luwero so that we can also ready ourselves for a response. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say you have sufficient forests in Masaka Municipality? (Laughter)

MR MPUUGA: Certainly, Masaka is an urban setting in a rural environment. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mpuuga for raising this very pertinent issue concerning our security. What I am aware of - and this is based on the principle of community policing, which the Inspector General of Police introduced - is what he called the crime preventers for all the districts. 

However, what he is raising is taking a different angle and my attention has been greatly drawn to it. I would like to request that I task the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs to carefully handle what hon. Mpuuga has raised because it appears to be diverting from what the IGP introduced regarding the encouragement of communities to work with Police to take care of their security through encouraging their boys and girls to accept to be trained in what we call community policing.

However, since it is diverting from that key principle, I would like to request that the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs takes up this matter very quickly to make sure that we rule out hooliganism.

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on Table –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, were you still on the Floor?

MR MPUUGA: Just to help her investigations –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. You need to go through the procedure.

MR MPUUGA: Most oblidged, Mr Speaker.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a shadow Minister of Defence and Security, I have something to seek clarification on. Crime preventers have been trained and passed out. When are they going to begin preventing the crime? What is being reported by hon. Mpuuga is crime in the making. The training of militias is illegal and those people are preparing to commit crime; this one you know because they are not allowed. No party or individual is allowed under the law of Uganda to have a private army in this country and they have stated the objectives clearly according to the report that they are preparing for the 2016 elections. 

By all intentions and action taken now, they are going to commit crime. If the crime preventers are to be authentically working, they must start working now by arresting those people; would you like us to arrest them ourselves? We shall make preparations to prevent crime and we shall be the actual crime preventers on this side.

Mr Speaker, we must put this on the record. If someone prepares on the other side to commit crime, hon. Mpuuga go and prepare to prevent the crime. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, of course, I am not aware and I do not know that the group that hon. Mpuuga is talking about is preparing to commit the crime as hon. Fungaroo has said. On when - (Interjections) - let me respond to hon. Fungaroo because he asked a question about when the crime preventers will begin to implement or to prevent the crime. If I can give a case from my district Kiboga, the crime preventers in Kiboga District were trained and they are working with Police right now. They are helping police to curb crime in the community. 

It depends on when their training had started; wherever training has been completed, they are expected to implement. So, I do not think the implementation is for the entire country but as I told you, the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs will look into the matter, which hon. Mpuuga raised so that we get a solution to it.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information about crime prevention. Crime prevention began in Makindye East, which is being used as a model all over Uganda, for crime prevention. This activity has done a lot of good in Makindye East. We have even constructed as a community a police post in Muyenga called Muyenga Community Police where we no longer have to arrest and even imprison; it is a place where people go for sensitisation about crime and computers have been put there to register people.

Mr Speaker, we might have other issues as, hon. Nankabirwa has put it, but I would like us to support community policing because it is going to assist us and the community to do neighbourhood watches to ensure that we eliminate crime in this country.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am aware that the rules of this House insist on relevance; at least I may not quote the rule but relevancy is something that is highlighted in our rules. The concern expressed by hon. Mpuuga has to do with preparing a group of mafias as my colleague is putting it; people to beat up the Opposition or other people who may not be deemed by a particular category as worthy to lead this country. 

I am extremely concerned by the proposal made by hon. Ssimbwa. What is going on in Makindye East is preventing thugs, robbers and rapists; that is not what would bother anybody in the Opposition. We would all be happy with that.

Mr Speaker, in 2007, this House put up a select committee on election violence, which compiled a huge report, which was presented here. The name of Kakooza Mutale together with his people featured highly in the atrocities committed in the 2006 elections. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, is it okay - are we proceeding properly, if we divert from the spirit of this submission, which requires very urgent attention and condemnation by this House to even think that it is a matter like the Makindye East model. Is it real right, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member for Masaka Municipality brought this debate himself and he raised two issues. He raised the issue of some training in the jungles of Luwero and he also raised the issue of crime preventers. So, he is the one who brought this debate. Are we proceeding correctly? Yes, we are because he raised those issues as a matter of concern. Please, conclude and we proceed.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Speaker, as I said earlier on, the other issue should be handled as the Chief Whip has directed but for the issue of crime prevention, I would even invite colleagues to come and visit Muyenga Community Police and see what is happening and how Police is working with the community to ensure that we eliminate crime. My point is that honourable members should embrace the issue of crime prevention so that we fight crime in our country. I thank you.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me a chance to make a remark on this matter. We seem to be taking this matter of crime preventers lightly. It is not only about what is happening in Makindye East, hon. Ssimbwa. We know what happened and we have heard about what happened in Makindye but what we are talking about is not about that. 

I do not know whether the crime preventers in Makindye East were being trained dressed in the NRM uniform. Were they? What we are talking about is things you have seen - the selection, training, ideology and the uniform they are wearing are all partisan. How do you expect us, who are not in that party, to feel? How do you want us to behave, when you are training people and dressing them in T-Shirts with the President’s portraits? When the President goes driving past them dressed in his portraits, in yellow T-Shirts. We are going into an election period. Already there is controversy on this election. You have denied us opportunity to make meaningful electoral reforms. We feel we do not belong to this country. 

You are now going ahead - Mr Speaker, I read in the media that Major Kakooza Mutale is training a group and I have seen the pictures; they are without shirts, those ones were half naked, that they are a group which are draped, they are going to deal with some errant generals who are opposed to the President.

It may be true or not but these things worry us. We are training a form of “Entarahamwe” and we are also going to prepare to reciprocate unless the minister comes here with a statement and reassures us that you are not training a partisan “Entarahamwe” ready to commit genocide come next year. (Interruption)

MS NABUKENYA: Thank you, the Leader of Opposition. I would like to give information concerning the militia group in Luwero, in a sub-county called Kamila in place called Matembe, which is organised by a one Major Kakooza Mutale. 

Mr Speaker, I have been visiting that sub-county and there is a very big group of young people dressed in green T-shirts and holding very big sticks. And they move around – it is a very big group; I cannot ascertain the number but they are being trained – they are singing revolutionary songs and NRM slogans. And they are actually terrorising the whole place. I want to also ask: Can one individual own a militia group? Is it allowed in the laws? So actually what is in the newspaper is right and everything – (Interjections)- yes, they are wearing yellow and at times green but they are under one person – Kakooza Mutale. Thank you. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much. And that information is proof of what we are talking about; Kakooza Mutale, we know him as a presidential advisor, but he is in the bush training people – militia militarily. But we do not seem to be taking this seriously, hon. Members. We are imploring you to take it seriously otherwise you are sowing seeds of bloodshed and it will happen and you will see. But you have a right and you have the mandate and ability to stop it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any response from the government side on this? Honourable Members, in the public gallery this afternoon is a delegation from Serere District Local Government comprising district councillors, clerk to council, sergeant-at-arms, chief administrative officer, chief finance officer. They are here on a study visit to Parliament and also to observe today’s proceedings. The delegation is led by Mr Okello Gerald, the district speaker, Serere. They are represented in Parliament by hon. Alice Alaso, hon. Elijah Okupa and hon. Stephen Ochola. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition has raised a pertinent issue about Kakooza Mutale. And indeed the woman representative of Luwero, where it is alleged that Maj. Roland Kakooza Mutale, a senior presidential advisor is training people – Mr Speaker, would it be procedurally okay for you, as our Speaker, to direct the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to find out whether what we are saying is really true and under what circumstances is Maj. Roland Kakooza Mutale, senior presidential advisor is training people? Otherwise, Mr Speaker, leaving this matter lagging and we end up in problems will not augur well. I beg for your procedural guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I really hope you were listening to what the Government Chief Whip said; if you listened, then I do not have to comment on what you have just said.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the issue initiated by the member of Parliament for Masaka Municipality and later asserted by the Leader of the Opposition - with practical evidence from the member of Parliament representing Luwero – is constitutional enough not to be abandoned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has not been abandoned. Hon. Member, please sit down. The Government Chief Whip has said that they have gone to alert the minister responsible and that minister will come back here.

Hon. Members, it is not to be sensitive to say you will refer any matter to a committee at this time and expect results. This Parliament is going on recess on Thursday; when will that committee sit? Please, let us be reasonable and practical with this matter that is before us. Let the Minister come tomorrow, give the statement – let them verify whatever facts exist; whether they are true or false and come back to the House. That is what the Chief Whip said if you were listening.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

2.41
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Wilson Mukasa Muluri): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2015 be read for the first time.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR DISABILITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

2.42
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Wilson Mukasa Muruli): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2015 be read for the first time.

MR WILLIAM NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We understand our rules very well and we also understand the various laws that we have passed in this Parliament. When you are laying a Bill, each bill should be accompanied with a certificate of financial implication independently. And the minister was proceeding to the next Bill before laying before Parliament a certificate of financial implication on the first Bill that he laid. Is it therefore procedurally right for him to proceed in that manner and therefore anticipating to lay the certificates of financial implications as omnibus?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I received communication that the four bills are coming from the same ministry; they relate to the elections and the certificate of financial implication that was attached to them is covering all the four bills. I have looked at them; so they will be laying them together.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to raise two points of procedure: (1) that the attached certificate of financial implication is entitled and if you allow me to read: “Clearance of the certificate of financial implication on the amendment of electoral laws for the youth, persons with disability and older persons.” And Mr Speaker, one of the Bills we have is the National Women Council Bill. So it is not covered under the certificate and I would wish to receive guidance on that matter. 

(2) The elections for social groups have commenced with people picking their nomination forms, the youth in Mukono have been very active on this. Would it be procedurally right for us to amend a law governing an election that has already commenced - the nominations are on the 27th, the nomination forms have already been picked by the candidates? I wonder how this law will affect the on-going youth elections and the elections for people with disability, which have already commenced? Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the certificate does not cover the Bill relating to the National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, it has to be corrected accordingly because as the honourable member has pointed out, it does cover three Bills; one on youth, two on persons with disabilities and three, on older persons. So, there is no reference on National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill. Please, correct that and we proceed accordingly.

On the second issue, whether you can amend the law when the process is already on-going, this will not be the first time this Parliament is doing that. As soon as it is discovered that there is likely to be a problem with a particular election, even if it is already in process, they can come and correct the law so that is done properly.

I recall in the Seventh Parliament, there was an amendment –(Interjections)- honourable members, can I have some order? I recall in the Seventh Parliament, there was an amendment to the Local Government Act that was done three days before the election itself. There was a time when people were going for elections and it was found that it was impossible to have the elections unless those amendments were made by Parliament. We came here and passed those laws in those circumstances and the elections went on. 

Therefore, there is no conflict as long as they do not occasion any injustice or disadvantage or prejudice to a person intending to contest in those elections. If it does, then the aggrieved person still has access to other places where redress can be sought and those matters are settled properly. So, there will be no problem with the way we are proceeding. Honourable minister, you have to correct that issue of National Council of Women.

2.49
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, agreed, that will have to be corrected. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Council for Older Persons (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was the motion for first reading of the Bill. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR DISABILITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

2.50
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “The National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have the certificate of financial implications?

MR MURULI MUKASA: I beg to lay a certificate of financial implications on the Bills entitled, “The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2015” “The National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill 2015”, “The National Council for Older Persons (Amendment) Bill, 2015.” The one of women we are going to make corrections. 

I beg to lay these certificates of financial implications on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have we read the one of older persons?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Yes, Mr Speaker

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the one of women councils has issues because the certificate does not cover it.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Like you have guided, Mr Speaker, the Bill entitled, “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2015” does not have a certificate of financial implications but we undertake to have this corrected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like me to refer these Bills to the committee to handle expeditiously?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move under rule 15 that rule – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am mindful about the Rules of Procedure and the constitutionality of issues. In light of that, is it in order for the minister to leave a gap over the presentation of the Bill, that a Bill that does not have a certificate of financial implications will be dealt with later? Is that gap acceptable in law?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The law you are referring to has not been written on earth yet. (Laughter) What we are dealing with is that the Bill does not have a certificate. So, it cannot be presented. If the certificate comes, it will be presented.

MR MURULI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move under rule 15 of our Rules of Procedure – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have two very serious concerns; rule 107 talks about certificate of financial implication and it reads;
“1) All these shall be accompanied with a certificate of financial implication setting out -
    a) the specific outputs and outcomes of the Bill;
    b) how those specific outputs and outcomes fit within the overall policies and programmes of Government; 
    c) the costs involved and their impact on the budget;
    d) the proposed or the existing methods of financing the costs related to the Bill and its feasibility.”

Mr Speaker, I was here watching. The honourable minister has brought three Bills with one piece of paper. Does that fit within what the rules of this House describe as a certificate of financial implications accompanying each Bill?

My understanding is that each of those Bills would have its certificate of financial implications. As it were, the honourable minister is bringing here one piece of paper, which he wants us to believe that it details all this as though it includes three certificates of financial implications.

Secondly, is it procedurally right for the honourable minister to continue forgetting the issue of rectifying the challenges of the Women Council and yet he is the Minister of Gender and Social Development? (Applause) The challenges the Women Council has faced in this country have gone on for the last five years. 

Honestly, if we are going on recess on Thursday, is it procedurally okay for the minister to again forget the Women Councils? Please, guide us, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The second issue that the honourable raised is a strong objection to the way the minister is proceeding; it does not raise any procedural question. (Laughter) It is a political question that the minister has to handle in the best way he can. 

On the first one, what has been issued here is covering three Bills from the same ministry. Does it carry the information that we require? - because all that could have been done was to make three photocopies and attach them to the three Bills. It would also still be the same thing because it is from the same ministry with the same sponsor and it is the same person issuing the certificate. There would be no conflict as long as the information required is contained in that document. It would be right for us to treat it that way.

However, on the issue of the National Women Council (Amendment) Bill, 2015, you have to start with that, honourable minister, and tell us how we are going to proceed and it has to be today. (Applause)

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, as we have promised, we are going to bring the certificate of financial implications regarding the National Women Council (Amendment) Bill, 2015.

The fact that we have brought the amendment Bill here is a clear testimony that we have not forgotten the women of this country. We are duly committed to the fact that women should also elect and have representation according to law. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, make sure the certificate comes this afternoon so that we can handle that also.

THE MINISTER FOR GENDER LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that under rule 15 that rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure be suspended to allow the House consider these Bills that have been presented and treat them with the urgency they deserve. (Interjections) Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion. It is moved by the minister under rule 15 to suspend rule 118 to allow this House to proceed with this Bill without referring it to the committee.

Honourable members, the motion is seconded by the Government Chief Whip, Minister of Local Government, hon. Eddie Kwizera, Minister for Internal Affairs and hon. Baba Diri. 

Honourable Minister, would you like to speak to your motion?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, these Bills are seeking a few amendments to the parent Acts and the amendments are to do with the mode of elections at the lower electoral levels. Save for the Bill on youths, it seeks also other additional amendments simply to bring in line the term of office of the youth councils from the four years to five years.

Basically, the Bills are to do with the mode of elections at the lower levels. Mr Speaker, in a nutshell, the Bill requests the House to endorse that these elections should be conducted by lining up. 

The principle of lining up was recently endorsed by this House when we passed the Local Government (Amendment) Act and in it, the elections of the lower levels are to be done by lining up. This method of elections is cost effective, transparent and truly democratic. 

Honourable members, you are aware that the national election season has begun and older persons, people with disabilities, youths and indeed, women are due to elect their office bearers very soon. It is, therefore, expedient, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that these Bills be debated and passed as soon as possible.

That is why, I am moving that rule 118 be dispensed with so that due attention is given to these Bills so that those segments of our society also enjoy their democratic right of electing their representatives. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the motion, honourable members. The motion that I now propose for your debate is that moving under rule 15 of our Rule of Procedure, Rule 118, which requires a Bill read for the First time to be sent to the committee be dispensed. Therefore, if it is approved, the House can begin discussing this Bill without that reference. 

That is the motion I now propose for your debate and debate starts now. Each Member will take three minutes and we will have a limited debate on this. If we want to adopt it, we adopt it. Can we start debate now?

3.04
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The three Bills proposed by the Minister of Gender and Social Development are very important Bills. I appreciate the desire by the minister to have this House make a decision very fast, but also, these matters are not just appearing to the minister as though it were a dream last night. He knew all the time that there was need to review some of these Acts by proposing some amendments.

The whole idea of suspending rule 118: “Reference of a Bill to a committee”, in my view is stampeding this House on the last minute. Government needs to be cautioned because the whole essence of why we are here is to do real scrutiny and add value to some of those proposals. You know how we stampeded ourselves in the last minute some time back with KCCA which has now become a nightmare for this nation.

Therefore, my proposal is to deal with what the minister is looking for and expeditiously pass the amendments. We could still give them to a committee and ask them to review them in two days so that they give a bit of an eye. However, you come here when I have just come from PAC and I have not yet eaten lunch, but you would like me to pass the Bills. Honestly, it would be difficult. 

Going by the very argument of the minister that the Bills are short and very clear, let us just give the committee tomorrow morning and they run through them. Those of us who have issues will go and raise them. In the afternoon or Thursday, we bring them back here. However, to do away with this rule really denies these Bills proper scrutiny. That is my prayer.

3.06
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to oppose the motion on grounds that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is one of the largest ministries: well resourced, well-staffed and charged with these core responsibilities.

As a shadow Minister for Youth the constituents for which these amendments are being sought, I am very sure, have not been adequately consulted yet the rules guide this august House to send any proposals, be it from the ministry or private member, to the relevant committee. This is to give an opportunity for those to be affected by such a law to submit their views. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the motion that the minister is seeking support for in this august House, if seconded or supported, will deny the constituents the opportunity for consultation and to give their input.
Therefore, I oppose the motion, Mr Speaker, and I would urge honourable colleagues to accept that this motion be sent to the relevant committee and within a week – since you have told us that House is adjourning on Thursday, we can source for information from the various constituents using our connections, so that we can give an input while these Bills are being considered by the relevant committee. I beg to submit.

3.08
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As women of this country, we have an obligation and the reason why we came to Parliament was to defend the rest of the women out there whose voices cannot reach here through any other means. The reason we got affirmative action was that there was lack of voice and a lot of marginalisation and suffocation of a Ugandan woman out there. That is the very reason why there was that plot and why the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda considered a woman to be in Parliament.

Now Bills like these on the Table, to go without any consideration, coming from a ministry which has the majority – in fact, the highest number of people who constitute this ministry are the women of this country; being left out and put aside is not acceptable.

Mr Speaker, the reason Bills go to committees is that the committees look at such gaps, sit down, consider them and call stakeholders and debate thoroughly in committees and eliminate the existing gaps.

My proposal is that the Bills should be given time, go to the committee. We will also bring the women’s Bill together with the certificate of financial implications and the motion will be moved at once. I beg to move, Mr Speaker, that we should not move in isolation, as a ministry – (Interruption)

MR LOKII: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I listened to the minister when he was tabling the Bill. I understood that he is basically tabling the Bill to make two requests: one, to spell out the procedure of doing the elections and two, to regularise the timeframe for the elections.

The point of procedure I am trying to raise is: is there any evil in streamlining the timeframe for the elections for these structures with the rest of the structures in the law, as stated in the Constitution that every after five years, there shall be an election? 

Is it therefore procedurally right for members to continue to agitate that women should be given the opportunity, to decide whether they want to operate on the regularisation of five years or maintain themselves at four years and yet this is about scandalizing the law of the country? Is it procedurally right? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this rule that we use tries to take care of any situation that may arise in the House. That is why in the same rules, under Rule 15, we have a provision for suspension of rules. The particular rule that the minister seeks to suspend, Rule 118, is not among those that have been restricted because Rule 15(2) says, “This rule shall not apply in respect to rules 5, 6, 11, 12, 13(1) and 88.” If it was the intention of this House to make sure that any Bill and motion that come must first be referred to the committee, it would have been included in the list of rules that cannot be suspended.

However, in the wisdom of the House, Rule 118 was left out of these restrictions meaning it is the House to take a decision on such. That is why this motion is moved under this particular rule for suspension of rules. We are therefore proceeding properly. The rule that the minister seeks to suspend is a suspendable rule. The question we need to be asking is: is the justification given by the minister sufficient for us to grant the suspension? That is the debate that we should have. And the minister has said that it is expedient to do so. The elections are due and there will be no time for us to go and deal with this before the actual elections take place. It is therefore expedient in the circumstances for us to do what he is requesting us to do. So, let us have this debate: is the minister’s request and the justification sufficient for us to grant suspension?

As I said earlier, this will not be the first time we are doing this; this House has done this many times before. That is the guidance I give on the point of procedure that has been raised. Honourable member, you have already contributed, please conclude.

MS NTABAZI: I was finalising my point, Mr Speaker. My point is -we are supposed to go in harmony. If we suspended this rule, when is the Bill for women coming? Is it coming up today so that we go together? When will it be coming because the same elections that the youth are going to go through and the PWDs will be conducted by the women using the same procedure? When are we going to have our Bill brought on board?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, actually the Bill is on the Order Paper. The only procedural issue that arose is that it did not have a certificate of financial implications and I have directed the minister to make sure the certificate comes today and we finish with this. There is therefore no issue about when this particular matter will come.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, this is a point of procedure. If the Bill has been presented without a certificate of financial implications –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has not been presented but there are other three Bills that have certificates that have been presented. That is why the minister is moving to suspend.

MR NIWAGABA: Is the rule about suspending the rule in respect of lack of certificate of financial implications?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, in respect of referral to committee.

3.16
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Women Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to stand with the minister and support him. Given the time constraints, we do not have all the time to refer this matter back to the committee as the procedure usually is. 

If you look at the Bill before us, it is very small - just one page and two clauses only. I think this House can have the capacity to look at these two clauses – they are just amendments. I think we should stand with the minister and support him because this will not take even 30 minutes for this House to dispose of. So, I beg that we go to the committee stage, Mr Speaker.

3.17
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In this House, we have two sides - there is the Government and the Opposition sides. In the circumstances we are looking at the Bills moved by the Government side, it would be fair – and in the interest of justice - for the Opposition side to have time to give their input, which could credibly be done at committee level.
 
Mr Speaker, we have been here for the last four years. In all these years, I know that Government has never gone asleep and it will never go a sleep. I do not understand why this House at this late moment is being bombarded with Bills and so many other requests that should have come in time? Therefore, I feel that it is not about how many pages that you are looking at in a Bill. It is about the content and the message that you want to address. Therefore, for someone to imagine that because it is one page or one sentence – Mr Speaker, you are a lawyer, one word can be more pregnant than even hundred pages depending on what you want to address. 

Therefore, I want to beg the august House that it would be prudent for our shadow minister and the Opposition to have time to look at this, Mr Speaker, and therefore, I do not support the motion that is being moved by the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, let me just do this so that we can see how we are proceeding. I have picked the National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2015 and the amendment is in one clause about the election for councils and committees. 

In sub clause (1) elections for national councils, at the district or city council for disability shall be by secret ballot.

In (2) - election for the village, parish or ward, sub-county, division or town council or committee for disability shall be by electorate lining up behind the candidate nominated for the office, their representative’s portrait or symbols.
 
This is the whole amendment being proposed. So, the question we should be debating is – because they are all similar, given the prayer that the minister has made - would this cause an injury to the House if it is examined by this House now? Or would it not? That is the motion.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know why we are taking so much time. We set the precedent. On LC I, we passed a law here that they should be lining. So, it is already precedent. We should just go in and accept the minister’s proposal and we move – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, the Constitution provides that we should give equal opportunities to all categories of people in the country. When we are amending the law concerning elections of LC I, it went to the committee and it got the input of various stakeholders. 

The suggestion by honourable members from Kasilo is that this does not need to go there. Is honourable colleague in order to say that we can deny opportunity to people with disability, the elderly, the women and the youth to make an input? Is he in order to suggest something, which is contrary to the Constitution?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what the member for Kasilo is saying is that the principle of lining up was already adopted by this House when we amended the Local Government Act. It is not a new matter to be considered. This House has considered and adopted it.

The honourable member is saying that we adopted the principle that at the lower levels elections can be carried out by lining up behind candidates - that is the principle that is in these amendments and that is what the member was saying. So, is he in order? I do not think he is out of order? (Laughter)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I really want to contribute on this matter. When we passed the lining behind under the LC I and LC II, some of us were attacked at home. My constituents attacked me saying they do not want to line behind. Yes, I know it is already a law but in that same law, there are stakeholders who are in court. It is being challenged in court.

We do not want to be doing the same thing. I think it is proper that we allow the other stakeholders involved in this - the youth, the PWD’s and women - to come and give their views. I would also like members to have a chance to go home and consult these people in their constituencies. Even if we are given a day to make phone calls. But we can just assume that because you passed the law for LC I, it can now apply to women and all these interest groups. It is not correct, Mr Speaker.

Why do we have to make laws in a haphazard manner and stampeded as if the country was made yesterday? As if we have not been here for five years? It is not proper! Mr Speaker, the way we are proceeding is wrong. We implore you and the House to let us go and consult on this and also consult the people who are concerned. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable Leader of the Opposition, the way we are proceeding is not wrong. It is up to the House to take a decision on it. But we are proceeding properly. A motion has been moved for suspension of the rules. That is procedurally correct. If it is suspended, it will be suspended and if it is not suspended, it will not be suspended. So, we are proceeding very well. It is not fair for you to go on record and say we are proceeding wrongly. We are proceeding very well especially under my guidance –(Laughter)– I think -

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I take note of the fact that the motion before us is in respect of an amendment Bill. I would like to refer you to Rule 109(3) of our Rules of Procedure, which requires two things: one, that the law to be amended should be copied and supplied together with the amending Bill. I have crosschecked my iPad, which is one of the methods of supplying information to members by way of electronic transmission to our respective mails, I have not seen one.
Two, Mr Speaker, under that same rule, you are also required - if the relevant part of the law to be amendment has not been copied - to give an opinion that it is of a minor nature and self-explanatory and that therefore, it should not be supplied. To the best of my knowledge, you have not done that.

Are we then proceeding properly in view of Rule 109(3) to consider the motion by the minister when the documents before us are inadequate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the law that they seek to amend says that the elections shall be by secret ballot; that is in the principal law. Do you require to be supplied with that? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The law that is amending it is saying, at a certain level, it should be by lining up; that is all. Are we proceeding correctly? I think so. (Laughter)

3.28
MR JACOB OBTOH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I don’t know – I am yet to appreciate the reasons we are overstretching the debate on this matter. Even going by Rule 109 that hon. Niwagaba was citing, I think would not be at this stage to seek to look at that rule. At this stage we are still getting to debate a merit of the motion whether we should suspend a rule that requires the Bill to be referred to a committee.

The Japadholas say this - and I would like to try to state it in English - that good resolutions are like crying babies in church, must be carried out immediately. (Laughter) I have looked at the motion - (Interjection) - Mr Speaker, may you protect me from the fires and from those who would like to take Japadhola lessons in this Chamber.

Mr Speaker, we are trying to purely look at the justification by the minister. Has he given enough and adequate reasons for us to suspend the rule? We are tempted to debate the merit, but I thought that is not yet the time. When you look at the proposed amendments, every general principle of law, at least from my training as a lawyer, has an exception. 
What a kind of world we would have if we had rules, which are stringent and rigid? Is the minister capable of benefiting from the exception? My answer would be in the affirmative. I would support the minister’s motion –(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad honourable member did not use Japadhola to confuse us; he used English at least and we were able to understand what he was speaking.

In his submission, the honourable member is imputing that we should move faster yet this is a man who represents people. He is representing people with disabilities, youth and women in his constituency. He has not consulted any of them on this matter. Does he want to tell us that he is abdicating his responsibility of representing these people? Is he in order to just take powers in his hands, while forgetting the people he represents, who he has to consult and bring their views here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member for West Budama South is debating a motion that seeks to suspend the rule to enable us move fast with the Bill. Is he in order? Yes he is. That is the motion. The motion is saying please waive all other processes, let us handle this Bill here and now. That is what it is saying. How else could he have debated it?

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, thank you for a very brilliant ruling. And for the record, the people of West Budama South considered many things before electing and sending me here. I am not a delegate; I am a representative. They voted my capacity to make decisions on their behalf. They also know that I will consult them on what I am not able to do. So, I am not attending delegates’ conference; I am a Member of Parliament representing my people. If to debate on a motion I have to go and ask for permission, I think that would be bloody.

Mr Speaker, I was looking at the justification by the minister. He called upon us to look at it that elections are at the doorway. Can we suspend - (Interjection)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I still have a procedural problem upon which I would like to seek your help. Hon. Jacob Oboth is very good at speaking. He wants to speak and win. Last week I was in his constituency, when he got up to speak everybody clapped but when others spoke nobody clapped. 

Mr Speaker, I know you would like us to move very fast, which is very good, and that is how they will determine you as the Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, that is not what I want but - (Laughter) - that is what the motion is. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to be helped. Rule 27 says that every last sitting of the week the Leader of Government Business shall make a statement in the House regarding the Government business of the succeeding week.

I was here on Thursday last week. Rule 28 says that, “A weekly Order Paper, including relevant documents, shall be made and distributed to every member through his or her pigeonhole and where possible, electronically.”

Mr Speaker, I have the order of last week, I never saw business to follow with the following. I never saw the minister talking about this. I came today knowing that we are going to start with the issue of districts and municipalities because that is where we stopped.

So, Mr Speaker, is it - because I think municipalities, cities and districts are very urgent but now I am seeing here national youth, women whatever. Is it procedurally right for us to abandon what was supposed to be done and we start with something which we have not had for the last one week?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We started with matters of urgent public importance that were not on the Order Paper last week. Even yesterday, they were not brought to the attention of the Speaker until this morning. The rules are structured in such a way that they can respond to emergencies. It is this emergency that we are interrogating now. Is this emergency? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the rules accommodate it for us to consider whether it is expedite or not for us to do so. That is the debate we should be having instead of these procedural matters we are raising. Please conclude. That is the debate we should be having.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a ploy that need - if I were not the chairman of rules I would misbehave –(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know that hon. Jacob Oboth is familiar with the rules and knows that when a member raises at least a point of procedure and order, he should be able to listen to what is going on. The point of procedure I would like to raise - the manner in which we are proceeding made me look around to see what is in our environment and I saw a word, “East African Legislative Assembly.” Is this East African Legislative Assembly or Ugandan Parliament? (Laughter) There is a banner above the Speaker’s seat. Are we in the Ugandan Parliament or the East African Legislative Assembly?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am sure you know in what capacity you are speaking. You know, this place is the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. The national theatre is across the road; it is not here. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, for that procedural guidance; one of the best this year. Mr Speaker, I would like to support and I would like to conclude by saying that it would only be proper for us to get the merits - and if we are convinced like I am - this is one of the matters that can benefit from the exemptions of the general principles of the rules.

3.41
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. The delay by the minister and his staff to bring the law in time should not cause more problems to the people who are supposed to participate in these elections because we shall be punishing the people. I think we should support the minister to expedite this law and this Parliament is supposed to make laws to at least to facilitate good governance and there is a cost saving.

Secondly, we are going to adjourn so if we send these pieces of Bills to the committee, it means we might adjourn before the committee reports back. I think Members of Parliament have capacity and are competent to represent all the people who voted for them whether they are women, youth or disabled. Therefore, I would say we should support the minister in his struggle to sustain the rule and then we do that thing. 
As far as the certificate for the women’s Bill is concerned, I would appeal to the minister to use his system now so that by the closure of the business, the certificate is in the House because it was an oversight on his part. I thank you.

3.34
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me submit in two lines: 

Firstly, I was a youth district councillor of Nebbi District but before that, I had also participated in the youth elections. Apart from the village youth councils, for example, I am talking of the area where I am conversant with: the disability and elderly councils; these councils have levels - village councils, parish councils, sub county councils up to district councils. Now apart from the village councils where the youth are all called upon to come and elect the nine executive members - if you become the chairperson of the youth council, you automatically become the secretary for youth affairs on the council one. After that, elections at the parish level are done by the executive.
 
Therefore, as you go as executive, you spend nothing - you do secret ballot without your pictures; you re simply given papers and you write the name of the person you want to be chairperson of the council, vice chairperson, the secretary for youth affairs, women affairs and that continues up to the district.

Mr Speaker, there are two things we are looking at: the cost effectiveness of conducting elections and the core principle of democracy in the elections -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are debating the merits of the Bill. Right now, we are debating the motion for suspension. You should have started with that and stopped there. 

MR ANYWARACH: I am giving the background to what I am coming to conclude with. Therefore, Mr Speaker, when we go to the motion to allow us have this Bill not sent to the committee to which I belong, the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development - we have no problem with receiving this Bill and we discuss it. The only issue I am looking at, like hon. Eddie Kwizera has said, is that we do not need to injure the chances and electioneering of the people who are supposed to be elected. However, the question is, without probably that amendment - we have had election of these councils. If we have had elections and we had no issues - I am sorry I will not mention about the regularisation - my issue therefore, would be: why should we rush? What are we going to cure?

Mr Speaker, yesterday, I visited Namulonge Farm. The rush with which a business man by the names Sudhir wants to take over that land of 1,800 acres and becomes his against our agriculture research and so on, would even necessitate more urgent action by the Executive to bring at least a motion here or we pronounce ourselves as Parliament to refuse that very fast than the urgency of what we are discussing here. 

Therefore, to conclude, I would propose that we do not need to suspend the rule and we allow this House to go to a committee stage expressly as if there is anything ahead of us. No, I do not support that motion, Mr Speaker.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving way for me to give this information. Honourable members, at the beginning of this sitting, the Speaker informed the House that we only have two days and that most likely on Thursday this House will be going on recess and today is Tuesday.
 
Mr Speaker, the second part of information is that we have an election calendar. The Electoral Commission has already given an election calendar. The youth and people with disabilities have already picked nomination forms. If we do not amend this law - the elections are due to start on 4th of September, according to the election calendar. So, my information to honourable members is that we do not have time. Time is not on our side so we need to take action now to enable elections of the youth, persons with disabilities and women to take place. That is the information I wanted to give.

3.48
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I honestly and sincerely agree with the idea or issue that it is important to have this Bill go to the committee. However, on the other hand, my dear colleagues, we must not forget - at the bottom of our hearts we know very well that honestly we do not have the time. We must be sincere to ourselves and not only to ourselves, but also to the people we represent.

Mr Speaker, I do appreciate that the minister definitely would like us to amend this Bill. If he has not brought this Bill in time, let us now deal with it since it has come. I would like to appeal to you, dear colleagues, that we support the motion and discuss this Bill now to give an opportunity to our people so that they can be elected when it is time. I real beg that we support the discussion of this Bill now. I beg to support.

3.49 
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank the ministry – (Interjections) – Can I request for some protection? Mr Speaker, you mentioned that we are not in a national theatre and so I would like to request our colleagues to know that we are in the National Assembly. 

I represent youth of Eastern Uganda in this august House. It has been an issue regarding – (Interjections) – hon. Nandala-Mafabi, can you please listen to me.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just proceed, please.

MR PETER OGWANG: Mr Speaker, why I have mentioned his name is for a reason – as far as the youth of Uganda are concerned, for the last four years there has only been one issue which these young people have been demanding the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; to bring this law to the august House for amendment. And that is on issues regarding the elections and term of office. We Members of Parliament are elected for five years. But the councils which elect us serve for a term of four years and their term expired almost 12 months back.

As we talk, there is a gap within the councils themselves. The road map is out and elections are meant to begin this week. Therefore, I really would like to request my honourable colleagues - an amendment of one clause here! What do we need to take to the committee? It is these very young people who brought the petition to this august House. I remember very well, they came to this august House. The Chairman of the National Youth Council then brought a petition here to ask Parliament to amend the law. 

So, I do not know what the committee will look at. Increasing the term of years from four to five, do we need to waste the committee’s time on this, Mr Speaker really? If it is issues of young people we have issues of young people, which all of us must address holistically but not on the issue of amending a term of one year to five years. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to implore and beg honourable colleagues - more or so hon. Nandala-Mafabi and my good friend, the hon. Bernabas Tinkasiimire; can I request that we all move as a team for this purpose. (Laughter) I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NANADALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if you are aware I am one of the members who sit in this Chamber so consistently. This youth member is rarely in the House. (Laughter) We have the timetable. 
Therefore, is the honourable member in order to point at me that I, among all the people in the House, and hon. Bernabas Tinkasiimire are the worst Members of Parliament to point at? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Youth Eastern simply urged the hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the hon. Bernabas Tinkasiimire to support him on this. (Laughter) In fact, he gave you great honour from all the members.

3.53
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to oppose the motion as proposed by the minister on only one ground. As a country we have made a commitment and a promise that we shall accord equal treatment to all Ugandans, irrespective of their age, gender or ability. 

Mr Speaker, we have heard from various people when Bills are brought here as stakeholders and at times we are tempted to think, when are seated here as Members of Parliament, that we know most of the things. But I would like to give an example of one time when we went for a maternal health conference. Ladies with disability told us that they would need to have a sign language interpreter in every labour ward because when midwives continue telling their mothers in labour that “push” the women who have hearing impairment cannot hear this word.

We are here not wanting to consult people with disability yet the law to make them line during voting is being proposed, Mr Speaker. This debate would be enriched if we would hear from their leaders because, for instance, some of the people we are proposing to go and line behind do not have legs. Others are old people who cannot stand for a long time. 

Mr Speaker, even if for symbolic value only, it would be proper for this Parliament to hear from the stakeholders. Let us not deny them this opportunity to be heard, after all the very reason we came up with interest groups was to give these people an opportunity to be heard. 

Mr Speaker, I would have taken the minister’s information, but let him hear from me after all he is the Minister for People with Disability yet he is able-bodied; he does not appreciate some of these issues.  (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I would kindly request that – (Interruption)

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, I respect my colleague, hon. Betty Nambooze and I know she is an informed Member of Parliament. In appreciating issues of disability or older persons, like she is mentioning now, she does not need to be an older person herself or a person with disability. 

Is she in order to think that I do not appreciate the issues of older persons and persons with disability? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the only facts I know on this matter are that the honourable minister is in charge of that sector and that is what the member said. And honourable minister, unless there is some form of disability that is not visible to us. (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a woman and a mother, I will take some time to check out if hon. Sulaiman Madada has any form of disability. (Laughter) But what I wanted to say – (Interjection) - I will take the information.

MR NOKRACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable member, for giving way. The information I am giving is that we, representatives of people with disability had had a lot of discussions with the sectoral committee. And now preparation has been made, including sign language interpreters. It is our experience that our elections are normally done late. Therefore, if this law now comes early like this, I appeal to all of us to support it so that our elections are done without further delay.

It is quite true that the calendar is now out. If we delay passing this law, our people are going to suffer. So, I really appeal to you to listen to us. Thank you.

MS NAMBOOZE: I am very grateful for that information, Mr Speaker. But my appeal still remains that there are some issues that might be raised by the stakeholders, if an opportunity is given. A day or two before the Committee of Parliament would also enable some of us to consult with our constituents – people with disability, the youth and the women because, I think at this stage, we can also make further amendments to these Bills and that will require consultations. Therefore, I beg that you be pleased to send these Bills to the committee for at least two days, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been on this for more than an hour yet we have other business pending. As I said before, this is not a matter that is very strange. The rules permit it and this House has done this before – not once but many times. 

It is true that we have only today, tomorrow and on Thursday we will rise for an adjournment that will be sine die. It would not be practical to refer a matter to a committee. This is now about guiding you because if you send it to committee, it means we will not pass it because the committee will have to meet and possibly prepare a report after consultations and come back when we are on recess. That is the practical thing we have to deal with. 

Is this Bill urgent as the minister has tried to articulate? If it is, we handle it but if it is not urgent in our opinion, we will leave it; we will send it to the committee and come back in October and still be able to handle it. But if it is going to regulate elections and they are urgent, then there may be need for us to reconsider handling it. 

So if it is not urgent we can come back in October and deal with it. Is it important for the elections that are going to go on? If it is, honourable members, as national representatives of women, people with disability and of all these categories of people affected by this law, would it not be something we can consider? After all, this is a one-clause amendment. You can choose to reject it and go back to the old law. But in order for us to reject it, we have to be able to move there because the debate we are now doing is actually on the Bill, not on the motion that is before us. We have debated the Bill rather than the motion for suspension of the rules.

So, honourable members, I would urge you because I am going to have to find a way of concluding this debate; we have other business.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In light of your guidance and reading from the mood of the House, we are in agreement. It is important that we have this law. But what members are trying to say is that we have ben sort of ambushed with this particular piece of legislation. 

Wouldn’t be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for us to sleep over this issue so that tomorrow we come back and decide on this legislation? I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been here for the last one hour handling this motion. Is it the wish of the House that we defer this debate? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

LT GEN. ANGINA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise because you have guided and I believe we are leaders that should yield to guidance. When you enter an ambush, you do not sleep over it; you act immediately. (Laughter) Therefore, speaking from the experience of ambushes, do not postpone but deal with it immediately. And for that matter we go into business right away. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, we all want the changes but please give us time to consult the people we represent. And we have said we can consult on phones. We may not drive to the villages but let us consult these four groups of people. The soldiers are taken care of.

Mr Speaker, the proposal by hon. Anywar should be supported. Give us a day and the minister should bring the women’s Bill so that we do the four of them together.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what would this mean? Should I defer the motion for suspension to be considered tomorrow or shall I be suspending consideration of the Bill after the motion is granted, then we come back tomorrow and look at it? The motion has to be granted first for us to go and consult and come back. This is to give us time to go and make phone calls so that when we come back tomorrow, we can deal with the Bill as it is.

Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that rule 118 be suspended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rule 118 is suspended. This Bill will not be referred to the committee; it will be handled tomorrow starting with the second reading.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table a request by Government to borrow up to UA 5 million from the African Development Fund to support the Multinational Lakes Edward and Albert Integrated Fisheries and Water Resources Management Project (LEAF III). I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, that is the request. It stands referred to the committee on National Economy to handle and advise the House on how to proceed.

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATIION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table a  request by Government to borrow up to SDR 54.4 million (USD 75 million) from the International Development Association to support the Regional Communications Infrastructure Programme (Phase IV).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on National Economy to handle expeditiously and advise the House on how to proceed.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Papers have been laid but I think there was a mistake, for which I seek clarification. Item No. 4.1 was a request by Government to borrow up to UA 5 million from the African Development Fund (ADF). Is this a request to the Parliament of Uganda to borrow five million or is it fifty million? I thought there was a mistake here. You raise this entire House to borrow five million! Is it true that as a sovereign nation of Uganda we are borrowing USD 5 million by motion? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the request?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I would like to confirm that the request from Government – (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, I have been made to understand that one of our colleagues is appearing in Parliament armed with a pistol. Is it in order for Members to come to Parliament while armed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No it is not and if there is such a Member, please excuse yourself and leave the chambers. Which Member?

MR KASIBANTE: The UPDF representative, Mr Speaker.

LT GEN. ANGINA: Mr Speaker, the Member should know the difference between a pouch and a gun. This is an empty pouch. We need to give them a lecture on military dressing.

MR KAJARA: Honourable members, I would like to confirm that the loan amount we want borrow is Unit of Account 5 million. I would also like to mention that this is additional funding; we already have money from the Global Environment Fund, the African Development Fund and from NELSAF. This is additional funding to ensure that this project takes off.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, this is now project number two because it is LEAF II and not LEAF I and the minister has said it is additional funding. If it were additional funds, this should have been for LEAF I. 

The procedural issue I am raising is that UA 5 million is about $6 million. To call a whole Parliament of Uganda to discuss UA 5 million when the SACCO is here, when Post Bank is here and when Centenary Bank is here is to demonstrate that the country is at crossroads.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that will be the advice that the committee will give us. I have already referred the matter to the committee and I cannot withdraw. Let the committee come and advise us that please, go to Centenary Bank and borrow this money. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 123(1) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND SECTION 2(b)(i) OF THE RATIFICATION OF TREATIES ACT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will not considering this today; the minister responsible is not here and that also applies to the next item.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had guided that this should not be the wording on the Order Paper; I do not know who has gone back to this wording. We are not dealing with the report of the committee but a motion. There was a pending motion for withdrawal of that motion. Therefore, let the record be properly captured. Therefore, item No. 7 should be, “Motion for the creation of new districts under Article 129 of the Constitution of Uganda.” That is the motion before the House. 

Honourable members, you remember the minister had moved under our Rules of Procedure to withdraw that motion, so we now need to understand the status - where we are. Remember, I deferred the debate so that we can continue after consultations to see how to proceed. Honourable minister, how do we proceed?

4.17
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. When we last considered this matter in this House on Thursday, we ended at a point where the Leader of Government Business, through you, requested the House to suspend the debate on the motion for withdrawal of the motion for the creation of new districts.

Mr Speaker, you and the House did gracefully agree to suspend the debate to allow Government carry out more consultations on the matter. As the Leader of Government Business said then, the purpose for further consultations was to enhance more unity and cohesion in this House. It was also meant to unite the country and take cognisance of the concerns of the honourable members of the House on the matter.

Cabinet, in pursuance to that suspension, sat yesterday and looked at this matter in a more broader and comprehensive manner. Firstly, it was Cabinet, and indeed Government, which had in the first place moved the motion for the creation of new districts. Secondly, it was Cabinet, owing to financial constraints in the years 2012, 2013 and 2014, which decided to halt the creation of new districts and therefore delay the discussion of this motion until financial constraints would be addressed and most infrastructural programmes, which Government was carrying out, have taken off.

Cabinet yesterday sat and decided that in view of the concerns of the Members to have the districts which Government had proposed, we therefore propose to proceed with the motion for the creation of new districts but create them in a phased manner. This was the position of Cabinet and Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Because the budget for this financial year has been passed, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could not accommodate any new district this financial year. 

We therefore proposed, in the spirit of moving together, that the first batch of the new districts will take effect from 1 July 2016 and the rest will be staggered over the financial years. In brief, that is the report that I have brought from Government. I know there are procedures that we have to follow but I thought I would present the report in detail. That is the gist and if I am allowed at a later time, I have an amended motion, which I wish to present to this House with your leave, Mr Speaker, for the House to consider. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the substance of the report is that the motion for withdrawal would not be sustainable based on the Cabinet’s decision yesterday.

Honourable members, I recall very well that on Thursday, there were strong objections that were raised against the minister’s motion for withdrawal. Now it has come back. There was a motion for withdrawal and it has now been revealed that there will be no withdrawal. However, we still need to phase off that motion for withdrawal to pave way for our proceeding with the substantive motion on the creation of new districts. Therefore, I now ask the minister to formally withdraw the other motion for withdrawal.

4.22
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): In view of the guidance you have given, Mr Speaker, and in view of the report I have given to this House, I beg to move that my motion to withdraw the motion for the creation of new districts be now withdrawn.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion that has been presented to withdraw the motion for withdrawal. (Laughter). It is seconded. Honourable members, going by the debate we had last week, it is only proper that we allow this debate to go on. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion for withdrawal is withdrawn. (Laughter) Honourable members, the motion that now remains before us is a substantive motion that was introduced in 2012 on the creation of new districts under Article 179 of our Constitution. Honourable minister, how would you like to proceed?

Before you proceed, honourable minister, in the public gallery this afternoon we have the She Cranes. The She Cranes - the Uganda national netball team - and team officials have just returned from Sydney, Australia, where they took part in the Netball World Cup and finished 8th overall. I do not have to ask you again, but join me in welcoming them back to Uganda and also in the chamber. (Applause)

You are very welcome and we thank you for your performance. We will find time to make a formal recognition of your efforts outside this country.

5.24
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Parliamentary Netball Team and the entire sports fraternity, I wish to take this opportunity to join you in congratulating and welcoming the She Cranes back home with an overwhelming victory.

To us as a country, when the She Cranes qualified for the Netball World Cup, it was already victory. What they did there was just an additional victory. Therefore, I would like to thank and congratulate them. I know the journey was not an easy one. 

Mr Speaker, there is another huddle for them to go and prove their worth. In 2019, the World Cup will again be held and I know our ladies tried their best to make Uganda really the Pearl of Africa and indeed, they made it shine. If they must qualify, they have to again participate in other internationally recognised games. This calls for us to give them support, understanding and a shoulder to lean on as a country in terms of budgeting and having them get prepared.

One of the reasons they have not been able to come with that World Cup trophy is because they did not sufficiently train. However, they promised that they are ready, given support, to train and come as the world number one in netball. 

I would like to congratulate them because what people knew about netball has actually changed. I am glad that it is the women of Uganda that have made this country proud by representing us in the World Cup. Congratulations to the She Cranes, congratulations to the managers and congratulations to the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, who insisted that money must be found for them to go. (Applause).

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you because even at short notice, you let the daughters of Uganda come to their Parliament and be recognised. We would like to thank you and we also would like to thank all Ugandans who supported them through prayers. We thank the husbands of our ladies who allowed them to go and take part in these games; we would like to thank them for having supported them. We would like to thank the wives of the officials and the children who accepted to remain home to pray and support their relatives who had gone to represent this country. We would like to thank the Almighty God, who took and brought them back safely with this victory. We would like to thank you, honourable colleagues, for being behind the She Cranes. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for that statement that is on behalf of us all. However, we will find time to do a proper motion in recognition of their participation. Before the honourable minister comes, I think let us tie up the issue of those amendments on the Bills from the Ministry of Gender.

You will recall that the National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill was not presented. However, it is before us and we have copies. I would like you, in your consultations, to also consult on that. It is the National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill. Consult on it as well so that when we come tomorrow, the motion for the first reading will be made and then we will consider all of them together tomorrow. Thank you.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In view of the report that I have given and the passage of the motion by the honourable members for withdrawal of the motion for withdrawal of the motion for creation of districts, for which I am very grateful, I beg to move the amended motion for a resolution of this august House, for creation of new districts as follows: districts to become effective – (Interruption)

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I thought when the minister withdrew the motion to withdraw the other motion, then we were supposed to proceed with the committee’s report before he presents the addendum. Would it not be procedurally right if we debated the committee’s report and then come to the rules?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are proceeding correctly.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, the amendments are as follows: districts to become effective 1 July 2016 include Kagadi District, currently part of Kibaale District, consisting of Buyaga East and Buyaga West counties with its headquarters – (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The term of the current Parliament will elapse in May 2016 and so will the term of the current Government. Is it procedurally okay for this Parliament to start passing motions on behalf of a Parliament that is yet to be elected? What will be the work of the next Parliament?

Mr Speaker, putting into consideration that we are going for elections, new promises and new manifestos shall be drawn. Are we proceeding well to start undertaking work that is supposed to be done by the next Parliament at this stage when we still have a lot on the table for us to dispose of? Are we proceeding well?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have, in our Rules of Procedure, a procedure for reviewing whatever decision Parliament has made. If the next Parliament should find that it is not necessary for it to continue, it will review it.

For now, it is expedient in the circumstances that it should be done that way. After all, when we adopted the Vision 2040 and the National Strategic Plan of five years, it was not because this Parliament was to go for five years more or 40 years more. It is just planning for that purpose. If it is acceptable, it will be taken over. I therefore do not see any problem with that. We are proceeding properly.

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a privilege to be a Member of Parliament because we have to check the mood and the temperature of the people we represent in Parliament. However, at the same time we should also be mindful of the resource envelope we have. 

I am standing here in testimony of what the Seventh Parliament passed due to a great demand for districts. If you remember, some people from some areas threatened to eat snakes and rats, which actually indicated that the interest for the districts was so high. However, we could not manage in terms of the budget. What was done was that the districts were passed in principle and phased in order not to put pressure on the resources for a particular financial year. 

In fact, I remember the Minister of Local Government then was my dear friend, Prof. Kabwegyere, and I was very angry with him because the majority of the districts that were going to operate that financial year were from the western region. I had anticipated that those districts should have come from the north and the east which had been affected by the Lord’s Resistance Army. 

You know, in politics you can never predict what is to come tomorrow. Although I was so angry with Prof. Kabwegyere, it was actually the creation of Dokolo which gave me a holiday of two months. Much as I lost Lira Municipality for obvious reasons that you know, God for the first time in so many years gave me two months to rest at home and come back through Dokolo District.  (Applause) 

Therefore, what I am trying to say is that we should balance, as Members of Parliament. We are really burdened because the demands of our people may not agree with what we can afford to give in terms of resources. We, therefore, need to give consideration about how we are going to phase them, but you also have to convince us what criteria you will use for the first category and the second category, so that we are aware. That is the clarification I would like so that we move in one spirit.

On the issue of districts, on the issue of municipalities, all that we are concerned about is that we do not want to over burden our country financially and at the same time, administratively, we must be sober. That is really my plea. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we listen to the motion and then raise all those issues. Let us listen to the amendment that the minister brought forward and then we deal with it. If we continue like this, we will not have headway. Let us first listen and then see whether it is something we can entertain. He is proposing an amendment.

Honourable members, we have a motion that has not yet been – Please, resume your seats. Let me inform you, honourable members, that motion, procedure, order, information and clarification are all areas where you can interrupt debate. However, right now there is a motion being moved. If in the middle of debate a member comes and says “motion”, that is interruption of debate permissible within the law. However, what is happening right now is that there is a motion being moved; it has not yet been moved. Can we have it moved and then we deal with all those other issues, please?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I had already moved for the creation of Kagadi District, currently part of Kibaale District, consisting of Buyaga East and Buyaga West counties with its headquarters at Kagadi Town Council;

Kakumiro District, currently part of Kibaale District, consisting of Bugangaizi East and Bugangaizi West counties with its headquarters at Kakumiro Town Council;

Omoro District, currently part of Gulu District, consisting of Omoro County with its headquarters at Omoro County headquarters;

Rubanda District, currently part of Kabale District, consisting of Rubanda County with its headquarters at Rubanda County headquarters.

Mr Speaker, the categories of districts that we propose to start effective 1 July 2017 are the following:

i) 	Namisindwa District, currently part of Manafwa District, consisting of Namisindwa County with its headquarters at Namisindwa.

ii) 	Pakwach District, currently part of Nebbi District, consisting of Jonam County with its headquarters at Pakwach Town Council. 

iii) 	Butebo District, currently part of Pallisa District, consisting of Butebo County with its headquarters at Butebo Trading Centre.

iv) 	Rukiga District, currently part of Kabale District, consisting of Rukiga County with its headquarters at Rukiga County headquarters.

v) 	Kyotera District, currently part of Rakai District, with its headquarters at Kasaali Sub-county headquarters. This district will consist of Kyotera County and the sub counties of Kyebe, Kakuuto and Kasasa in Kakuuto County. The two sub counties in Kibanda and Kifamba, formally in Kakuuto County, will now be part of Kooki County constituting of Rakai District.

vi) 	Bunyangabu District, currently part of Kabarole District, consisting of Bunyangabu County with its headquarters at Kibiito Town Council.

The districts to become effective 1 July 2018 will include:

i) 	Nabilatuk District, currently part of Nakapiripirit District, consisting of Pian County with its headquarters at Nabilatuk Trading Centre.

ii) 	Bugweri District, currently part of Iganga District, consisting of Bugweri County with its headquarters at Busesa.

iii) 	Kassanda District, currently part of Mubende District, consisting of Kassanda County with its headquarters at Kassanda.

iv) 	Kwania District, currently part of Apac District, consisting of Kwania County with its headquarters at Aduku Town Council.

v) 	Kapelebyong District, currently part of Amuria District, consisting of Kapelebyong County with its headquarters at Kapelebyong Trading Centre.

vi) 	Kikuube District, currently part of Hoima District, consisting of Buhaguzi County with its headquarters at Kikuube Town Board.

The final category is the districts which will become effective 1 July 2019. These are;

i) 	Obongi District, currently part of Moyo District, consisting of Obongi County with its headquarters at Obongi Trading Centre.

ii) 	Kazo District, currently part of Kiruhura District, consisting of Kazo County with its headquarters at Kazo County headquarters.

iii) 	Rwampara District, currently part of Mbarara District, consisting of Rwampara County with its headquarters at Rwampara County headquarters.

iv) 	Kitagwenda District, currently part of Kamwenge District, consisting of Kitagwenda County with its headquarters at Kitagwenda County headquarters.

v) 	Madi-Okollo, District currently part of Arua District, consisting of Madi-Okollo County with its headquarters at Inde Trading Centre.
vi) 	Karenga District, currently part of Kaabong District, to consist of Dodoth West County with its headquarters at Kidepo Town Council.

vii) Kalaki District, currently part of Kaberamaido District, consisting of Kalaki County with its headquarters at Kalaki County headquarters.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I propose that the headquarters of each new district, which is not yet a town council, shall immediately, upon the passage of this motion, become a town council in accordance with the provision of the Local Governments Act. I beg to move that the motion be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will propose the motion again for your debate. There was a motion for a resolution of Parliament moved under Article 179 (1) (b) of the Constitution to provide for the creation of new districts. That was the motion I proposed and now there is an amended motion to that effect. 

The initial motion had the committee report, which we listened to, but now that motion has been amended in the terms that have been proposed by the minister. I now propose this motion for your debate and debate starts now.

Honourable members, before we start debate, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from different secondary schools in Pader District represented by hon. Odonga Otto and hon. Lowila CD Oketayot, Woman Member of Parliament. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. I hope they are still there. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a good idea that the minister has brought the districts and of course, as practice and as a rule, it would be good for us to declare interest in terms of this motion in this House.

Owing to the fact that we have seen that Omoro and Bunyangabo districts are part of this motion and they were both beneficiaries of a county sometime back, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the Chair be taken by another Member so that at least – (Laughter) - the issue can be taken seriously. In fact the question of –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, every matter we deliberate on in this House is of national nature and in one way or another, it affects every member in this House. Mr Speaker, you have even presided over motions for roads, health centres in your constituency, roads connecting through your constituency and many more. Is the member in order to say that when the Speaker is presiding over the House on national matters, he should disqualify himself and yet the issues that he is presiding over are of national nature? Is he in order to say that the Speaker should not sit in the House when matters affecting the people of Uganda are being presided over?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true that by provision of the Constitution, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament shall be elected from one of their own and they do not resign their positions; they remain Members of Parliament representing their constituencies. That is by the operation of the Constitution. 

Also, by operation of the Political Parties’ and Organisations Act, a Speaker and Deputy Speaker are entitled to belong to political parties. The two Speakers – the current Speaker and Deputy Speaker - are both members of the NRM. However, there has not been occasion that a matter from the NRM Government has been treated with unfairness because the presiding officer is a party member. 

The purpose for which we wear these wigs is to de-personate us as human beings and make us act in that capacity as no longer MP for Omoro County, with the interests of the Omoro people. I would otherwise be articulating those issues and taking advantage of my position to present issues for Omoro County here but I do not do that. Many times that matters have come that affect people there, I pick the member for Gulu District or members from the region to bring those issues rather than I. That is the way to proceed. 

Therefore, to say that the Speaker and MP for Omoro County has an interest is to state the obvious. (Laughter) I am a Member of Parliament for Omoro County. The world knows that and the honourable member knows that. Uganda knows that I am a Member of Parliament for Omoro County. Does the creation of any of these issues benefit Oulanyah Jacob as MP, or the people of Omoro? Are the people of Omoro citizens of this country? I do not know. 

As Deputy Speaker presiding now, I am sitting here as the Deputy Speaker. I have no particular interest to push debate this way or the other way to achieve any personal interest. I am not the author of this motion and just like I said the other day, the mere fact that you are sitting in a bus does not make you a bus owner. (Laughter)

What we are discussing here, for all intents and purposes, we are hoping that it is in national interest and not personal interest. Honourable members, let us respect that principle and proceed that way. We will still be able to proceed. I do not even vote. Please, do not be bothered with my position being here and matters of Omoro County coming.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am certain that when the minister withdrew the motion, it meant he withdrew the certificate of financial implications. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us proceed properly; no motion has been withdrawn. The motion that was withdrawn was that for withdrawal but the substantive one was not withdrawn.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If the certificate of financial implications has not been withdrawn, then you are making my case different now. In 2011, the minister brought a motion with a certificate of financial implications which had not expired and he said, “I would like to create these districts” and by now all the districts would have been created. That meant that the certificate of financial Implications was genuine and we should have acted on it.

The fact that the financial implications certificate which exists now is of the other day and we never created districts means we have delayed these districts by five years. Now we have accumulated enough wealth. I have seen the budget of appropriation accounts that we passed in 2012/2013 indicating Kakumiro, Kagadi and others. They are in the appropriation account, meaning allowing Government to spend on districts which were never created on that day and money for those districts is now somewhere hanging.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that instead of delaying the districts whose money we have kept, we create them now because the money is there and the certificate of financial implications has not expired? For us who are also interested in new districts, we would like to bring them now because those are the ones which will come in the following years. 

Mr Speaker, the reason I raised the procedural issue is because technically, we would be making a mistake to push to another Parliament a financial implication for the period we are in. You talked of the Vision 2040; world over, every Government plans and has visions. Visions are not only here but everywhere, but they do not plan visions on creation of districts and counties. Those are done by respective institutions like Parliament. Won’t it be procedurally right that we have money to have all these districts operationalised immediately?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that would not be a procedural issue; it is a financial issue. The Speaker is not privy to the financial matters of the Government and it is the Government that is making this proposal. It is not a procedural point; I think it is a matter that the minister needs to explain rather than the Speaker.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I did explain, although briefly, while moving my motion that Cabinet, in which the minister of Finance sits, did consider the creation of these districts. We looked at the possibility of starting with some districts this financial year. However, the Minister of Finance clearly informed Cabinet that in the budget of this financial year, there is no provision to start a new district. He advised, and Cabinet agreed, that the earliest Government can get money to kick-start the first batch of the districts is 1 July 2016. The other categories of districts will also be created over the following financial year. 

It is in that spirit that I have moved this motion. This is not the first time this Parliament, as hon. Cecilia Ogwal pointed out –(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let the minister finish.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have here the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) which is every three years. I do not see anything here that talks of creation of districts in 2016, 2017 or 2018. Is the minister in order to tell us – In 2016 and 2017 there is nothing on creation of districts and today he says the creation of districts can be done in 2016 and that is when the budget is there, yet we have the MTEF for the next three years.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Parliament this year cannot make budgetary provision for financial year 2017/2018; it cannot do that. When the time comes, this Parliament will be able to do the budget for financial year 2016/2017. It will be able to do that in the next budgetary cycle but it cannot do the other one. Therefore, that is why it is a projection.

We have already passed what is happening this financial year and the argument the minister is advancing is that it did not cater for creation of a new district. Therefore, that should be considered in the next financial year, where the budget will be done by this House to make provision for those.

Are we, therefore, proceeding properly or is the minister in order is the question? I think we are proceeding properly and the minister is perfectly in order to make the projections in the circumstances.

MS SSENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. I do appreciate that the minister has presented this motion and we are ready to debate. However, I would like to humbly request, as a matter of procedure, that he also presents the next motion on municipalities so that we debate all at once. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is hardly the kind of motion you can debate at once. Can you debate it at once, honourable minister? No, I think this is a really substantive motion; let us debate this motion.

4.58
MR BARNABAS TINKASIMIRE (Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, thank you so much. I would like to thank the honourable minister for amending this previous motion. I also would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to amend his amended motion -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To propose an amendment.

MR TINKASIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I would like to propose an amendment particularly on the dates of commencement that on part A, the districts which were proposed to be effective from 1 July 2016 be presumed to have started on 1 July 2015. The districts which were supposed to be effective from 1 July 2017 do start 1 July -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words the years should be reduced.

MR TINKASIMIRE: Yes. My justification for the amendment, Mr Speaker, is that you remember we had a bad day on Thursday when the entire Cabinet had to go and reconsider their motion. Given the fact that serious pronouncements have been made on some districts like Kagadi and Kakumiro where the President, a fountain of honour –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, the motion proposed by hon. Tinkasimire has financial implications. Is he in order as a private member of this House to move a motion that involves financial implications?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is entitled to move a motion that has financial implications with the consent of the Government. If there is no such consent, then we would not be proceeding properly.

MR TINKASIMIRE: Mr Speaker, perhaps I should persuade Government in my justification and they will buy my argument. Given the serious pronouncements which were given by the President to the people of Kibaale and being a fountain of honour, it would be in good faith that the people of Bunyoro and Kibaale continue to see him in that light.

Mr Speaker, the two first districts had been proposed to start in 2012. Money was appropriated - Shs 2.3 billion - and an appropriation Act of Parliament passed by this House. Therefore, the money is there – (Interruption)
 
MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, you have ruled that unless the honourable member’s motion is with the consent of Government, he cannot proceed. The Government is here and they have not consented at all. Are we proceeding rightly? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have come this far; let us see how to harmonise and go forward. You see, as for the certificate that was issued in 2012 and the money that was appropriated in 2012, two things may have happened. If that money was misused, that would be a matter for the Auditor-General to report on and our Public Accounts Committee will pick it up as a query. 

Secondly, we also know that monies that have not been used in a financial year are returned to the Consolidated Fund. That is automatic. Therefore there cannot be some money hanging somewhere with somebody for this district. It was either misappropriated, in which case there should be a query from the Auditor-General, or it could have been returned to the Consolidated Fund if it was not used, or it could have been used in the budget by reallocation or things like that. Therefore, there is money that could have been carried forward for that purpose beyond the 2012 financial year. 

Now, honourable members, there is a procedural point from the honourable member. Is the motion being proposed by hon. Tinkasimire sustainable without consent of the Government? 

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have read Article 93 a few times now, even a motion for amendment is not sustainable unless it is by the Government; that is in the law. No motion or Bill which has financial implication can proceed if it is not from the Government. A private member is prohibited from doing that. The only way you can do it is by having the Government agree to it.

Now, can I ask on the record whether the government agrees to this principle? 

5.06
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, Government rejects Ndugu Tinkasiimire’s proposed motion because of financial implications.

5.06
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to move an amendment that we remove all these districts of 2018 and 2019 and fit them between 2016 and 2017. 

My justification is that those of us who are sure that we will be back here cannot spend four years giving out districts. We should be looking at other matters. For those of you who are excited about 2018 and 2019, I would like to make you believe that this will be “air” for you and you will get empeewo. This is in Luganda. Mr Speaker, my amendment – (Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The motion before this House is meant to result into a resolution of this Parliament. Is the honourable member in order to suggest that part of this motion, which will be a resolution of Parliament, will be ‘air supply’ to the people of Uganda? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Kalungu West, just in case you have forgotten, this is the Parliament of Uganda and it can never do the kind of things you are suggesting it can do; supplying air. When a Member of this House stands to speak, he must respect the purpose and decorum of this House and extend that courtesy to its membership. 

Can a resolution of this nature that we are going to pass be termed ‘supply of air’ by an honourable member of this House? Would that be fair? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I command a lot of respect for hon. Adolf Mwesige and I know, for other reasons that I will not say, why I can state that this will happen. However, this House is on record for approving a district in 2006 after people ate rats but up to now, they have never received those districts. Regarding Umeme, how many recommendations have we made here and they have not taken off? 

Mr Speaker, what I am saying is not in bad spirit; it is in the good spirit of what you are intending to give. You want to give these districts – By the way, Kalungu is not benefiting from any of this – (Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable member to continue undermining your ruling, especially when the mood in the House says that he should withdraw his statement and he goes ahead with his arguments? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Kalungu West, you owe it to the House to uphold its dignity.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I would like to state that there is the House and Government. I would like to put it on record that even when we were fighting for teachers’ salaries, the House was committed but Government refused. It was this House still struggling for them. 

As I justify my motion, sometimes some Members do not take the time to listen to what we are saying. Honourable member from Fort Portal Municipality, please increase your attention in this House. What I am trying to emphasis is that the motion I am moving is to –(Interruption)

MR SIMON PETER ALEPER: Mr Speaker, I would like to move under Rule 70 that the Member no longer be heard. It reads, “If a member persists in irrelevance or tedious repetitions or uses objectionable words and on being called to order fails to retract or explain the words and offer an apology to the satisfaction of the Speaker, any Member may…” That is why I am moving under this rule, Mr Speaker and I beg to move. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, unfortunately that is not sustainable because that is moved by way of motion not procedure. You rose on a procedural point so unfortunately, I am unable to help you with that. 

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, you gave your ruling on whether this Parliament or Government can commit the next Government but Mr Speaker, you are a Speaker of Parliament whose acumen in law I cannot doubt at all. 

However, I would think that the Attorney-General, on the part of this Government, would give a legal opinion over this matter as to whether this Parliament and Government can commit the next Government in the creation of these districts.

I am saying so because this matter has a precedent. I remember that the Rt Hon. Apolo Nsibambi had presented to the Eighth Parliament, where he was sitting as a Member of Parliament – (Interjections) - I rise on a procedural issue and hon. Odonga Otto, Member of Parliament from Aruu, moved that this Government could not commit the next Government on who should be appointed in which position. The ruling at that time was that indeed, he carried the day and therefore, Professor Nsibambi’s submission was withdrawn.

Mr Speaker, the same circumstances are apparent. We seem to plan for districts, which would be passed in the next Parliament. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would ask for your guidance as to whether the Attorney-General would not be the right person to give a legal opinion on whether this Government can be committed to undertake for the next Government or Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is only one Government of the Republic of Uganda. Whether in 2025 or 1963, there is only one Government of the Republic of Uganda. The leadership may change in the course of time but the government will always be the government of the Republic of Uganda. That is why even judgements that were ended against past Governments are enforced against other Governments that succeeded. 

That is why loans inherited by previous Governments are being executed and diligently repaid by the existing Government. That is why debts and all these other things are still called the debt portfolio of the Government of Uganda not the government of Idi Amin or UPC or any other Government. It is the government of the Republic of Uganda; sovereign debts of the Government of Uganda. 

Therefore, whatever we do today, if it is legitimate, will bind future Governments. If they would like to extricate themselves from it, it will be their responsibility to give justifications for abandoning it. So please, let us proceed with this debate.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, this is a very important matter constitutionally. As we undertake to commit ourselves, it is important for us to understand the distinction between a government and a state. In light of that, Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance. If what we are doing is correct, how come every Parliament elected; the Ninth Parliament or the Eighth Parliament, has an unchallengeable right to design and approve its Rules of Procedure?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, there was a ruling by the Chief Justice, Benjamin Odoki, that there is only one set of Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I was hoping that as a law student, you would be aware of this. (Laughter)

The Chief Justice said that demarcation of the Rules of Procedure of the Ninth Parliament do not apply. There are only Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It may be the Ninth Parliament or the Seventh Parliament but the rules are the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The Ninth Parliament may review and make changes – That is the ruling that was made about four years back and I recollect this very well. That is the current position of the law on that issue. [Members rose] Are we now going to debate procedure only?

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. There are districts, which applied like Oyam. We started applying to the Ministry of Local Government since 2011. I followed it up and we have a very big number of people in the district and in Lango sub-region, even geographically, our area is very big. We even submitted to the ministry and I have a copy of my submission here, which was received by the ministry. Unfortunately, our district is not mentioned here.

Last time, we appealed up to the committee and our name came before Parliament and it was rejected. Therefore Mr Speaker, where is the fairness in granting districts, counties, constituencies and sub-counties? If the minister can go back and amend this motion so that at least Oyam, which fairly deserves it and which started asking for a district since 2011 – What more should we do in order for our name to be included or what is the criterion that we should follow in order for Oyam or Aber District to be included in the list of the districts, which are brought by Government before Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not a procedural point; you are moving an amendment. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, a motion was brought in Parliament in 2012. It was presented before this House and referred to the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. A report was brought to this House together with a minority report. As we were proceeding with that report, the minister informed this House that there was a moratorium that had been imposed by Government against the creation of new districts. 

It was upon that background, Mr Speaker, that you allowed the minister to go back and consult. He is coming back with an amended motion but there was a report, together with a minority report, of work which was done by a committee of Parliament. 

Secondly, about the moratorium, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for us to know from the minister whether Government has lifted that moratorium so that even other areas could move to propose for the creation of districts? This is because what was holding us back was the moratorium. Now that the minister is amending the motion and presenting it as a new motion for debate here, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for us to know from him whether the moratorium has now been lifted?

Mr Speaker, would you guide me on what is going to happen to the report of the committee and the minority report that were presented before this House? In addition, is this second motion also going to go back to the committee or are we going to dispose of it this evening? Mr Speaker, I would like to be guided.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when a Bill is brought to this House, read for the first time and sent to a committee, when that Bill is coming back to the House, it does not come to debate the report of the committee. It comes, on second reading, to debate the motion for second reading of the Bill where the committee now reports on what their findings are and guides the House and guides the debate. The same applies to motions of this nature, which are referred to committees.

When the committee is ready to come back to the House, it is not the report of the committee that is going to be debated; it is the motion, which was referred to the committee that is going to be debated, which is now going to be informed by the report; majority or minority, whichever is applicable. That is what would inform the debate and decisions would be taken. 

Where you need to take the recommendations of the committee is when you come to a decision. For example, if the committee had recommended, in their report – After considering they say, maybe five new districts should be created. When the time comes for decision, for example, if there was a decision to be taken on Kagadi and there is an amendment that the committee has recommended on Kagadi, that would now be the time to propose that amendment so that it is handled and voted on and it becomes the position of the House.

Let me give you an example. We had a situation here when the counties were being handled. The minister brought the motion and it went to committee. The committee came back and proposed some amendments, which were not handled by the House. At the time of putting the question, no amendment was proposed. Members, at the time of taking a decision, no amendment was proposed. Therefore, what ended up being passed was the initial motion that was proposed by the minister. 

If the committee wanted to amend, at the time that, that item was called, they should have proposed an amendment to it but because it was not amended, we cannot change it; we go by the original text because that is what it is. If you need to amend it, you propose the amendment and it is amended and that becomes the position of the House. 

Therefore, we are not debating reports of committees; we are debating the motion. Now, can that motion be amended and at what time can it be amended? The answer is, yes and the answer is also at any time. That motion can be amended at any time of the proceedings. Therefore, we are proceeding correctly.

Will it be referred to the committee? The substance of the discussion has already gone to committee. This is now an amendment on the Floor at this stage, which we now need to handle the way it is presented.

Regarding the moratorium, by virtue of the minister coming to withdraw his motion, which was premised on the ban on creation of new districts, that means that the moratorium has been lifted, by implication. Otherwise, we would not have been able to proceed with this debate. Therefore, can we proceed with the debate, honourable members? Let us debate this. 

5.27
MR STEPHEN MUGABI BAKKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I rise to support the motion of the minister that the districts, as mentioned, be created.

Mr Speaker, I am a beneficiary of the districts that have been created over the years by this Government. Bugiri District was curved out of Iganga and I can tell that we used to suffer a lot under Iganga. We got district status in 1997 and we have since moved on and the district is developing.

We have also seen the creation of Namayingo, which is also moving very fast in issues of development. There is absolutely no reason why anyone would block Ugandans who wish to be ruled in the manner that they have stated and this is provided for in Article 1 of the Constitution. Therefore, the people of the various districts mentioned: Kagadi, Kakumiro and Omoro should be given district status such that they can determine their own issues at that level.

Mr Speaker, in the same manner, I support the idea of staggering district approval so that we can ease on the financial burden of the various financial years. I reject the idea that we should bring them forward because it will create a lot burden on the current financial year or the next one.

In the same vein, when it comes to municipalities, I will be supporting the creation of the 11 municipalities in this financial year – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is anticipation, honourable member.

MR MUGABI BAKA: I will be supporting the creation of those municipalities and the additional seven in a staggered manner, as we have agreed, Mr Speaker.

Therefore, I rise to support this motion and I urge colleagues to support it so that the people can determine their own issues as they have requested. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.28
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I would like to support this motion but with some amendments.

I would like to note that when Government is creating new administrative units, the criteria should be scientific. When I look at these districts scattered over three years, I get so worried when I see Mubende District having been put in the year 2018.

Mr Speaker, I would like to put this on record and the minister should note that as we talk, Mubende District is the second biggest district in land area in Uganda and that is only after Kibaale District. 

Mubende District is also the second biggest district in Uganda in terms of population. It has a population of 688,819 people as per the 2014 census. Among these districts, which have been put in the first phase, it is only Kibaale and Kabale which have bigger populations than Mubende District. When it comes to land area, it is only Kibaale, which is bigger than Mubende. 

Mr Speaker, we were promised Kassanda District in 2009. It gives me a lot of pain to see that they are pushing us to 2019. Can the minister be a little scientific and use the population figures in order to determine, which district comes before the other?

As I speak, Mubende District is made up of five counties; five constituencies and it is so huge. His Excellency the President directed the Prime Minister to make sure that these big districts are considered when they are distributing resources but resources have never been distributed equitably.

Let me give one simple example. When they are giving Mubende District university quota, we consistently get 11 students to go to the university. My neighbour Gomba, which -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, our contributions are two minutes so that we can cover the number of Members rising.

5.32
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion, which was presented by the minister. I just want to raise a concern that in circumstances where we have motions of this nature coming on the floor and we find that there is a lot of interest from the Members, creating an impression that every part of the country probably needs service delivery and we begin demanding for districts as a basis for service delivery, there must be proper criteria. We do not need Government or Parliament to come and create arguments on the floor. 

Rather, the minister should come up with a scientific system so that at a certain point when the population of an area is at a certain amount, depending on how accessibility in that area, we can then proceed and have a district or a town council or any other administrative unit. I would like to support the minister but also inform him that in future, we need to have proper procedures.

In addition, the minister has left out some other districts, which I believe should have been on the list. Probably, we may need the minister to give us some kind of clarification. I know that Busia originates from Tororo District but Tororo has really agitated for district status and to have Tororo County curved out. What is the status of Tororo County because I do not see it reflected anywhere in all the procedures that come out.

Staggering of districts is a good idea because this will ease the burden on the government. However, we are seeing new administrative units coming up. Probably in the near future, we propose that trading centres that have grown and are ready be elevated to town councils –(Member timed out.)

5.34
MS JUDITH MARY AMOIT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I am happy that today, Cabinet agreed to bring back this motion to this House. 

Mr Speaker, you may recall that the people of Butebo District had a representative here who was a minister; Dr Mallinga. When we were paying tribute to him, the prayers of the people of Butebo were that this pledge should be given to them. They are still waiting to date.

During the recent celebrations, the honourable minister Tarsis Kabwegyere came and the people of Butebo reminded him that since the late minister was a long serving Member of Parliament and a minister, this should be given to them to show the contribution that Dr Mallinga made to this country.

It is my prayer, therefore, that Government, as per its commitment, takes this seriously. In the subsequent years, this must be fulfilled. I have fears because this was promised in 2006, 2011 and now it has been pushed to 2017. I have fears because the other time we had a moratorium and now we are reinstating it.

Mr Speaker, I remain fearful and I ask this Government to take this commitment very seriously so that we can have this district created as we go into the political arena. You aware of the political temperatures - (Member timed out.)

5.36
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to oppose this motion. The minister, on behalf of the government, has confessed and rightly so, that Government is not in a good position to create new districts, at least this year and it is not mandatory that the NRM Government will be in power next year. 

The process therefore becomes like we are discussing a manifesto of the ruling party because we are having elections next year before the implementation of what we are trying to create.

Mr Speaker, the second point that I would like to make is that the ingredients for the justification of creation of these districts change over time. Things like population are not static. Today, we have the highest rural-urban migration in the history of Uganda. Because of what is happening in the rural areas of Uganda, everybody is coming to town, especially to Kampala. As a result, the population in Kagadi today may not be the population of the same place tomorrow. Therefore, we are just doing this in speculation. 

Mr Speaker, earlier on I wanted to rise on a point of procedure as to whether it is procedurally right to have a manifesto of a political party discussed in the National Assembly. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.37
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to clarify on the constitutional criteria used for giving out districts. If you look at Article 179(4), the criteria talks about taking into account means of communication, geographical features, density of population, economic viability and the wishes of the people concerned.

Mr Speaker, if I am to give a rough population census as per the population census that was just concluded, a request for Aber District was submitted in 2011 by the former Woman MP, Beatrice Lagada. Aber has 199,022 people; Omoro has 165,642, Pakwach has 147,963 and Rukiga has 102,038. Those are what I have managed to compute.

Therefore, of the three districts, which are already being created, Oyam surpasses them all. Actually, Oyam comes close to Rubanda, a district, which was created from Kabale, which has a population of 199,616 compared to 199,022 of Aber.

I have not done all the calculations but I am very sure that many of the districts will fall short of the population criteria compared to some of the districts, which have duly requested. Therefore, we really need to know the –(Member timed out.)

5.40
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity and thank you, honourable minister for the motion. I support it because Kabale District, as per the recent census, has a population of 534,160 people with six constituencies, 25 sub-counties, over 140 parishes and over 2,000 villages.

Therefore, we really appreciate your consideration to curve out Rukiga and Rubanda Districts from Kabale. However, my only worry is from the experience of Kibaale District. Considering one of the letters that they laid on the Table last week where they were promised a district in 2012 and they never realised the two districts, I am a bit sceptical regarding the confirmation that in 2016, we shall have the proposed districts implemented and given district status.

The other challenge, which I am seeing as a long term challenge to this Parliament and country is the fact that, in my view, Government does not give special consideration to districts that are still large. If, for example, the people of Kabale knew that they are entitled to more than one road unit compared to Butambala, which may have fewer sub-counties, maybe this pressure could not come. The - (Member timed out.)

5.42
MS ROSE AKELLO (Independent, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for this motion. The motion regarding districts, which was brought in this House last week, scattered Members of this House but I am happy that Government has reconsidered the motion and brought it back to the House.

Mr Speaker, I am one of the beneficiaries of the creation of districts. Earlier on, we had Kotido District and we were three districts composed in one. When Kaabong District was created, that is how I managed to be in this House and I thank the NRM Government for that.

Mr Speaker, I know that I am going to be a beneficiary because I have seen in this list- We have a tribe in Kaabong, among the Karamojong, called the Napore people. These are people who have been marginalised and kept under the umbrella of the Karamojong. However, if you go there, you will find that they are different ethnic people. I am very happy that Government has created Karenga District and I know that when they watch this, they will be very happy and grateful.

Mr Speaker, last week we were debating municipalities in this House. We debated and passed the counties and in essence, we were increasing the number of male Members of Parliament in this House while the female ones are getting fewer. I urge Members to pass this motion of the creation of the districts so that the number of the women in this House also increases. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, you know that in this country, women comprise three quarters of the population. Therefore, if we bring more men here, we shall be marginalised and the affirmative action will not be –(Member timed out.)

5.44
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I support the motion because there are matching benefits for these areas because we shall see increased service delivery. These areas will also be centres of development and industrialisation. The more districts we create, the more employment opportunities we will create. Therefore, there is an aspect of employment that will be considered.

Honourable members, most of the formation of administrative and planning units is as a result of political pressures on Government and lobbying. However, when we come here, we should also know that much of this pressure is from our people themselves. When we come here, we should look at the affiliations of these people who have been lobbying Government to create these centres and not work in reverse. 

In addition, when you get a district, there are other benefits like district quarters in as far as education is concerned and admissions to Makerere and other universities. We should also look at resource allocation where a very big district gets one road equipment unit. If it is split into many districts, they will access a number of road equipment.

Therefore, we need to match our political representation with pressure and look at how many letters have been written to all offices of Government instead of turning against them to say we do not want those districts. This Parliament cannot create a district; all these districts are created from wherever they are. Mr Speaker, I support the motion and I thank you.

5.46
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion, especially after witnessing what befell our minister on the floor here. I am one of those who was against the creation of districts but I had to go and do some homework to know why there was all that pressure and I realised how important and dear these districts are to the honourable members and to the people who demand for them.

This to me is a lesson, especially to the planners in this country. The major reason being given is service delivery. I have been thinking and reviewing the National Development Plan and looking at the Vision 2040. My conviction is that when you look at the trend of population growth in the country, there is a huge youth population.

The last time we were debating about gambling and these games reaching the villages, I think these are modern behaviours or a new culture that is emerging. I see that in the future, if we have a regional city in Gulu, the people of Omoro and others will have all these young people moving to the city for jobs. If we have regional cities in Mbale, Fort Portal, Mbarara and Arua, we will see the country move much faster and people will stop demanding for more districts.

I am therefore giving a futuristic solution that when we have regional cities, we shall be able to cure the demand for districts as these cities will take up the young population - (Member timed out.)

5.48
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. If creation of districts is for service delivery then who does not want service delivery? We all need service delivery for the people that we represent.

My only concern is that these demands were there three years ago. If they handled what they are bringing today, all this pressure would not have come in. Why do we want to work under pressure? The government should sit down and plan for this country. It will be really embarrassing for the honourable minister to come with an issue, withdraw it and then bring it back. That is the pressure, which comes on the government. It is only prudent that a Government worth its name sits down to plan ahead.

We will not have to eat rats and come, demand and cry in this Parliament before you deliver services to the people of this country. The fact that you are elected as a sitting Government means that you are given the mandate to look ahead for the people you represent. I hope that you have learnt a lesson. Let consequent planning spread to the whole country.

I am aware that there are certain parts of this country, which should have had these districts much earlier. As I heared from my colleague from Mubende, that is a huge area. I know of Agago and of other parts of this country. We would want the government, through its minister, to come up with a smooth plan of how we can have administrative units for this country so that you do not work under pressure and so that you do not even have that financial jungle, which puts the government in doubt. You should spread it out, the criteria should be clear –(Member timed out.)

5.50
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion on the grounds that Arua City is on the way. We in Arua support any progressive development and what we are following, particularly for Arua City, is embedded within Vision 2040. Therefore, it will be historical for us, as the Ninth Parliament, to be on record in the creation of cities or realisation of cities that have been earmarked in Vision 2040.

As we debate this motion, and indeed after me you should put the question, Arua is the third largest district in terms of both population and constituency representation. In the past, we have given birth to Yumbe and Koboko and of recent, we gave birth to Maracha. Maracha should have been with Terego but some things happened in the Eighth Parliament and Terego was referred back to Arua.

My appeal to the honourable minister is to see that as we create Madi-Okollo District, Terego gets district status. This is because the resolution of Arua District Council is very clear. Ayivu County, which I represent, is now together with Vurra forming Arua City. That will leave Terego County in space. For that reason, honourable minister, would you consider amending your motion to accommodate Terego County to become a district? This is because in our earlier pronouncement, we divided Terego into two for it to befit district status.

Madi-Okollo has been divided into two to befit a district status. Therefore, to avoid bringing this matter back on this floor, it would right for the minister to amend the motion so that Terego is included in the subsequent implementation of district creations. Thank you.

4.52
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and Government for accepting to lift the moratorium on the creation of new districts and I stand to support this Motion. This is going to widen and deepen decentralisation in Uganda and unearth participation of the people in decision making and resource management.

My only concern is that these districts were supposed to have been created in 2012-2015 and the people have waited for a long time because this has been their wish and the President had made this pronouncement. I would like to appeal to Government that if it were possible, we move and break these districts into two; creating one batch in 2016 and the second batch in 2017 and then we move on.

This is because Uganda is not moving backwards but forwards and we need to develop faster. Creation of these districts has enabled places that were so remote to get kick-started and take on development so I support this motion. Kwania is ready is ready for a new district and I would like the minister to take this proposal that 2016 and 2017 is time enough for us to have these districts created. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.54
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion for the creation of districts as proposed by the honourable minister. I would like to observe that Kabale, one of the districts, which has generated two districts, has 570,000 people. Kibaale with 780,000 people has also given us two other districts. Mubende, which has 680,000 people, is in the middle and only one district has been created.

As far as land area is concerned, Mubende is the second largest district in Uganda. Mr Speaker, you may recall that the people of Kasambya County, who I represent in this Parliament, brought their petition to this Parliament requesting for a district. Apart from the petition, the President, on the 30 January 2010, promised the people of Kasambya a district. 

I would like to persuade the honourable minster to amend the motion to include Kasambya County as one of the districts. I cannot fail to represent the interests of the people who sent me here. I would like to be on record – I would be one of the luckiest people if Kasambya County is considered for district status. It qualifies and has 186,000 people yet other districts have got 190,000 and 110,000. I feel it is – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, don’t you think it is at this time - Let us see how to proceed properly because as we debate, we still have a motion and an amendment motion.

Would it not be proper for us to decide which motion we would like to take on? I will put the question to the amendment as proposed by the minister as to whether we should go by the amended motion or we go back to the old motion. 

I put the question to the amendment proposed by the minister as the amended motion. I put the question to the amended motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That means that the original motion is not there. We are now dealing with the amended motion. Can we have Busongora South, Pader, Obongi, Kalaki, Agago, Bubulo, Buliisa, Bundibugyo, Kibaale in that order. We are moving, honourable member. 

MR MUGABI BAKKA: I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedural guidance?

MR MUGABI BAKKA: Mr Speaker, I seek procedural guidance from you. From the way we are moving, it is clear to me that we may not be able to have the numbers to conclude this motion on creation of new districts. Isn’t it right for us to proceed in such a manner that we end debate on the districts and proceed to have the motion on the new municipalities so that we debate it today and then the two motions can be voted on tomorrow when we have enough quorum?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would we want to proceed that way? Honourable members, the opinion is that we pause debate on the creation districts here with the amended motion and then we go to the next item and see how far we can go with it and deal with the whole thing tomorrow. Can I put the question to that proposal? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will come back to this motion tomorrow and take decisions appropriately. Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER SECTION 7 (2)(a) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT PROVIDING FOR CREATION OF NEW MUNICIPALITIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion was moved. We received this motion already. Did I propose the question for debate?

6.00
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I had formally moved the motion on creation of new municipalities and I think debate was about to commence. 

I would like to inform this House that I intend to make amendments. I am therefore giving notice to this House that I have amendments to add more municipalities and also to phase them. However, to do that, I need the clearance of Cabinet, which I will be seeking tomorrow morning and I will therefore come back with new amendments to the floor of this House tomorrow.

I therefore beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker, to allow those amendments to be brought so that the House can debate and consider them in a holistic manner.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, the motion was moved. I do not know if we shall be proceeding well - We can debate and at any time, the minister can move an amendment. I do not know if it is not okay - I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member for Bufumbira East is suggesting that we debate the motion as it is and wait for the amendment when it comes.

Honourable members, this is the situation. The mover of the motion, I guess going by the spirit of the debate we had last week over this matter, has gone and consulted and needs further consultation on how to handle this issue of municipalities. I think it will be proper for us to have the whole package and then we can debate more proactively. 

Honourable members, in view of that, this House stands adjourned to tomorrow 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.03 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 19 August 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

