

Tuesday, 2 August 2022

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

Mr Herbert Edmund Ariko 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Herbert Ariko, you are most welcome to the 11th Parliament. We know you are not a stranger in this Parliament; you were in the 10th Parliament. Having been here, you know what is supposed to be done. I urge you to be an effective representative of the people and remain a servant leader. You are most welcome.

I am giving you a copy of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda that you have sworn to and that you are going to uphold. I am also going to give you the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that will help you in your day-to-day operations. Welcome. (Applause) Please, go and have a seat on the backbench. (Laughter)

Honourable members, this afternoon, join me in welcoming a delegation from Soroti City East that have come to witness the swearing-in of their leader, Hon. Hebert Edmund Ariko, a Member of Parliament for Soroti City East. 

Please, join me and welcome them. (Applause) You are most welcome. Here is your Member of Parliament. Congratulations. (Applause) 

2.08
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have colleagues – and I am speaking now as the Whip of the FDC – who have just returned from cells. They were kidnapped by hooligans belonging to -

THE SPEAKER: Under which rule do you rise?

MR SSEMUJJU: I am going to cite the rule. I am now giving the background. 

THE SPEAKER: First give us the rule that you are rising on. 

MR KIBALYA: Order

THE SPEAKER: He is on procedure, hon. Maurice. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Unfortunately, he was Guild president at Makerere University. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, he was the Guild president.

MR SSEMUJJU: Unfortunately. Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 59 – I hope the arrangement in the new rules captures the matter of privilege.

I have colleagues, Madam Speaker, who were arrested by goons, accompanied by the chairman of the NRM Electoral Commission – Members of Parliament: Hon. Isodo and others. I intend, later on, to give a statement under the rules. 

The procedural issue I am raising -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, how do you define a “goon”?

MR SSEMUJJU: An outlaw – someone who acts, not following the law.

THE SPEAKER: Have you confirmed that they were not following the law?

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: You were in Soroti - why were you not arrested?

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I fear – because the rules protect you. So, I ask you to allow me raise the procedural issue, because –

THE SPEAKER: Yes, they are my rules. I want you to use the right word.

MR SSEMUJJU: Under the rules, you will also be the one to rule, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I want you to use the right word. They are not “goons”.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, maybe you can help me. (Laughter) I can leave the word “goons”, if it is offensive. 

Madam Speaker, the point I am raising is that we have colleagues who were kidnapped by a group belonging to NRM. These colleagues are in the House now. The subject matter is the swearing-in of the beneficiary of that hooliganism. 

I am seeking your indulgence, Madam Speaker. I thought that in your communication, you would allow me, as the whip of FDC – and I am here by law – later, to make a short statement about colleagues and the suffering we went through at the hands of honourable people who were involved in hooliganism. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Hajji – and Imam – you need to be truthful to what you say, but we will give you time to present your statement, with evidence.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:
Nobert Mao

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mao, can you come over this side after signing. –[MEMBER: “Procedure.”]- can we finish the signing and then you come up with your procedure? (Applause)

Hon. Mao, the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, you are most welcome to the 11th Parliament. Your appointment comes at a time when this House has been demanding for establishment of the Constitution Review Commission. It is more historic that we have someone from the Opposition as the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. (Applause) In addition, we have issues of human rights and issues of political prisoners.

It is good you have come at this time. We hope to get the best out of you. 

Here is the Constitution that you have sworn to uphold and the Rules of Procedure, to help you in your day-to-day work. We wish to congratulate you upon your appointment. You are welcome to the 11th Parliament. (Applause)

The Prime Minister will show you where to sit. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, in the VIP Gallery, join me this afternoon to welcome the members of DP: 

Hon. Fred Mukasa Mbidde 
Dr Kiwanuka Mayambala - National Chairman;
Dr Siranda Gerald - Secretary-General;
Ow’ekitiibwa Christine Kasule;
Mr Imam Makumbi - Vice-Chairperson, Western Region;
His Worship George Fred Kagimu - Vice-President, Central Region;
Mr Gilbert Amado - Vice-President, Eastern Region; and
Hon. Aisha Waliggo – President, Women’s League.

They are here to witness the swearing-in of hon. Mao. You are most welcome. Please, join me to welcome them. (Applause) 

2.26
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have received hon. Mao with an embrace - I should say, in haste. Not so close the usual embrace, but an embrace of somebody we are used to.

Under rule 9 of our Rules of Procedure, the House is supposed to be guided by the presiding officer as to the sitting arrangement. Hon. Mao, having gone through a second baptism –(Laughter)- neither of water nor of the spirit, but some sort of undertaking - whether feisty or otherwise - would you kindly guide the House?

Now that the hon. Mao is here, courtesy of some undertaking called a “memorandum” and having committed the members of DP to certain actions, including a vote on the side of the ruling party, how, as the Leader of the Opposition, should I consider the status of the Members from the DP while I am whipping for House business, when their President is this side and the rules prescribe the manner of doing business in the House, Madam Speaker, under rule 9? 

Will you, please, guide on how we should proceed, as we receive the newly baptised Member - neither with the spirit nor with water, Madam Speaker? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Mao is an ex-officio Member, appointed as a minister and - He is appointed as a minister. That is why I asked him to sit on the front bench - and that is why he is sitting there. 

What you are talking about are Members appointed under political parties. That is why I also directed hon. Ariko to sit on the back bench. 

Therefore, this is not what you mean. For him, he is seated as a minister on the front bench. He is an ex-officio Member and that is where he belongs. He is appointed by Government. (Applause) Fortunately enough, the Leader of the Opposition is a member of the Appointments Committee and he was the one who was even lead counsel for Hon. Mao. He was very happy that we had a sober-minded person in that position. Those were his remarks. (Applause)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for your ruling. Unfortunately, the unprecedented nature of this matter is that you have the DP president on the NRM side and his Members on our side - including the whip of DP. (Laughter) However, Madam Speaker, since you have ruled, we will now learn to live with it. (Laughter)

The procedural issue I am raising, under rule 83, this Parliament is a House of decorum. That is why that rule goes even into smaller details of how you enter and how you leave. 

Just a short while ago, while the Hon. Norbert Mao was walking in, our colleagues on the other side were clapping and yelling, yet under our rules, even the way you express happiness is defined, as a Member of Parliament –(Interjections)- You can say “Aaah”, but that is what the rules say; that you cannot even clap; you just stamp your foot. 

I would like to ask you, Madam Speaker, whether the procedure taken by colleagues from the other side - of yelling, shouting and clapping, including the Prime Minister - is not offending our rules. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have order in the House? The agreement that the Leader of the Opposition was talking about; as Parliament, we are not privy to it and we cannot go by what Leader of the Opposition was talking about. All we have is a person as a Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Can we go to the next item? (Laughter)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to the 12th Sitting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament. 

I welcome the two Members; that is Hon. Norbert Mao, Chairman-General of DP, and Hon. Herbert Ariko, MP for Soroti City East. Welcome to the 11th Parliament. (Applause)

On a sad note, this weekend was catastrophic for our people in the Elgon subregion. Heavy rains triggered flooding and landslides, killing many people - and many are displaced. We will, at a later time, hear from the Prime Minister, who has been to Mbale. 

I urge the Executive to establish reliable disaster early warning systems to save the lives of the people. I remember last week, Rasta was talking about this same thing and he said we are going to have a problem. We also need to scale-up on climate change adaptation and mitigation interventions for sustainable development.

May I ask the House, therefore, to rise to observe a moment of silence for the people we have lost in Bugisu subregion? 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on 30 June 2020, our own, Victor Kiplangat, delivered Uganda’s first ever marathon gold medal in the Commonwealth Games. He conquered 42 kilometres in two hours, 10 minutes and 55 seconds. (Applause)

On behalf of Parliament, I wish to congratulate Kiplangat and the entire team that is in the Commonwealth Games. Could we join together and congratulate this Uganda? (Applause) 
I urge the sports minister to move a motion formally to pay tribute to the athletics team for their historic performance at the recently concluded athletics in the World Athletics Championship, where our team has performed very well. 

Honourable members, we have up to 30 September 2022 for our next recess. That will mark the end of the First Meeting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament. So far, we have concluded only one Bill, yet, we are meant to have gone a long way with the Bills that were brought by Government. We were given about 62 Bills, but we have concluded only one. We have a pending KCCA Bill, the National Local Content Bill and the Mining and Minerals Bills, which was brought back to the House; we gave the committee one week, but they have not come back. 

I also urge the Committee on Finance to expedite the consideration of the National Local Content Bill and bring it to the House. In addition, other committees should expedite their work and ensure they bring reports to the House. You can only be accountable for work whose report you have presented to the House. 

I have asked the Clerk not to release money for committees that are not working. We have never received any report from the HIV/AIDS and Equal Opportunities committees. So, we are going to have reports for the last, first presented in the House session, before we disburse funds for committee work. 

At the halfway mark of this session, I intend to convene a midterm review of the session to evaluate the performance and progress of both the committees and the House. Periodic measures of our progress are a precondition for the improvement of our performance. So, if we do not do that, people will remain relaxed and do their own things. 

Honourable members, I have received communication from the Leader of the Opposition appointing hon. Helen Nakimuli, the Kalangala District Woman MP, as the Shadow Minister for Animal Industry and Fisheries, to replace hon. Charles Tebandeke. This is pursuant to rule 14(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Please, take note accordingly.

2.34
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga):  Madam Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. For the record, we are not bloating the Cabinet. We are only replacing one member with another, to enhance our efficiency. 

In the same breath, I communicated the appointment of hon. Frank Katabazi as the new Shadow Minister for East Africa Community Affairs. He replaces hon. Gilbert Olanya, who is going to be re-designated, and that should be done by the Opposition Chief Whip when the Speaker grants leave.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I have not received that letter and I am not aware of it. I only received one. So, you will designate when I receive a copy. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you and congratulations. There is a procedural matter from hon. Silwany.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter relating to your Communication from the Chair. It is very sad that we have again lost our brothers and sisters in Mbale in a very unfortunate incident that happened two days ago. This is not the first time we have this challenge as a country. It is neither the first nor the second; such incidents have been happening many times in different regions. 

Therefore, the procedural matter I am raising is: Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us as Parliament, since the Prime Minister is here today, to ask her to give us the plan?  I am saying this because the rains have just started and this is just one incident; there are going to be many more. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to ask the Prime Minister to give us the strategy and the plan that Government has put in place to prevent such disasters from continuing to happen in our country?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Silwany, you are raising a procedural matter on my Communication from the Chair; you cannot raise a procedure on my Communication from the Chair. 

MR SILWANY: Much obliged. But I just wanted to seek your indulgence. (Member timed out.)
 

2.37
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the communication, specifically - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe, for your information, I received a report from the Prime Minister and she is going to give us an update on what is happening.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madman Speaker. My concern is on the matter that you have just talked about, regarding the review that you are going to undertake. I would like to point out that the performance of this House, in certain aspects, is dependent on the ministers also doing their part. 

Madam Speaker, when you direct on certain matters and the minister commits to bringing a statement, maybe in a week’s time, but then, it takes three months, that also becomes a challenge on our part because we end up with very many unanswered issues. 

Madam Speaker, last time you asked the Clerk to generate all those matters referred to the ministers so that they are put on the Order Paper and dispensed. However, there are also commitments made on the Floor. For example, when I raised the issue of musicians who have been going to schools and performing skimpily, dancing seductively, the minister committed to bringing guidelines here in two days. However, to-date, those guidelines have not been brought. 

I see something circulating on social media. And, I see the Minister for Education and Sports here. Wouldn’t it be right that the minister presents these guidelines and we close that chapter? I am saying this because as a nation, we have to be morally upright and be cognisant of the fact that there are people now flocking into schools and teaching our children - actually, the issue of homosexuality is gaining momentum in schools.

Madam Speaker, the minister is here; I wish he can be -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, bring those guidelines on Thursday. And, we are also told that the schools belong to some ministers and some MPs - I mean where allegation happened. 

2.39
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise in relation to rule 25 of our Rules of Procedure.

I have observed that after your Communication from the Chair, there is always a struggle by Members to catch your eye, and how exactly that should happen. Therefore, colleagues are in a dilemma sometimes. That is why my brother from Bugiri, formerly of JEEMA, but now in NRM, the hon. Silwany, was raising a procedural matter against your Communication from the Chair, which, under our rules, is not allowed. 

What should happen ideally, under rule 25(2)(e) is that once the Chair has made the communication, immediately, there is supposed to be a reaction to the Communication from the Chair and it is the indulgence of the Speaker to determine who and for how long that communication should be made. 

Ideally, once the Speaker has made the communication, the duty on any person who wants to say something, is just to stand and seek to catch the eye of the Speaker, without necessarily bothering yourself with either “procedure” or “clarification” because that is what the rules say.

It is up to the presiding officer to ask whether anybody has a reaction to his or her communication, depending on who is in the seat. This is the third time I am raising this matter. I think it would be important that it is streamlined so that colleagues do not find difficulty in raising issues after the communication of the Speaker. It is under our rules. 

I hope that moving forward, we will try to follow the guidance of the rules. Thank you. 

2.42
MR PASCAL MBABAZI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance concerning the road units that were provided to every district by Government. Most districts are now grappling with de facto machines and a case in point is my district, Mubende. We have spent seven months without our grader, which has been helping us in maintaining the roads.

Mubende District is well known for maize, coffee, bananas and other agricultural products. Therefore, road infrastructure is very important in the development of this country, and Mubende in particular. However, the absence of the tractor, which has been very useful in rehabilitating our roads and has taken seven months at the centre under repair, has caused the district to lack good roads. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Pascal, is it a tractor or a grader?

MR MBABAZI: Sorry, it is a grader. For seven months now, we do not have it at the district. The district now tries to plead for machines from other districts and they are saying theirs are also in the same dilemma. 

My plea is that the Ministry of Works and Transport comes in to help those districts that are stuck with poor roads, like Mubende. We have hard-to-reach areas like in my constituency; Butoloogo Subcounty where people are now demonstrating. They want to be cut off from Mubende District and taken to Kassanda.
Madam Speaker, I will be very grateful if my plea is considered. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A few minutes ago, you made the House to stand up for a minute of silence in respect of people who have died in Bugisu sub-region as a result of the rain; the calamity, which has taken place. 

I was sitting hoping that, that was going to be the first issue to be dealt with. However, I am hearing about graders now. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we deal with the issue of the people who have died and are yet to die because of this rain, which is in plenty?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, Member of Parliament for Budadiri West, I have a document and the Prime Minister is going to be led by Hon. Karim, the area Member of Parliament; and the minister is going to give us a report on that. It is the next item. Please, do not take over the powers of the Speaker. 

2.46
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I have taken note of the concern of our brother, the Hon. Pascal Mbabazi that the graders in Mubende are not in motorable condition. I will direct the Minister in charge of Works to go and make sure that these graders are repaired. Thank you.

2.47
MR KARIM MASABA (Independent, Industrial Division, Mbale City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am moving under rule 25 of the Rules of Procedure on a matter of urgent public importance concerning the torrential rains and the floods that occurred in Mbale City and the neighbouring areas. As you are well aware and in the Rt Hon. Speaker’s communication, these floods began on 30 July 2022. So far, over 20 bodies have been recovered. We expect the numbers to grow because the water levels are just going down. Anytime from now, I believe we will be recovering more bodies. 

Apart from the loss of lives, very many people have been displaced in thousands. I was in touch with the LCI chairpersons and the leaders at the city. We have so far counted about 1,200 people who are displaced. We expect these numbers to go up because we have not yet reached some of the areas. 

A lot of property has been destroyed as you have been seeing all over social media and everywhere. What you are seeing is what is actually happening. People do not have houses, schools have been destroyed, churches and mosques -

Our people literally do not have where to run to for help. We would house some of them in these areas, but these have been destroyed. The Industrial Park, which serves the entire Eastern region has been submerged in water. It employs very many of our youth and people. We expect more problems to arise from the unemployment that is being caused by this catastrophe. 

Many of the roads in the area have been cut off. Some of the bridges have collapsed. Right now, the city does not have the capacity to sustain itself, given that they were given Sh 30 million for the Road Fund, which is too little to even help repair one of the roads. 

In conclusion, my prayers are:

1. 	The Office of the Prime Minister urgently deploys an effective machinery to help the people of Mbale who are currently struggling. You have seen that it is the local community that is trying to fight hard. I contacted some colleagues in the UPDF and they are also having issues because the military barracks at the Third Division in Bugema was also affected by the water. Some of the victims among the dead are UPDF soldiers. 

2. 	The Office of the Prime Minister urgently supplies emergency relief in terms of food, medicine, water, beddings and temporary accommodation for our people. There is a very big slum of Namatala, which has over 50,000 people. As I speak, they do not have any drinking water because when the floods came, they contaminated the water that these communities survive on. We do not have water at all and people do not have where to sleep.

3. 	The office of the Prime Minister should urgently provide financial assistance to the families that have lost their dear ones and those that have been affected – people still have bodies stranded in the morgue because they do not have money to claim them, and give them a decent send-off. Therefore, I request that the Office of the Prime Minister urgently expedites this process. 

4. 	The Ministry of Works and Transport urgently repairs the roads and bridges that have been cut off because movement is now a problem. I was up in Bumbobi and some of the roads have been cut off. There is a bridge that was being used by the community, but it has now been completely washed away – in Mutoto. So, we are still facing a big challenge with transport and movement. 

The other issue is on the resettlement programme. I am requesting the Office of the Prime Minister to fast-track and ensure the safety of our people. There was a programme, but unfortunately, it has not moved as far as we expected because it was rolled out about five years ago. The plan was to construct about 900 houses, but as we speak now, only 100 have been constructed. With these rains just beginning, we expect that there could be a lot more danger in case the Office of the Prime Minister does not act fast. 

Lastly, the Prime Minister was there and we are grateful, but the people were disappointed because we had a lot of expectations when the Prime Minister came. Unfortunately, we were not helped much. I am kindly requesting that you speed up – because I know you might be planning to do something for us, but time is not our best ally right now. Our people are dying and starving. I am requesting that you expedite the entire process. Thank you very much. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Karim. (Member rose_) Unless you have additional prayers, we could first listen to the report from the Prime Minister and then, you react to it.
 
2.50
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the House that I travelled to Mbale City on Sunday 31 -(Interruption) 

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, we are still under the COVID-19 guidelines. Apparently, I see quite a number of colleagues in this House without masks. They are all over the place. Are we proceeding well when a number of colleagues deliberately come to this Parliament without masks, yet you have taken care to mask yourself? 

THE SPEAKER: Hajji Kivumbi, they have put on the masks. Those without masks, please, get out. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. The procedural matter I am raising is because the Prime Minister does not accept clarifications. A while ago, a Member raised the issues of tractors – but the reason I am raising this matter – 

THE SPEAKER: When did she refuse to accept your point of clarification? 

MR SSEWUNGU: I do not know, but that is her style of debate in the House. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Why are you speaking in anticipation? 

MR SSEWUNGU: The procedural matter I am raising – 

THE SPEAKER: No, let her present her statement and then, you seek clarification from her. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I stood very humbly, patiently and well organized, but she refused to accept my point of clarification. 

THE SPEAKER: When was that? 

MR SSEWUNGU: It was here. 

THE SPEAKER: She will give you your clarification. First, listen to the report. 

MS NABBANJA: I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I would like to inform you that I travelled to Mbale City on Sunday, 31 July, 2022, following reports of the devastating floods caused by heavy rains on the night of Saturday, 30 July, 2022 resulting in the overflow of rivers Nabuyonga and Namatala in Mbale District. This has led to deaths, destruction and displacement.

On arrival in Mbale City, I was led by the Resident City Commissioner, Mr Ahamad Washaki, the district leadership and technical staff to the most affected areas, notably: River Nabuyonga along Mbale - Kumi Road, Nambale Bridge along Tororo Road and Mbale Industrial Park –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, hon. Masaba raised a matter of national importance, which, ordinarily, attracts a short answer. The Prime Minister is making a presentation. Under the rules, a ministerial statement is debated, at least, for an hour. 

The procedural issue I am raising is whether the Prime Minister’s presentation, which she has not shared with anybody like the rules say, is going to be treated as a ministerial statement or just a response to a matter of national importance? 

THE SPEAKER: After receiving matters of national importance from the five Members, I sent them to the Prime Minister to bring a write-up on the response and that is what she is doing. It is uploaded on your iPads. I am the one who wrote asking what action she had taken on this issue. Some of you are raising matters of procedure while our people in Mbale are dying and you do not know what is in Mbale.
 
MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, the main findings are:

As of yesterday, 1 August 2022, a total of 23 people were confirmed dead. Amongst them was a UPDF soldier. Several bodies and motorcycles are feared to still be trapped on river beds, and a number of people are still missing. Several homesteads have been destroyed and families displaced. 

At the Mbale Industrial Park, a big section has been submerged and the products and equipment destroyed.

Nabuyonga and Bungokho bridges were seriously affected, causing cut-off of water supply to Mbale City.

Actions taken

After the tour and inspection of the damage caused, I chaired a multi-sectoral meeting comprised of local leaders and officials from the Ministry of Health, Uganda National Roads Authority, Uganda Red Cross, disaster preparedness department in my office, the Uganda Police Force and UPDF. The purpose of the meeting was to come up with a quick and detailed assessment to enable Government to respond effectively.

His Excellency the President of Uganda has committed Shs 5 million to each bereaved family to cover burial expenses. The list of the dead from Mbale Resident City Commissioner is hereby attached.

Government, through the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness under my office, has provided relief food to a tune of 90 metric tonnes to Mbale City, Kapchorwa and Mbale District. The food is already there. 

The UPDF and police have intensified search and rescue operations by clearing the river beds. The Ministry of Water and Environment is on the ground to reconnect the water supply at Bungokho Bridge. I am told that Mbale City now has water. The Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA are also on ground, clearing the roads that had been blocked by the debris. 

Madam Speaker, Government will urgently embark on restoration of damaged infrastructure in the affected areas. Like I have already told you, UNRA is already on the ground. However, there are those other roads that are managed by the district, including the Mbale Industrial Park. 

Government has intensified early warning mechanisms using information from the Uganda Meteorological Authority and  various media channels like radio and TV to alert people on the impending disaster since it has just started raining. 

The Police will also set up roadblocks to prevent people from crossing dangerous bridges and other locations in case of imminent danger. 

People who have illegally encroached on the wetlands or settled close to the riverbanks and forests will be evicted and resettled. 

The Office of the Prime Minister, using the UPDF Engineering Brigade, is coordinating, as you are aware, the Bulambuli Settlement Project aimed at resettling identified households at high risk of landslides - this has been going on since 2018. 

Government has so far constructed and settled 272 households at Bunambutye Settlement in Bulambuli District. 

We have also constructed a health centre III and a primary school in this settlement; approximately, 2,500 people have already been settled. As you are aware, our budget was affected by the floods last year that hit the country, and of course, COVID-19, through budget cuts. 

The Bulambuli Settlement Project is targeting up to 900 households - like my brother here said - from the five most landslide-prone and affected districts of the Mt Elgon sub-region. 

Madam Speaker, the settlement process is being implemented in a phased approach with the first, second and third phases already complete. 

In the fourth phase, Government plans to construct 100 houses. The Cabinet chaired by the President yesterday extensively discussed this matter and came up with short, medium and long-term solutions. 

Today, I chaired a meeting of development partners to plan and respond to the problem and they have pledged support. 

I have attached the number of those people who are affected and those who are dead - you can check on that list because I do not need to read it. 

Government has so far done the following in Bunambutye: We constructed 101 houses in the first phase, with pit latrines and kitchens. We constructed 140 houses in phase two; 22 houses in phase three; and 32 houses are under construction in phase four. 

We constructed Bunambutye Primary School within the settlement area, recruited a head teacher and staff for the primary school. 

We have constructed a health centre and it is fully functional. A market is to be constructed within the settlement area. 

The process to give the settlement a town council status is on-going in the Ministry of Local Government. 

Madam Speaker, we are also thinking about having these people settled in towns. We are in discussion with Government. Today, like I told you already, the Ministry of Works and Transport as well as the other agencies; the ministries of Defence and Veteran Affairs, Education, Relief and Disaster Preparedness, Local Government and Finance are in a meeting. 

In conclusion, Government has deployed all responsible agencies and technical teams, including UPDF, in the sub-region, to do continuous assessment and appropriate intervention will be done. 

Madam Speaker, I have my sister here, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, who has details of what took place. I request that you give her some little time to give the details to the Members. However, her detailed report is also attached as Annex 2. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: The other one of “we are in discussion with Government” was a slip of the tongue. It was supposed to be that Government is in discussion with the development partners. (Members rose_) I will allow all of you to react, first get the information.

Please give us the details.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ministry came up with a National Disaster Risk Management (DRM) Plan and Cabinet approved this plan on 11 July 2022. 

When we talk about the DRM plan, we are talking about the future and most sustainable activities that this House would want to get from us. The following are the basic components of this DRM plan:

We have the equipment part of it, we have preparedness, response, the disaster risk reduction, understanding the risk, disaster risk reproductive coordination and governance. 

In addition, we have standardised disasters into level one, level two, level three and level four. Right now, what is happening in Mbale or in the Elgon sub-region, is level three.

Honourable colleagues, you are aware that a disaster happened in the Elgon sub-region. We have been giving early warning messages through the Uganda Media Centre.

We have also been working with the local governments in these districts to see that our people stay away from this; that is why you realise that last season or last year, we did not have any death in the Elgon sub-region. However, the catastrophe that happened this time happened in the town itself - not even again where we had thought it would take place; for example, Bududa, Sironko, Manafwa and Namisindwa. 

It is very unfortunate that we have lost over 23 people, but we are already taking action. Just as my Prime Minister has mentioned here, the development partners have given support, and we have requested for more to be able to rescue our people who have been affected. 

We have also mobilised resources before this; I would like to give an example -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, we have received a statement from the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. She even gave an outline of what Government has done so far. Now, a junior minister after her supervisor has spoken is repeating one word after another. 

Is the junior minister in charge of disaster preparedness proceeding well to begin repeating what the Prime Minister has told Parliament word-by-word instead of allowing either Members from the area to give us information or for some of us to seek clarification?

THE SPEAKER: The junior minister in charge of disaster preparedness was given permission by the Prime Minister. Therefore, she is moving on the right track. Honourable minister, please, summarise. You are the only minister for disaster preparedness.

MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I saw my brother Ssemujju, rising up, I knew what he was going to say; we are used to him. 

Anyhow, Madam Speaker, I was guiding the House that there is a plan that the ministry has already developed. 

Talking about sustainability, because what my Prime Minister has just presented, is only on what is happening right now and what we have done, as Government. 

However, what I am talking about is the fact that we have already come up with a plan: it is a 10-year plan, and has been approved by Cabinet. It is going to be brought here, when we get time because we could not do it today. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we need an immediate plan. The areas where disasters have befallen are not areas that we even expected to experience such a disaster. When you look at areas like Namatala, Nabuyonga, Namakwekwe, Maluku and industrial area - you grew up in those places - we need an immediate plan for them. 

MS ANYAKUN: Madam Speaker, we have an Atlas that has been developed. It tells details of the entire country, where we have impact on disasters and it is marked in red, orange and green. We have the map and I will lay it on the Table next time; I am bringing the plan here. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the city honourable Member of Parliament - yes.

3.12
MS MIRIAM MUKHAYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance -

THE SPEAKER: No, we want your reaction to what has been raised by hon. Karim, the report from the Prime Minister and the one made by the disaster minister. 

MS MUKHAYE: Okay, thank you very much. Let me first say that I have grief and pain in my heart because my people are really suffering and this suffering, is even in my neighbourhood. Some of my close neighbours died; even my real family has lost very many crops. Therefore, there is pain in my heart, as I share this.

This is not an easy thing because many of you may have just seen it on TV, but on ground, people in Mbale and Elgon subregion at large, are suffering. They are struggling and do not know what awaits them. 

I know the reports that have come in may not have shown exactly what is on the ground because even today, before I came here, the LC III chairpersons called and told me that there is still a drizzle of rain and many crops are being washed away; people do not know what to do. In Mbale and the entire Elgon sub-region, we were lucky that we had some rains while other parts of the country suffered drought and so, people were soon harvesting their crops; some had even planted crops ready for the second season, but all those crops have been swept away.

I request, just like my colleague said, that the response should be done quickly. One of the issues that I would like to add, is that we have the Uganda National Meteorological Authority, which is supposed to inform us on  issues of climate change. However, in most cases, this information does not trickle down to the ground. I would request that this information gets translated into local languages; let the people be given these alerts so that those who are in risky places, can know what to do. 

Yes, there is talk about the disaster response plan, but this is like a story. Today, we are behaving as if we are guests in our own country; as if we do not know the things that are happening in the Elgon sub-region. Whenever a disaster occurs, it is like we are waking up to something that we did not know would happen. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I woud like to urge Government; let this be taken urgently. I do not know how many people will die before Government wakes up to save them. However, that said, I would like to appreciate you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, because the people you supported when you came to Nambale Bridge, which is very close to my home, called me and appreciated the relief you gave them. 

Therefore, I would like to thank you very much for that gesture of love and of a mother, who left other programmes and went to Mbale to witness the things that are happening. (Applause) Thank you very much. I believe you will do more to help our people, not only in the Bugisu sub-region, but even in other regions of the country. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we hear from the hon. Isaias Ssasaga?

3.16
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a supplementary to what my colleagues have said, we appreciate the little response that Government has made to the people of Mbale. 

If you look at the gravity on the ground and the sensitivity of the floods; the landslides, which have occurred right from the mountain top - you know that what you are seeing in Mbale is the effect of what is happening on the mountains. The team that went to Mbale only stopped in Mbale City; it did not extend far out of Mbale. And, contrary to what my sister is saying that there were no major landslides and floods that occurred last year in Mbale; this is not true. Even the last time, we had serious ones in many subcounties and areas, in Bugisu sub-region. If your response has been slow or no response at all, you did not have to tell us they never occurred; they occurred and you never responded. 

However, back to what is happening in Mbale, I would like to say that the degree of responsiveness from Government, I believe, is not adequate enough. We expected Government to have responded much more than the way it has done, because most of the relief items you have provided, have ended up in the hands of a few people. The affected people are very many and I would encourage – (Interruption) 

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, for allowing me to give you information, my brother. As you thank Government for deploying rescue teams on ground, Madam Speaker, as one of those that have been on the ground, I would like to give you free information. Much as we have had the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces soldiers and police personnel rescue teams donning uniforms labelled “Fire Rescue Teams” they are sleeping on the job. 

The bodies that have so far been retrieved from the river, is courtesy of the efforts of the locals. When they were called to help, one could not even dare brave the waters to help retrieve a body; they lack the skills and expertise to rescue and/or evacuate those that were trapped in certain locations. 

So, to say that Government has deployed when these people are idle, Madam Speaker, is lacking in the aspect of humanitarian spirit. Thank you, my brother.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the colleague has perfectly put it out. To me, I could equate the efforts of those who went there to a film show. 

When you watch what is happening on the screen and people moving around, you would actually think that the efforts on the ground, in terms of evacuation of the people and giving aid, is much, but it is not.

So, I implore the Prime Minister that even as you go back to Mbale soon, please, involve the leadership rather than moving with the Resident City Commissioners and cameras around, which I believe to the local people is not benefitting them. 

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, I have the supplementary disaster report from Sironko District, which I could also, at the same time, lay on the Table wherein very many subcounties have been affected in Sironko District both in Budadiri County East and West, Bukiise Subcounty and Masaba Subcounty where landslides occur. Around 30 families are in the camp at Gibisi Primary School lacking food and beddings. 

We have Sironko Town Council, which is heavily flooded as the water came from the mountains. It is also crossing over to Bukedea. I believe that by now, water could be crossing to Bukedea. It has been so flooded and all crops have been washed away. 

There is Bubeza and Nalusala subcounties where even the bridges have been washed away. I implore the disaster preparedness team that as you plan for disasters in the Elgon sub-region, also include Sironko and all the affected areas. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I believe it is high time that Elgon sub-region is declared a disaster-prone area. I know Government is trying, but it may not have all the capacity. If the area has been declared a disaster area, more interventions would come on board to help us in that area. Otherwise, we have said it here time and again, the Rotarians have always raised it and we have raised it here in Parliament of how Government is prepared and we foretold this Parliament and the ministry that disasters are coming any time; the landslides are going to come, but on ground, nothing has been prepared. People are only running to rescue the situation, but the interventions before that have not been taking place. 

I think it is also high time that this Parliament looked at the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. I remember, Madam Speaker, you sent this committee and it moved around the country. They generated a very good report, which was brought here on the Floor of this House, read and adopted. If we could go into the implementation of that report, I believe it can mitigate most of the effects which could come as a result of landslides and the floods. I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to look at the recommendations of the committee and you could pass on to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister the list of the areas and include in it – since you talked about Bukedea – Busano since we share the same voters. 

Members, we have got the information. What we want is action; we need the Rt Hon. Prime Minister on ground with the disaster preparedness team to take action on what is happening. The lamentations that we are doing here are just for your own good because you want cameras. (Laughter) What we want, Honourable members, is a team on the ground.

Honourable minister - can you people sit – what we want is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to go on ground. Go with the Members of Parliament of those affected areas -(Interruption)– Order! Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you need to go on the ground; people are dying day in, day out and you need to go with all the Members of Parliament of those affected areas. 

We need results; we need feedback in the House. 

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I would like Honourable members to appreciate that even before this tragedy happened, two weeks ago, I was in Mbale. Four weeks ago, the President was in Kapchorwa on the same issue. Honourable members are saying we are just posing around for cameras, but I was there before. That will not demoralise us; we shall make sure that we deliver to the people of Mbale. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, we have taken note of the concerns of our honourable colleagues and we shall definitely act. I promise that this Government will act, and I promise that we shall handle issue by issue.
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bagala?

3.26
MS JOYCE BAGALA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the Uganda Public Service Standing Order, 2021, “Misconduct of a public officer shall include acts that bring the service in disrepute, bullying or victimisation, threatening behaviour, fighting or assault at the place of work.”

Madam Speaker, on 29 July 2022, on the NBS Frontline Talk-show that happens every Thursday at 1000 p.m., the Honourable Minister for Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance witnessed an act of misconduct and crime being committed by a public service officer called Ofwono Opondo, who is the Government Spokesperson and also the Deputy Director at the Media Centre. He attacked, on live television, the Lord Mayor of Kampala, Erias Lukwago. 

Since Thursday up to now, I have not seen any Government statement relating to the incident that happened that day. That is why my prayer is to see this Government, and indeed, the Minister for Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, take punitive action against Mr Ofwono Opondo because what he did could instigate violence not only on Opposition Members of Parliament, but also on Government officers on TV talk shows. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

3.28
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, since she has said the issue was witnessed by the concerned minister, and I believe he has the capacity to investigate the matter, I will only inform Parliament on what he will have come up with. [MEMBER: “Procedure?”]

3.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, thank you. This matter could appear liken person-to-holder on the part of the persons involved, but may have far-reaching implications on how we are perceived as leaders in this country.

I would have expected the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, first of all, to express regret over a public officer for behaving in that manner. Probably the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, out of her seemingly busy schedule, could have received information from the minister concerned on whether action has been taken on this public officer, but the Rt Hon. Prime Minister seems to tell Parliament that she is hearing it for the first time and, therefore, did not have room to seek for information.

Madam Speaker, the Lord Mayor of Uganda’s capital city is a very serious human being and the image of our city. Therefore, for anybody acting on behalf of Government – because the Government Spokesperson was there to speak for Government – for anybody representing Government to try to treat the Lord Mayor of the city in that manner and we gloss over it as though it is a common occurrence, is an invitation for public officers to behave in a manner they desire after all, their principals will let it pass or treat it casually.

We would like to receive more commitment from the Prime Minister, first of all, that she is equally concerned that this is a very serious abdication of public duty on the part of a public officer and, therefore, action – not in the future, but immediate – is being taken or has already been taken.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the ICT and National Guidance minister come and report to the House on what could have happened. Of course, it is regrettable. Today, it has happened to Hon. Lukwago, tomorrow it will happen to another person.

The minister will come and report. The Prime Minister was in the field. She was busy. She may have not seen –(Member rose_)- Hon. Sarah Najjuma, the minister is coming to report. We are not discussing that issue.

MS KANUSHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry to interfere, but I also have my disaster. I am raising a procedural issue under rule 236 of the Rules of Procedure, which says the Speaker or a chairperson of a committee shall take all necessary steps to ensure the persons with disability are facilitated in their participation in proceedings of the House or its committees.

Madam Speaker, I am raising this issue because I have been discussing it with the responsible people. It concerns parking for Members of Parliament with disabilities. 

Madam Speaker, this Parliament designated parking for us. It is clearly marked: MP PwD Central; MP PwD Eastern; MP PwD National; etcetera. Since we came here, we have been struggling with parking. This same parking lot is next to our ramp, which we are supposed to use. 

Madam Speaker, it has become a habit that we always do not find our parking. We struggle to move from wherever to come to this place.

This Parliament passed a law called the Persons with Disabilities Act, which makes it an offence for an able-bodied person to park in any parking marked PwD parking.

Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that people, whom God has blessed with normal legs, do not want to walk long distances, but insist and park in the parking for Members of Parliament with disabilities. My anger today is that when I came in and spoke to the security personnel, he told me that: “I am sorry. The person who has parked in your parking lot is a commissioner”.

Madam Speaker, even in –(Interjections)- I do not know which commissioner –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member of Parliament with disability, that is not an issue of the Prime Minister -

MS KANUSHU: Madam Speaker, I rose on a procedural matter –

THE SPEAKER: We will handle it.  


MS KANUSHU: Madam Speaker, allow me to conclude. Under rule 9, Madam Speaker, you are supposed to allocate reasonable accommodation for seats. This Chamber is not accessible to us. It has stairs. We cannot go down nor sit on the upper seats.

For us, a seat is not just “convenient”, but “reasonable accommodation”. I request that you make this work easy for us – but also, because it is a right that we need to be in this Parliament and participate on an equal basis with other Members of Parliament. 

I do not see why a person who can read and write would park their car in a parking marked “PwD MP”. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Members of Parliament, that issue is going to be handled. (Ms Akumu rose_) It is not for the House. Hon. Akumu, sit. (Laughter) The commissioners, who park where the people with disabilities are supposed to park, should leave that parking. That parking is for people with disabilities.

Honourable members, we want the Minister for ICT and National Guidance to bring a report in one week on what is happening. 

In addition to that, as you do evacuation of people in wetlands, we also wish to ask you to evacuate the investors who are in the wetlands. (Applause) On that road from Mbale to Kamonkoli, there are investors in the wetland. Let us not do it in a discriminatory manner. Next item.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, on Friday last week, I presented a motion to your office and that of the Clerk in relation to a matter before this House – relating to ROKO Construction Company. 

I seek your guidance on how that motion should be processed so that this House is properly protected. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, LoP. We received the motion and we will handle it according to the Rules of Procedure of this House. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, thank you for allowing me to raise this procedural matter. A while ago – before the Prime Minister leaves - a Member raised an issue on tractors and their districts not having equipment. 

Madam Speaker, there are a number of new districts in Uganda that do not have road equipment. The procedural matter I am raising – before the Prime Minister goes – is that before you ask the Minister for Works and Transport, how do we know and when will these new districts ever get their road equipment? They do not have enough funds.

Secondly, on the same procedural matter, Madam Speaker, as we talk about the issue of Mbale, it was the same problem that occurred in Kasese. What we are seeing on TV is that the wananchi are using ropes to pull out people and vehicles from the floods. 

Madam Speaker, Government has seen all these floods taking place: What have they put in place by procuring equipment that can help to retrieve and control these disasters? 

Honourable members this is an act of God. We want to know whether when the Prime Minister comes back here, she is going to inform this House on what they are putting in place in case such a disaster happens. Are we going to use ropes for tying goats, the way we are seeing it, and pulling out vehicles from the water, – or are they going to procure better equipment? 

That is what I am seeking, through the procedural matter. However, because the Prime Minister never accepts clarifications, we shall continue slowly and humbly nagging her, until she accepts that behaviour of clarifications. (Laughter)

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, you are aware that in this financial year’s budget, we budgeted for graders for the new districts and municipalities. This question has been coming up here and I have answered it many times.

As for ropes, Madam Speaker, you realise that by yesterday, the cranes had already reached the site. Now, we are using the cranes to evacuate and open the river beds. 

It is true that police and the general public were rescuing victims using ropes. By that time, we had not yet transported the machinery to the site. However, the machinery is now on site. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item

LAYING OF PAPERS 

THE REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF THE INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION TO THE 8TH GLOBAL CONFERENCE OF YOUNG PARLIAMENTARIANS HELD IN SHARM EL-SHEIKH FROM 13 TO 16 JUNE 2022
3.40
MR PATRICK NSANJA (NUP, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to lay on the Table a report entitled, “The Report of the Delegation of the Inter-Parliamentary Union to the 8th Global Conference of Young Parliamentarians held in Sharm El-Sheikh from 13 to 16 June 2022.” I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, hon. Nsanja. Honourable members, this report is for your information. It will be uploaded for easy access. (Applause) Please, address your minds to the resolutions and explore the relevance of oversight undertaking. Next?

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY BILLS UNDER STANDING COMMITTEES 
 2016-2021

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Speaker Emeritus. (Applause)

3.41
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Rebecca Kadaga): Mwenye kiti na wabunge wa Uganda –(Laughter)- Habari za mchana; bon après-midi – good afternoon. 

Madam Speaker, I am here to fulfill an obligation, under Article 123 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, relating to the execution of treaties and conventions. Additionally, I am also proceeding under Article 65 of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community, which governs the relations between the Assembly and the National Assemblies of the Partner States. I would like to read what is in Article 65:

“In pursuance of the policy of the Community of popular participation in the achievement of the objectives and so that the Council may be able to take into account, in the exercise of its functions, the opinion of the general public in the Partner States on matters relating to the achievement of the objectives of the Community, as expressed through the debates of the elected Members of the National Assemblies and those of the Assembly, and to foster cooperation between the Assembly and the National Assemblies of the Partner States – 

the Clerk of the Assembly shall, as soon as practicable, transmit to the Clerks of the National Assemblies, copies of the records of all relevant debates of the meetings of the Assembly, to be laid before the National Assemblies by the respective ministers responsible for the East African Community.”

Under rule 36, I am going to lay copies of the Bills introduced to the Assembly, Acts of the Community and I will give a brief summary. For today, I do not have the records of the debates of the Assembly.

So, I will begin with the Bills before the standing committees of the House for the years 2016 to 2022. 

Now, we have:

The East African Community Whistleblowers’ Protection Bill, 2016; 
The East African Community Retirement Benefits for Specified Heads of Organs Bill, 2016;
The East African Community Mining Bill, 2017;
The East African Community Youth Council Bill, 2017;
The East African Community Pharmaceuticals Bill, 2020;
The East African Community Sexual and Reproductive Health Bill, 2021;
The East African Community Surveillance and Enforcement Commission Bill, 2022;
The East African Community Cultural Heritage Bill, 2022; 
The East African Community Financial Services Commission Bill, 2022; and 
The East African Standardisation, Accreditation and Conformity Assessment Bill, 2022.

I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Please lay.

MS KADAGA: I have additional Bills which are in the process of assent - to be completed, awaiting assent:

The East African Community Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Bill, 2016;
The East African Community Counter Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2016;
The East African Community Gender Equality, Equity and Development Bill, 2017;
The East African Community Polythene Materials Control Act, 2017;
The East African Community Customs Management (Amendment) Bill, 2018;
The East African Community Lake Victoria Basin Commission Bill, 2020; and
The East African Community Integrity and Anti-corruption Bill, 2020. 

Honourable members, I just want to make a small comment on this one, that I am intrigued that they were passed and sent for assent. They have not been assented to, but they have also not been declined. So, they are still in abeyance. So, for this category, I have written to the Chairperson of the Council now, the minister from Burundi, for us to take action on those that are completed, but not assented to. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS KADAGA: I have another category of Bills, where assent was withheld and as is the practice within the Community, if one Partner State withholds consent, that means the Bill will not come into law; it will not come into effect. So, I just want to present those where consent was withheld and who withheld the consent: 

The East African Community Tourism and Wildlife Management Bill - consent of the United Republic of Tanzania was withheld;  

The East African Community Trans-Boundary Ecosystems Management Bill, 2010 – The United Republic of Tanzania withheld their consent;

The East African Community Disaster Risk and Management Bill, 2013 - the Republic of Kenya withheld assent;

The East African Community Electronic Transactions Bill, 2014 - again, the United Republic of Tanzania withheld consent, indicating that the issues of electronic transactions should be handled by a taskforce on cyber laws. So, this has also been withheld; 

The East African Community Creative Cultural Industries Bill – again, the United Republic of Tanzania withheld consent on the basis that it was contravening Article 91 and 59(2) of the Treaty for East African Community; and

 The East African Community Forests Management and Protection Bill, 2015. Again, the United Republic of Tanzania declined to consent, awaiting policy guidelines.

I beg to lay.

The next category is of Bills that have been assented to and are in force.

The Acts of the Community Act, 2003; 
The Laws of the Community Interpretation Act, 2003;
The Legislative Powers and Privileges Act, 2003;
The East African Community Customs Management Act, 2004;
The East African Community Standardisation, Quality Assurance, Meteorology and Testing Act, 2006;

 The East African Community Competition Act, 2006;
The Customs Management (Amendment) Act, 2007;
The Summit Delegations of Powers and Functions Act, 2007;
The East African Trade Negotiations Act, 2008; 
The Lake Victoria Transport Act, 2008;

The East African Community Budget Act, 2008;
 The Customs Management (Amendment) Act, 2008; 
The Civil Aviation Safety and Security Oversight Agency Act, 2009; 
The Community (Amendment) Act, 2009; 
The East African Competition (Amendment) Act, 2010;

The East African Community Service Commission Act;
The East African Parliamentary Institute Act, 2011;
The East African Customs Management (Amendment) Act, 2011;
The Legislative Assembly Elections Act, 2011; 
The Administration of the East African Legislative Assembly Act, 2011; 

The Community Emblems (Amendment) Act, 2012;
The Community HIV/AIDS Prevention and Management Act, 2012; 
The Community Conflict Management Act, 2012;
The East African Community Elections Act, 2012; 
The East African Community One-Stop Border Posts Act, 2013; 

The East African Community Vehicle Load Control Act, 2013; 
The East African Court of Justice Act, 2017;
The East African Community Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016; 
The Community Elimination of Non-Tariff Barriers Act, 2017;
The Community Audits Act; and
The East African Monetary Institute Act, 2019.

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, Uganda is a partner State of the EAC block. The membership now comprises the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Republic of Burundi, the Republic of Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, South Sudan and Uganda.

I would like to inform the House that on the 11th of July, the DRC reposted the instruments of ratification two months ahead of time. We had given them until September, but they moved very early. So, they are now full members of the EAC (Applause) and have started attending our meetings. 

The critical organs of the treaty include the Legislative Assembly, which as I have informed you, has 62 members and eight ex-officio members from each partner state. There is a requirement that we have good relations between EALA and the partner states, through the transmission and exchange of follow-ups debates of the sessions with the assembly, and the laying of the Bills and Acts, which I have just done. 

So, a lot of the Bills’ work has been done by the community. A total of 36 substantive Acts have been enacted and assented to. Another 36 have been introduced, 14 are in the process of assent, 15 are before the committees, and the eight, as I informed you where, there are reservations. 

The concluded Acts have all been assented to. And, once they are assented to, they go into force immediately. So, those that are still under consideration, we shall be able to inform the House and the country about their status. 

Therefore, this statement is a fulfilment of the obligations of Article 65 and rule 36 of the Rules of procedure. Thank you very much for your attention, Madam Speaker and Members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of East African Community Affairs. The documents are going to be deposited in the library for your information. I know that these documents will be good for you to understand what is happening in the East African Community. 

Our committee on the East African Community Affairs should regularly monitor and report on the status of our national compliance to the East African Treaty and Protocols, because that is why this committee was formed. So, that is what should be done. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, procedure on what?

MR KATESUMBWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister for laying the documents. However, I would like to rise in accordance with rule 36 (1) of our Rules of Procedure, which talks about the laying of records of debates, Bills and Acts of the East African Legislative Assembly. 

Madam Speaker, this rule sates in parts thus: “…the minister responsible for East African Community Affairs shall, within 21 days, after the end of every session of the East African Legislative Assembly, lay on Table … the copies of all relevant debates … the copies of Bills … and Acts of the Community....” 

Madam Speaker, while I appreciate what the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister has done, you realise that among the documents that have been laid are Bills, which were done way back; it has taken years for them to be laid here. 

I would like Government to explain why it has taken this long for these to be laid. While we appreciate what the current minister has done, Government should ensure that this rule is complied with to enable us understand the affairs of the EAC, so that we can meaningfully support the process of integration.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, that is the reason you should thank the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister -(Applause)- because she has been able to dig out all the documents that have not been laid. Now that we have the documents - we have been having ministers there, but they would not come to lay those documents. But at least she has made the effort. (Applause) 

MOTION FOR ARESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO PROVIDE MONTHLY PAYMENTS TO VILLAGE HEALTH TEAMS AS AN INCENTIVE FOR THAT ROLE IN THE HEALTHCARE DELIVERY SYSTEM IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: We have postponed this motion because the Opposition is not ready; they have requested us to push it to tomorrow. So, for the sake of peace and harmony, we believe we should do that.

3.58
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity, when the Prime Minister is still here, to say this.

Madam Speaker, this is in regard to the independence of Parliament. It is a preserve of this Parliament to undertake the role of appropriation. The Committee on Education and Sports eloquently and clearly made a proposal that was adopted by the entire House, to the effect that Shs 485 billion be allocated or be put in the budget focusing on all the teachers countrywide regardless of discipline - Arts or Sciences.

However, at the end of July 2022, we got feedback from our fellow citizens, and especially the teachers, that the report from the Committee on Education and Sports that was unanimously adopted by this very House, that Shs 485 billion be paid to teachers regardless of discipline - Madam Speaker, your citizens across the country went into shock when they went to the bank only to find that only one segment of the teaching community was considered. This very House instructed the finance minister that the Shs 485 billion be distributed to all teachers across the board. 

Our Constitution is very clear that when it comes to pay, there should be equity and that is a constitutional mandate. Madam Speaker, you directed and the Constitution gives you the power that the moment you direct Government, it is not an element of option. Government must follow through the commitment. 

The Science and Arts teachers go to the same shops, educate their children from the same schools, go to the same hospitals and are affected by the same challenges. I think this cannot be a Parliament that is going to sit while Government disregards its resolution. If we do not attach value to ourselves, nobody else will. 

My procedural issue is simple and crystal clear. This Parliament has the mandate and preserve. If there is not enough money, this Government has the power, duty and responsibility to ensure that the Arts teachers get their pay in form of a supplementary.

Also, this Parliament has the mandate to direct Government to hold the pay until Government has enough money. As representatives of these people, we are finding it hard -

The Speaker: Can you conclude?

Mr katusabe: Okay, I have been directed by the Speaker to conclude. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, my conclusion is around the fact that our brothers and sisters in the teaching community - If we, as Government, do not have the money now, we can consider that effective July 2022, they begin counting on us. Madam Prime Minister, you can commit Government that until we have enough money to pay the teachers - especially for the Arts segment – we begin counting the arrears.

Lastly, if that cannot be done, it is still within the mandate of this Parliament to ensure that the money that was allocated to all the teachers in this country is shared equally; in other words, the Shs 485 billion. We still have enough room to ensure that, that money is paid to all the teachers in this country. 

I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Prime Minister - Honourable members, join me in congratulating one of our backbenchers, hon. Akello from Agago. (Applause Congratulations! 

4.05
The prime minister and leader of Government business (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You are aware that Government is committed to enhancing salaries of all public servants, including all teachers, but we started with scientists. Other categories will be enhanced, depending on the availability of money. 

You are aware that by the time we made that resolution, the teachers were on strike. Government and teachers –(Interruption)

Mr ssewungu: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for the good response. We all agree with what you are saying. However, do you know what is going to happen? As we talk, the Arts teachers are determined not to mark ‘O’ Level, PLE and ‘A’ Level Examinations because of the discrepancies, if I can inform you about that. Therefore, as you pay some above the rest while doing the same job, could you take keen interest in whether there is teaching going on in schools right now?

Lastly, Madam Speaker, can I put you on notice that we are going to court for this matter? What is going to happen is that teachers will pretend to teach while they are not. I can assure you about that. Thank you. 

The Speaker: The problem is that Hon. Ssewungu is a teacher; so, he is one of them. 

Ms nabbanja: Madam Speaker, you are aware that it is the NRM Government that brought the rule of law. That is why my brother is now confidently saying that they are going to court over the same. 

I would like to once again inform you and this country - and also thank the teachers. We did a verification exercise and found all the teachers in this country in class. I want to thank you.

Mr silwany: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister for giving me this opportunity to seek your clarification. However, before I do so, I would like to thank you. I think you are a very active Prime Minister. I have seen that whenever there is a disaster or challenge anywhere, the Prime Minister is the first to arrive at the scene. Rt Hon. Nabbanja, we are very grateful that you are doing this. Please continue raising our flag very high. (Applause)

The clarification I would like to seek is, what is the timeline? For example, if we talk about teachers, when are we targeting to sort them out and the public servants as well? Could you give us some timelines so that we do not remain waiting forever?

Ms nabbanja: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that Government, once again, is committed to enhancing salaries of all public servants. We started with the scientists. In the medium- term, we shall handle category by category depending on the availability of funds. Thank you.

Mr kibalya: Procedure.

The Speaker: Yes?

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We appreciate the answers from the Prime Minister, but I seek your indulgence. We come from these constituencies and you will get information from the rest of the Members of Parliament; the teachers are not teaching. 

Therefore, I request you, Madam Speaker, to send the Committee on Education and Sports to the field so that they can come and give you a report. You will base on that report to make your own conclusions. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the students are going on holiday. When they return, we will follow it up – we will do our oversight role – to make sure that the teachers are teaching. 

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Cotin Nursery and Primary School in Lira. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Dr Ruth Aceng, the Minister for Health, Hon. Vincent Obong, Hon. Peter Ocen and Hon. Linda Auma. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Join me in welcoming them. You are most welcome. (Applause) You gave us very good Members of Parliament and maintain them. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO PROVIDE MONTHLY PAYMENTS TO VILLAGE HEALTH TEAMS AS AN INCENTIVE FOR THEIR ROLE IN THE HEALTH CARE DELIVERY SYSTEM IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe just as a reminder, this evening we have His Grace Paul Ssemogerere, the Archbishop of Kampala Diocese. He has come to Parliament to pray with us and officially welcome us to Parliament, and we also welcome him in that ministry. We will have Holy Mass here and then celebrate the feast of our patron, St Thomas More, and then solicit for contributions for the completion of Christ the King Church, Kampala. So, kindly join us in the Holy Mass at 5.30 p.m. 

The motion is going to be presented by Hon. Stephen Aseera. 

4.12
MR STEPHEN ASEERA (NRM, Buhaguzi East County, Kikuube): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to provide monthly payments to the Village Health Teams (VHTs) as an incentive for their role in the health care delivery system in Uganda. This is moved under rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament: 

“WHEREAS Objective XX of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda requires the State to take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population; 

AND WHEREAS in 2001, the Uganda Health Sector Strategic Plan 1 recommended the establishment of Village Health Teams (VHTs) to bridge the gap and improve equity in access to health services; 

AWARE THAT the decision to establish VHTs was made in line with the Alma Ata (1978) and the Ouagadougou (2008) declarations on Primary Health Care and the Village Health Teams (VHTs) Strategy and Operational Guidelines were formed and commissioned in September 2001; 

NOTING THAT VHTs contribute significantly to Uganda's health system, through empowering communities to take control of their own health, wellbeing as well as participating actively in the management of their local health services, including home visits, mobilisation of communities for utilisation of health services, routine immunisation, health promotion and education, community-based case management of common ill health conditions, follow-up on the mothers during pregnancy, after birth and”–- the list is very long – “for the significance of the VHTs in our community;  

CONCERNED THAT despite the tremendous contribution by the VHTs in addressing basic health care service delivery to the whole population, especially in rural areas, VHTs remain poorly facilitated in the performance of their duties and in 2014, a study by the Ministry of Health indicated lack of regular monthly pay as a barrier to their performance;
 
AWARE THAT VHTs are paid approximately Shs 10,000 per month or Shs 30,000 per quarter, which does not match the services rendered given that majority of the population lives far from health centres, which makes VHTs indispensable to bridge the gap; 

FURTHER AWARE THAT the financial incentives to VHTs, which are provided based on the activities to be implemented, are not regular and this has led to a high turnover of members out of the programme due to the financial constraints and lack of transportation, among others, which continue to affect the programme; 

CONSIDERING THAT the 10th Parliament passed a resolution to pay the community health extension workers Shs 150,000 per month, who are to be recruited from the VHTs and are to be based at the parish level, yet VHTs continue to be poorly facilitated, despite their contribution to the health care delivery system; 

COGNISANT of the UN Sustainable Development Goal No.3 on health and wellbeing under which member states are called upon to ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at all ages; 

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED THAT: 

Parliament urges Government to provide a monthly payment to VHTs of at least Shs 100,000 each as an incentive and recognition to the noble role that they play in the health care delivery system. “
 
I would have loved to have even suggested a higher fee, but given the COVID-19 situation we are in – I would comfortably begin with Shs 300,000. However, for the start, let me suggest Shs 100,000. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Hon. Aseera. First of all, do not go very far. I would like to know whether your motion has a budgetary implication. 

MR ASEERA: Yes, Rt Hon. Speaker; it has a budgetary implication. However, we could engage the Ministry of Health to have this effected. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Two, does it affect Article 93 of the Constitution?

MR ASEERA: Yes, it does, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: If it affects Article 93 of the Constitution, then it can only be brought by Government.

MR ASEERA: Rt Hon. Speaker, it is the reason that I have brought it on the Floor, so that we can equally work together with Government.

THE SPEAKER: You are not Government.

4.20
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all appreciate - in fact, these VHTs in most of our constituencies are being facilitated by MPs.

They come to us and we appreciate and recognise the role they play. Unfortunately, this particular motion, under Article 93(b), we cannot proceed on it in this manner because it has an effect since it creates a charge on the Consolidated Fund. 

Now, because it is a motion brought in good faith and intended to help all of us, I propose that Government picks it up and proceeds from here.

Otherwise, as Parliament, we are barred in the manner in which the motion has been structured. However, we should not lose sight of the significance of this motion. 

I hope the Prime Minister can undertake to pick it up from here and perhaps channel it through the right processes and have it brought back to save the MPs from the challenges of looking after these VHTs in our respective constituencies. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, can you take over the motion? (A Member rose_) It is not anything that you are going to debate. First of all, our hands are tied. We want the Prime Minister to make a commitment that she will take it up and bring it as a Government motion.

4.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Rt Hon. Speaker, you are aware that we are struggling to pay teachers; you know - let me call a spade a spade. 

Secondly, the motion has very good intentions. Let me take it to the Government side and discuss it; we shall report back here in the near future.

THE SPEAKER: Prime minister, kindly report back to this House - not “in the near future” at least. (Laughter) Please give us the time when you will report back. The Prime Minister will have to report back to the House in one month.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that this matter was handled in 2017. In addition, because Government is constrained, it was not able to bring it here. Let me take it back, and like you have said, I will come back here and report in a month's time.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Aseera. Prime Minister, we suffer a lot with VHTs; we are the ones giving them money. Kindly, help us solve this problem, for them to perform very well. As Government, you need people who perform; so that will be the best way to pay them so that they are able to perform. 

Honourable members, I adjourn the House until tomorrow, 3 August 2022 at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 4.24 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 August 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 