Thursday, 22 August 2013

Parliament met at 3.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I want to begin by asking the Clerk to lay on Table, a Compendium of Diaspora Investment Business Opportunity, a publication of the Uganda Investment Authority. We have placed copies in the library both in hard and soft forms. Members are asked to publicize the compendium widely; it deals with investment opportunities in this country. So, I want the clerk to lay it on Table for Members to have access. Okay, can you explain – he is not allowed? Okay, let me tell the Members what it is about.
Hon. Members, the first one is called the Home Compendium of Diaspora Investment and Business Opportunities. It is published by the Government of Uganda, the Uganda Investment Authority and the UNDP.

The second one is also called Home Compendium of Investment and Business Opportunities, Volume II. It is also published by the Uganda Government, the Uganda Investment Authority and the UNDP. So, I invite Members to study them and see where they can put their money as they invite other people to invest in the country.

Secondly, honourable members, last Thursday, I attended a meeting of Speakers of the Pan African parliaments and a number of issues were raised. One was that the Pan African Parliament will be transformed in a number of ways. They have been asking for legislative powers. Their position is that the ministers responsible for foreign affairs undertake the responsibility of sensitizing the countries so that when the decision is taken, PAP will be able to develop.

On trade, there was concern that inter-Africa trade is very limited within the African Union; we trade at only 20 percent amongst ourselves while trade within the European Union is about 80 percent. So, there was concern that we are not trading with ourselves well. So, we agreed to diversify the exports and reduce dependency on the traditional items.

Also concern was expressed on unemployment concerning the youth. We took into account their growing numbers and agreed to intensify strategies for improving employment, trade and growth.

There was also a decision that we should harmonize legislations to enhance integration. So, we shall have to sensitize Parliament on the AU Instrument signed by the heads of State. I think we have never seen one in this House. We were requested to ask parliamentary committees to consider the AU Instrument as adopted by our governments. But also that we sensitize government departments on the need to domesticate the AU Instrument and report annually to the Speakers’ Conference on progress made. 

This is an area, honourable members and especially the Prime Minister – on treaties and conventions; I think we are doing very badly indeed. I don’t recall the last time a treaty was tabled here. So, I hope something will be done.

There was a discussion about democracy and good governance in which there was concern that many African countries had not adopted or ratified the Protocol on Elections, Democracy and Governance. So, I would like to ask those in charge of bringing it to do the needful.

We also discussed more about the MDGs and Africa’s progress to date. And as we have been discussing, in some areas, we are doing well, but in some we aren’t doing too well. So, we agreed that we try to race to 2015 and see how we fair.

There are some children here, but I don’t know who they are – okay, in the Public gallery, we have Mr Charles Onen, the LCIII Chairperson of Namkora in Kitgum and Mr KajobaJamadda, a councilor for Mukono Municipality. They are here to watch the proceedings of the House.

We also have, in the Public Gallery, pupils and teachers of Bukedea Primary School. Can you stand up? (Applause) Yes, they are represented by hon. Rose Akol and hon. Ekuma. They are welcome. But we also welcome the pupils and teachers of Good Hope Primary School, represented by hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Kusasira. 

Further, we have pupils and teachers of ZakayoMusisi Memorial School, represented by hon. Abraham Byandala and hon. Brenda Nabukenya. You are welcome.

But I understand we also have councilors and some civil servants from Buvuma Island. I don’t know where they are seated – oh! Islanders, you are welcome.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.14
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, a report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Appointments benchmarking visit to the US Congress from 29 July to 02 August 2013. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to ask the committees of both Budget and Foreign Affairs to take an interest in that report. Among them we have – of course there are many problems in the foreign affairs office. But in Washington, we found that the passport making machine is obsolete. It has been there for 20 years and it has not been serviced for a long time and it may cause problems at the embassy. When I came back, I wrote to the foreign affairs office to tell them to do something about it together with Internal Affairs. Other issues of course relate to underfunding and lack of facilities at the foreign missions for our people working there. So, I do hope that the committee can quickly look at it so that it inputs into the debate on the budget.

3.15
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Delegations from Parliament travel to different capitals of the world and whenever Members come back, they bring information about our missions. We want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for taking interest in what is happening in our missions. We have been here and we have asked the ministers of Foreign Affairs to address the situation of our missions- the conditions of the properties abroad. Hon. Kabwegyere will recall when he was a minister in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; it is no longer the same. Our people are suffering in the missions: rents are not paid, water is disconnected and electricity is switched off. And I keep wondering when the government wants to open more missions-we have told them that they must look after the present ones. Take care of our officers abroad. But now and then, we get reports about our missions and the ministry has got three ministers. 

So, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for taking interest in the ministry. But these are the cries of Ugandans; the cries of Members of Parliament on this Floor. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall also find time to discuss them because they are really important.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On Tuesday during our sitting you did direct the Minister of Local Government to make a report over the bicycles and even the LC elections and he was supposed to present a report today. What is outside there is burning. People are getting bicycles but they do not know whether they are for the office of the LCIs or for individuals because those bicycles are coming in the names of individuals. Up to now, outside there, out of the 52 districts, so far-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are now talking about the issues which I asked the minister to address. Let us finish with the items on the order paper. I will be calling the minister later. Let us first finish with the laying of papers. 

THE REPORT ON THE SECOND GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON THE GREAT LAKES REGION (ICGLR) OF THE REGIONAL WOMEN FORUM (RWF) ON THE STATE OF WOMEN, 2to 6 JULY 2013

3.18
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a brief report on the second general assembly of the regional women’s forum which is under the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region which took place from 2 to 6 July in Sudan, Khartoum. I beg to lay.

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF MEMBERS FROM THE COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS ON ITS STUDY VISIT TO ARUSHA TO BENCHMARK REGIONAL HIV STRATEGIES, POLICIES AND PROGRAMMES, FROM 5 TO 13 MAY 2013

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson of the Committee on HIV/AIDS or a member. Next item.

NAMAYINGO DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.19
THE CHAIRPESON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Madam Speaker, may I lay the following documents as per rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure: Namayingo District Local Government, financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay. 

KWEEN DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MR SABIITI: I beg to lay on Table Kween District Local Government financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the Auditor-General’s opinion. I beg to lay.

MOYO DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MR SABIITI: I beg to lay on Table Moyo District Local Government financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

KABAROLE DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MR SABIITI: I beg to lay on Table Kabarole District Local Government financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

MASINDI DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MR SABIITI: I beg to lay on Table Masindi District Local Government financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-general. I beg to lay.

MITYANA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MR SABIITI: I beg to lay on Table Mityana District Local Government financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. 

BUGIRI DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MR SABIITI: I beg to lay on Table Bugiri District Local Government financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General.

SEMBABULE DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MR SABIITI: I beg to lay on Table Ssembabule District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012 and the opinion of the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

KIBOGA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MR SABIITI: Kiboga District Local Government financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General

LUUKA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MR SABIITI: I beg to lay on Table Luuka District Local Government financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

BUSIA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MR SABIITI: I beg to lay on Table Busia District Local Government financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay. 

KALUNGU DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINON THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, may I lay on Table Kalungu District Local Government financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General?

BUVUMA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE, 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MR SABIITI: I beg to lay on Table Buvuma District Local Government financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

MPIGI DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MR SABIITI: Lastly, I beg to lay on Table Mpigi District Local Government financial statements for the year ended 30June2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

3.24
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Madam Speaker, I am sorry but I feel I have an issue that I should raise. As a former commissioner of Parliament, I feel I still owe this institution some level of speaking for it if I can and in a situation where I can. 

The Executive of recent has been continuously attacking the institution of Parliament through the leadership and we have been keenly following the statements that have been coming out. Today in the press conference that was addressed by the minister without portfolio, hon. Twodong, the same issue still keeps coming up much as this time they tried to do damage control and said what was in the press was not right but some issue is still not clear.

The Prime Minister says he kept on taking the initiative in order to speak to the Speaker and disclose the information that there was error in the public that came in The Observer as far as attacking the Speaker is concerned. I am still wondering whether this is true because we do not want a situation where we have the Executive fighting the institution of Parliament. You put all our lives under threat. We feel we are not safe and we feel we must at all costs defend the Speaker of this House.

As a former commissioner, I still feel I owe this House this little contribution that I can still make. My concern is whether this statement is true that efforts were made to reach you and disclose this information. To the Executive also, we are wondering whether this time as a female Speaker, is it about male chauvinism that we have these two offices fighting and attacking the institution of Parliament through the leadership. I am very worried and as a woman, I stand to detest this in the strongest terms possible. I need an answer to that.

3.23
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point raised by the former commissioner is a matter that should attract the attention of every Member in this Parliament. We spent this whole morning in a forum called IPOD (Interparty Forum for Dialogue) and I thought that forum should be able to fertilise the relationship between the different parties in the country.

As a stakeholder in the 1995 Constitution where I participated vigorously in the entrenchment of almost every article in that constitution, much as I disagreed with some and I did not sign, I think it is my pride to see that this constitution is implemented to the letter. I get disappointed to see that the spirit that the people of Uganda had in the writing of the new constitution is now being trampled upon. 

Madam Speaker, I know you feel uncomfortable; you are seated on that chair. It is not about hon. Amama Mbabazi attacking hon. Rebecca Kadaga Alitwala - it is not. Members have always reacted to my pronunciation but if I could call of you Langi names, you would make it very easy for me. This is not about individual attacks, it is not about personality. We are concerned about hon. Rebecca Kadaga the Speaker of Parliament. We are concerned about the institution of Parliament and at the time of writing the constitution, we demarcated the areas of the three pillars of the state. We know where their responsibility starts and where it ends.

Madam Speaker, you have been restrained, the former Speakers were very restrained they never trespassed or treaded on the feet of the Executive or the Judiciary, never on record. I have been in this House since the Sixth Parliament, Seventh Parliament, Eighth Parliament and I am here following up the new constitution. I have never witnessed a debate where this Parliament discredits the Executive or the Judiciary. We have honoured and respected the other two institutions. Why is it that the Executive has continued to attack the institution of Parliament?

I want to repeat what I said this morning; it is not about NRM, NRMO is a good party just like any other party - what makes the difference are the personalities that we put in the leadership to run the various institutions –(Interjections) - Let me finish and I will give you the time.

I am a student of organisational dynamics and I have come to learn that we should not just put a person in leadership. We must understand the character of that individual because that individual can collapse with the entire organisation. That is very important and that is why I am standing up to say that I am not attacking the institution of the NRMO - we are partners, we have a forum where we can discuss our differences but for heaven’s sake, if any individual in the NRMO has a problem with any individual in the FDC, let them sort it out or even internally. If there is any problem with in the NRMO or FDC, let them sort it out but let them not bring it on the national platform. It is making it difficult for us and this is supposed to be the supreme organ of the state.

I have listened to leaders of this country referring to the Speaker of Parliament as a little girl running from one night club to another. Really, it is not Rebecca who is being despised. If hon. Rebecca Kadaga is running from one night club to another, what about me? You are doing it and I am doing it. They are actually saying that is how you look at a Member of Parliament.

So Madam Speaker give us opportunity; you made your defence statement the other day when you entered Parliament. I know you have been away. I have also been away but I know if the person who is alleged to have made that statement did not actually make the statement, it is now two weeks, that person would have come out with a statement. But two weeks on and no statement has come out and that is why it is a matter of concern to all of us.

I rarely throw away newspapers. Some years back in 1996 - I have a magazine at that time which was called Uganda Confidential dated 5th of December 1996 –(Interjections)– I have it here. It is not talking about you so just allow me read it. In this article, it is about Bakunda vs Hon. Amama Mbabazi –(Interjections)– 1996. And Madam Speaker, if you could allow me to read one paragraph, then I will justify the statement. You know the rule requires that you do not make a statement unless you can justify it.

In this particular article, Mr Bakunda is saying on the 2 September 1996, Darlington Bakunda, Chairperson and founder of Bakunda Development Centre issued a press statement where he was unhappy with hon. Amama Mbabazi, the Member of Parliament for Kinkizi West: “On behalf of the peace loving people of Kinkizi East, Rukungiri District, I…” meaning Darlington Bakunda, “…wish to disassociate myself from the adverse press reports emanating from hon. Amama Mbabazi. He is dividing the people of Kinkizi...” this document is here and anybody who wants a copy, I can give it to you because history does not die –(Interjections)– facts do not die. I will lay it on Table, do not worry. 

So I am bringing this to show that there is a track record and we must contain people whose character does not fit into certain offices. (Laughter)-(Applause) -We must protect our country and its image. 

Madam Speaker, you were recently at the Pan-African Parliament and you have seen how I stand on international fora and defend my country and my President. If you attack the President of Uganda, Gen. Museveni, anywhere in the world and Mrs Ogwal is there, I would stand up to defend him - (Applause)- because he is my President. Whatever problem we have in Uganda, we will sort it out in Uganda. [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] But outside there, you are not going to disgrace Uganda; you are not going to spoil the image of Uganda. It is my responsibility to defend my country and my leaders. 

Why on earth would anybody not stand up to defend the image of the institution of Parliament and the Speaker? Why? I speak as a mother of this country, as a person who contributed in the making of the Constitution, as a person who made the first shot to call for the return of multi-partism and now all these people who are standing up and clamouring for multi-partism were all burying their heads in the sand. Now democracy has come, multi-partism has come and you are insulting it but that is not right.

I would have said much more but I have remembered one thing and I want to stop on that. During the time when His Excellency the President was campaigning for the second referendum, he came to Akii-Bua Stadium and he asked me to help him to campaign so that we return multi-partism to Uganda. I told His Excellency the President that if only he had used his wisdom and consulted me before he locked up the parties, I would have helped him but because he locked up the parties without consulting me, let him carry his cross up to Calvary and in my constituency then, Lira Municipality, those who voted at all were not more than five percent.

And that shows you what my position is as far as democracy is concerned, the rule of law is concerned and constitutionalism is concerned. Let no body play with that because otherwise you are not going to collapse alone but you are going collapse and injure many Ugandans by being reckless.  

I beg to stop here. May God bless all of you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me clarify that it is not true that I am not accessible. No one tried to contact me. It has been almost two weeks since that article appeared and I do not think it was about looking for me. I think the right thing was about to go to the press and say this did not happen. But having said that, I have a Principal Private Secretary in my office, I have the Clerk of Parliament, I have my Senior Personal Secretaries and anyone who wants me can find me. So it is not true that I could not be found. I even have the commissioners; so it is wrong for someone to go to the press and say I am not accessible. Commissioner Dombo?

3.40
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much. About a month ago, Madam Speaker, you requested me to represent you at a workshop in Munyonyo when we were discussing the Finance Bill. In my concluding remarks during that meeting, I appealed to honourable members and the nation that we need to change the course of politics in this country - the attitude and the way we do things.  

I appealed to members that we should find time to reflect on how we are conducting ourselves and how we conduct business in Government and in Parliament so that we can give politics the right direction. I did request the financiers of the meeting that we were attending then to find time and organise a workshop on the way politics must be conducted in this country. Madam Speaker, I did raise these issues on your behalf because I found that we are progressively moving apart either as an institution of Parliament or as people in Government. 

In that meeting, I did mention that there are three arms of Government and that Parliament is one of the arms of Government and at times, we operate as if the Opposition is not part of Government and at times they also conduct themselves as if they are not part of Government. But these are issues that we must reflect on. I have at times listened to His Excellency the President attacking leaders in Government in the names of Members of Parliament and I have wondered why.  

Madam Speaker, the business in a multi-party democracy before anything is hammered on the Floor, the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of Government Business behind the scenes must interact and discuss the issues that are going to be debated. If we do not do that, we are progressively going to divide the people of Uganda when it is our responsibility to unite them.  

The honourable member who introduced this topic, a former commissioner, did state that as a former commissioner she is obliged to defend the institution. Madam Speaker, you recall that in our first commission meeting, one of the things that we undertook is taking the oath of secrecy because it is not our duty to want to divulge and discuss the issues we internally discuss. We have maintained up to a certain extent this position. 

But, honourable members, you recall that as commissioners, we have at times taken exception at the risk of being misunderstood to respond to the issues that are directed to the Speaker for the purposes of cushioning the institution because the Speaker is the individual and also the institution and anything that attacks her or undermines her indirectly or directly, undermines the integrity of the institution of Parliament. At one time, we issued a press release and in the concluding remarks of that press release, the back bench commissioners - the NRM at that time because the issues we were responding to had been addressed in a related meeting.  We did appeal to our leadership in the country to ensure that the leaders spend more time talking to one another in order to find out ways on how to govern the affairs of this country. We did that and at the risk of divulging much, this matter which has been brought was extensively discussed in the Commission meeting today and we want to thank God that for the first time in so many months, both the Prime Minister and the Speaker were present in the Commission. As commissioners, we took both of them to task as to why they should find more time talking to the press when they have a lot of time to talk to one another –(Applause)– and enable us do proper administration. We did ask them: the Speaker is the First National Deputy of the NRM Party and the Prime Minister is the Secretary General; why don’t you find time to talk to one another? We asked the Leader of the Opposition why he does certain things that he does. I do not want to go into the details of the issues that we discussed but as commissioners, on your behalf, we have taken responsibility to ensure and we have appealed to the members that the senior people in this country, be they clergy men, be they senior citizens, be they politicians, should talk to our leaders so that behind the scenes, they do a lot of talking that will enable us as members of the institution to work together. 

On a good note, could be the press conference was held without knowing the nature of business that we are conducting in the Commission but the furthest I can say is that we got a commitment from the senior leaders - the Leader of the Opposition, the Speaker who chaired the meeting, and the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business and they all agreed on the need, as leaders in this country, to continue doing more talking than the various press issues that have been coming up and this will help the governance of this country. 

So, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, because I did not want to say more of what transpired there but through the Prime Minister –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, hon. Dombo, and I am glad you are giving us this information. The clarification I seek from you is that the Speaker made her defence here but the Executive went and gave a reply in the media. Mr Commissioner, would you be offended, since the Executive is here, if they gave their response to us here in the House? Why should they be more comfortable talking to the press and have a closed meeting in the Commission whereas matters are here in the House? Shouldn’t we receive a statement from the Executive?

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, it is good the Vice-President is here and he is the second most important person in this country –(Laughter)– but I did mention to members that we, in the Commission, are happy to report that we got a commitment from all the leaders. We got a commitment from the Leader of the Opposition, we got a commitment from the Prime Minister and we got a commitment from the Speaker that progressively, it is dialogue that must continue governing the affairs of this institute. We want to encourage the Executive; we even sent the Prime Minister that he should relay the same message to His Excellency the President. He is the fountain of honour and the things that he does lay the foundation for the issues of governance in this country. I did not want to get into the details but even within the House, we have started engaging across the sides on the issues that we are involved in as a House, that outside continue progressively to demean us as an institution. People should do more talking than what we have been doing on the Floor. So, behind the scenes, a number of members are already engaged to ensure that we progressively improve governance in this country. I just wanted to provide this information. I am sorry if I have said more than what I should have said. I thank you very much. 

3.50
MS BETTY ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We appreciate the explanation but I think due to public demand, we, the Members of Parliament whom you lead, are eagerly awaiting opportune time to get a statement from the Prime Minister so that we can go on and look into the details of this as a way forward and a separation and respect of institutions of Government. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that the Prime Minister comes here to the Floor of Parliament and brings a statement to enable the hon. Members debate it and we state the records right rather than discussions in the press and relying on what has been discussed behind the scenes since it is the institution of Parliament at stake? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to demand for a statement from the hon. Prime Minister?  

3.51
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank hon. Ibi for raising this matter. We are a young democracy. A few years ago, Ugandans took a decision to go multiparty but when you look at the trend of events in the country, we seem to want to vulgarise the multiparty politics in this country and I think as Parliament, we should urge all the stakeholders in this country to respect each other. This Parliament is constituted of the Government side, Members of the Opposition, the Independents, and the UPDF and Parliament must be respected as such because from the story that caused all this confusion, Madam Speaker, you were being accused of favouring the Opposition; that you met a team from the Opposition side who came to your Office to consult you on a matter related to a Bill which was before this House –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my colleague for giving way. We seem to be reaching the biblical building of the Tower of Babel. We seem not to be talking the same language and we may not build this tower but I was horrified by the statement which was attributed to the Prime Minister concerning your Office. That fateful Tuesday when that obnoxious Bill was passed, we met as the Shadow Cabinet and we realised that the Bill had caused a lot of hatred in the House and that we were not talking to each other and we thought that if we debated that Bill that day again, there was bound to be more acrimony. We then decided that we should talk to you and if possible talk to our colleagues on the opposite side so that we find a more harmonious way of moving forward. 

I was one of the three people who were chosen by the Shadow Cabinet to come to your office and talk to you on whether that day could be rescheduled to the following week. We came with hon. Betty Aol, hon. Mwiru and myself. We met hon. Reagan in your office and we asked him to join us. We spent less than one minute in your office. The request from the Shadow Cabinet had been granted without us asking for it. Madam Speaker, you told us that you had also considered the matter and had rescheduled the debate to the following week. Therefore, we never influenced you to reschedule that debate from the order paper because we took less than two minutes in your office. 

When we left your office, we came and found on our systems that the order paper had been done by your office – with that business put under matters to follow. You also informed us, while we were in your office that you were expecting a team from Government to come to your office at midday – we were in your office at around 11.30 and you asked us if we would be available to come and begin our negotiations there. We said, “Yes”. The three of us sat waiting for you to call us but you did not. But our colleagues came and I think they managed to convince you to change the order paper; we did not convince you to change the order paper, you had already made up your mind. So it is the Government side that convinced you to change the order paper that day for the Public Order Management Bill – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are moving away from the subject.

MR WAFULA: Madam Speaker, I am not moving away from the subject because that was the statement in the media –(Interjections)– as a Member of this Parliament, I was horrified two days after –(Interruption)

MS ANITE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to take this opportunity to thank hon. Ibi for raising that crucial issue. However, the point of order I am raising to hon. Wafula Oguttu is that the issue we are discussing here is the turmoil between the Speaker and the Prime Minister. We have not discussed the issue of the Public Order Management Bill. You even advised him that he is out of context. But he is still insisting on debating the Public Order Management Bill, which we have already put aside. 

Is he therefore in order to go against your ruling and advise as the Speaker – the mighty Speaker whom we respect so much as a House, to insist on the Public Order Management Bill? In my opinion he is out of order, Madam Speaker, but you can rule also –(Laughter). 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that one is a junior Speaker. I think the point has been made in this matter. I think continuing to speak on it will just draw us apart. I think the points have been made. We have agreed on a way forward for now and we shall keep you updated – (Interjections) – no, the Commission meeting was about other issues. That one just came in as a by the way.

Before we go to the next item, join me in welcoming the children, Members of Gabula Atudde Group from Mukono, represented by hon. Nambooze and hon. Kusasira. 

Before we go to item four, I want to adjust the order paper slightly to allow the Minister of Health to brief us about some emergency and then the minister for Local Government will tell us where the bicycles of the LCs are. 

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH-CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to update you on the haemorrhagic fever which is currently in the media. The Ministry of Health confirmed the outbreak of the Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever in Agago District, Kalongo Hospital on 15 August 2013 at 6.00 p.m. This was officially declared to the public on 16 August 2013 at the Media Centre. 

Following this confirmation, the Ministry of Health deployed a multi-disciplinary response team to investigate and support the initial response. A team comprising of officers from the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Agriculture, UPDF, WHO and CDC were deployed to Agago District – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the minister is about to discuss a very important issue to this country and I appreciate her coming to the House. But I thought a statement of that nature would require giving us copies after which we can make some observations and clarifications. So, I am wondering if she could give us copies of that statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe the minister did not know she had to bring some 350 copies. Honourable minister, the statement has to be debated so it is important for the Members to have copies. I hope the statement of the bicycles is available. Let us arrange for the statement to be reproduced while we listen to the other minister. 

MS OPENDI: Okay, Madam Speaker, let me try to reproduce copies. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Onzima – have you brought copies - 

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Alex Onzima): Madam Speaker, I just have a handful of copies but let me also say –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, this House has procedures which it follows and it values every statement of the magnitude similar to what the minister was about to deliver. I therefore demand that in the absence of a formal statement circulated to all members, you should not go ahead to give us wolokoso because we value information pertaining to the bicycles. The bicycle matter is a very important one to our voters. In terms of procedure, should the minister continue to deliver his speech in the absence of that statement, to which we want to make reference so that we can interact?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, it seems you have a similar handicap that befell your colleague. You are supposed to come with 300 copies. 

MR ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, please accept my apologies. But I request that we can have more copies as we proceed to dispose of this matter.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, that will mean that you are charging Parliament for doing your work.

MR ONZIMA: Okay. Madam Speaker, if that is your ruling, I have no option but to oblige. Then we can proceed with this matter in the next sitting.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking your guidance on the way ministers are behaving in this House. I would like to be guided whether ministers are taken through induction before they take up their positions. This is because we are getting embarrassed whenever ministers are making presentation. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not think I can respond to that one; my work is to approve them and then they go away.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As honourable members can appreciate, it is sometimes difficult to produce many copies. That is why the Parliamentary Commission has taken a decision to get electronic tablets so that we can get some of this information electronically. 

But, Madam Speaker, in the event that we are yet to deliver these devices to the members, I plead that, for example, regarding the report from Ministry of Health, as health professionals, sometimes when emergencies come, we do not follow the standard procedure but we try to save life. As we postpone a report on this emergency, more people could be dying and maybe – (Interruption) 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order pursuant to our Rules of Procedure. This honourable House has Rules of Procedure which we have to follow and honour. The honourable Commissioner is speaking as though he were giving a directive from the Speaker that we should move like this because of this and that. Is he in order to make reference to issues we have not passed as Parliament? We are supposed to follow the Rules of Procedure which demand that before a statement is given by the minister, copies must be distributed.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will ask the Clerk to help the Ministers of Health and Local Government to produce copies as we do other work. So you will have to wait. The Clerk will help you but she will have to send the bill to them for doing their work. (Laughter)

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last Tuesday, on the Floor of this House, I asked Government to explain the on-going activities of the Electoral Commission and the Attorney-General promised to provide a comprehensive report to Parliament on this matter today. I am wondering whether the Attorney-General is represented or the Minister of Constitutional Affairs who is present is able to explain this matter so that we can go back and inform our people. I think the concerns I raised were reported and I am waiting for the response. 

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday, I think as we were leaving the House, I had a chat with the Deputy Attorney-General and he told me that he was ready. I am surprised that he is not yet here. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I have a similar concern; two weeks before we had that adjournment, which took some days, I had raised two issues here and you had directed – and the Government Chief Whip actually said she would take up the matter. The first issue was on the intimidation of the fishermen on Lake Kyoga. And they had pledged that there would be a response but they did not come back, and I am not hearing of it anymore.

The second one was to do with the framework for the students’ loan scheme. It was also supposed to come the following week but it did not come and I have not seen it. So, Madam Speaker, do we have to take the Executive by their word or they are so unserious that we cannot believe them when they commit themselves?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I cannot answer about the fishermen but I know that the Minister of Education tabled the Higher Education Financing Scheme Bill last Tuesday. We gave it the first reading that day and I told the committee that I was giving them strictly 45 days for them to come back. So the Bill is already here.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. But as you may recall, my answer was not strictly about the law; it was also about the policy framework. There are very many things in the students’ financing scheme that cannot be addressed by the law. And as you recall, policy informs law. And without a policy before this House, we will make a law that will have very many gaps that we will be amending it the next day. So I thought that the answer the ministry would have given me would have been comprehensive and informative enough to help us as we look at the issues of the Bill. So, I consider the tabling of the Bill as a partial answer – for which, of course, I am very grateful. As you know, from 2006, when I was a shadow minister, I have moved and pursued the issues of the loan scheme. Perhaps I was the first one to propose it on this Floor. So I am so passionate about it that I would like to make an informed input. If the minister can help me now by giving us the policy so that we also look at the policy as we look at the Bill. I will consider that matter settled and wait for the Minister of Fisheries.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Education, do you intend to bring that policy?

4.14
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My thinking is that by tabling the Bill here last Tuesday, hon. Alice Alaso’s concern had been taken care of. But I have just learnt that she is requesting for a different document, which is in the ministry and it is not difficult for us to forward to this House for purposes of information. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So will you be able to send it to us next week? Does she have 300 copies today? I do not think so.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, we can send a copy on Tuesday next week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE IRENE GLEESON

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anywar, you can present for five minutes. We only have 30 minutes for that item.

4.15
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I stand here to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Irene Gleeson under our Rules of Procedure. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity: 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda, with regret, learnt of the demise of the late Irene Gleeson, which occurred on the 21 July 2013 in Sydney, Australia;

AND WHEREAS the late Irene Gleeson was born in Irene Hepzibah Smith in Sydney, Australia on 30 December 1944, studied to become a teacher at Kurringai College and was a devout Christian Missionary;

NOTING THAT the late Irene arrived in Kitgum District, Northern Uganda in December 1991 amidst a civil war, founded the Irene Gleeson Foundation to care for orphans and hurting children through offering motherly love, quality education, feeding and medication and gave hope to all the people of Northern Uganda;

APPRECIATING that the late Irene Gleeson set up and cared for over 6,000 children in four primary schools which include Palabek Primary School, Childcare Primary School, Amida Primary School and Padibe Primary School and Childcare Vocational School training over 1,000 students in brick laying and concrete practice, machinery and mechanical training skills and sponsored hundreds more to secondary schools and university study;

FURTHER NOTING that she started an HIV/AIDS hospice, which today offers palliatives care and ARVs to over 60 patients per day, started Mighty Fire FM broadcasting to over one million listeners, educating communities on development and facilitating a healing process of a war-torn people, maternal health projects and women’s hospital whose construction is ongoing;

RECOGNISING that the late Irene offered selfless service to the people of Uganda with immeasurable love, commitment and dedication so that they achieve their full potential;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament of Uganda, duly convened and sitting in Kampala on this 22nd day of August 2013 as follows:
    1. That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Northern Uganda, the entire country and the people of Australia upon the demise of the memorable lady commonly known as Mego.
    2. That Parliament registers its admiration for the late Irene Gleeson’s illustrious service above self to people in need.
    3. That Parliament expresses its appreciation for the great contribution made by the late Irene Gleeson towards provision of quality education and medical care to the people of Northern Uganda.
    4. That Parliament recommends that the Government of Uganda completes and stocks the women’s hospital that the late Irene Gleeson had started in Northern Uganda.
    5. That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services that the late Irene rendered to the country and humanity.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member. I think we will take two minutes each.

4.20
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion that this House pays tribute to the late Irene Gleeson and I would like to thank hon. Anywar for tabling this motion. Going through the profile of the late Gleeson, as provided by the mover of the motion, I am very much convinced that this was a type of entrepreneur that we need in this country. The late Gleeson was the type of investor who causes change and social transformation. You can see what she did and clearly this is the type of development partner who supports government efforts in developing Uganda and not the type of masquerading investors who we see on the streets of Kampala riding boda bodas and carrying buveera of pancakes.

Madam Speaker, for me to give tribute to this type of person who made this kind of contribution to our country is an encouragement to the private sector because it gives them the feeling that Parliament really appreciates their contribution. The Mighty Fire FM is well known and for anybody who has been in Northern Uganda especially at the time of the war, the contribution of this radio station in the peace process in Northern Uganda and beyond was quite significant. 

This motion should not stop at merely taking note that this was done. Rather, a contribution to the peace process should be a stand-alone resolution of Parliament.

I would like therefore to propose to the mover of the motion that after number five in our resolutions, we add a separate stand-alone resolution, “That Parliament appreciates the late Irene Gleeson for her contribution to peace building, reconciliation and development in Northern Uganda and the entire country through her efforts in community information, communication and mobilisation.”

THE SPEAKER: Would you want to add that she could be honoured posthumously by the government; to award her a medal posthumously?

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, I think that is the right way because some of the people we have awarded really - this kind of profiled person deserves posthumous recognition by Government. I beg to move on that.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.23
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to second the motion moved by hon. Atim Anywar. I knew the late Irene Gleeson through the Irene Gleeson Foundation because she was helping war-torn victims with trauma counselling. She would bring experts from Australia to come in and help the people who have been traumatised by war. You know, trauma is an inside wound and she brought people to help our people to deal with their pain and loss. 

She also built schools in Northern Uganda, especially primary schools and in my own district, I know of two: in Padibe and Palabek. They are called childcare because she really cared about the children. We also called her childcare and referred to her foundation as simply childcare because she really cared about the children of Northern Uganda.

I strongly second the motion that Parliament pays tribute to the late Irene Gleeson and we reward her posthumously. Thank you.

4.25
MR WILLIAM WILSON NOKRACH (NRM, PWD): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank hon. Beatrice Anywar for moving this motion. I worked in Kitgum from 1999 till the time I joined the Eighth Parliament. We were implementing a psycho-socio support programme to mitigate the effects of the war and that was the time I met the late Irene Gleeson.

She was a very religious lady, generous and committed to supporting the people. I recall vividly that she did not only support orphans; she provided immense support to the disabled people. She bought wheelchairs and all the other safety devices for the disabled people. But she also supported a primary school for the blind in Kitgum District.

She had a radio station from which a lot of church music was played. Indeed, she was a great lady. She did quite a lot. She was very generous, committed and cooperative.

Madam Speaker, this kind of person is usually very rare to get. She went to Kitgum as a single mother. While there, she showed a lot of good examples to the people of Kitgum. She preached to the people not to discriminate any person. Her doors were always open for support. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

4.27
MY GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I rise to support a motion moved by hon. Beatrice Anywar, to pay tribute to Ms Irene Gleeson. When I realised that in Northern Uganda in 1991 – you know, between 1990 and 2005, if you weren’t a strong hearted person, you would not stay in the Acholi Sub Region. Those were very hard times for the Acholi community.

But when she arrived in 1991 – 1993 through to 1995, her people used to ask her to go back to Australia. They told her how she was going to die from the Acholi Sub Region and that she needed to leave. But she said that she wasn’t willing to go anywhere. She had accepted to die with the suffering children in Kitgum. 

The time children were sleeping under the verandah, she organised them, erected tents and distribute blankets to them. She was a very courageous lady and did very many good things for the people of Acholi. But more remarkable, the late liked education so much. I remember she used to tell the children in the Acholi Sub Region that the only thing that would make them go succeed was to read hard. She used to say that for them to get out of the suffering they needed to concentrate on books and that time would come for them to see the light.

Madam Speaker, the late constructed four schools and a training centre for the youth who were redundant and because they had no jobs, they would be trained. Therefore, we will really miss her so much. We pray to the Good Lord to rest her soul in eternal peace.

4.29
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to support this motion. I personally participated in radio talk shows at a radio station that had been established by the late Irene Gleeson. I want to say that Northern Uganda suffered a lot at the time of the war. But while we were totally rejected, there were some few people, like the late, who ventured to stay in the north. And that radio did a commendable job to the people of the north in terms of mobilisation. 

I recall at one time suicide was actually the order of the day. But people didn’t really need anything apart from encouragement. So, she mobilised people under religion. She was a Christian who tried to help people to believe in their morals and that was great because it reduced that high rate of suicide, which was very eminent.

But also in terms of education, she did well. Yes, she did not set very high standards of education such as building boarding schools and so on. However, she made sure she covered a very large population in the areas in Kitgum and Lamwo districts. If you see those red blouses and shirts – even when she died, I saw something in the New Vision and you would just know that the late Irene Gleeson did a commendable job. She gave out life to very many people who could have lost lives because they did not have any hope. 

Even for the children, she made sure she established health centres for them and whenever any children got sick, there was that facility for the children to go to. She worked with the people of the north to provide job opportunities to up to over 450 people, employed in her foundation.

So, if all of us who think we are Christians or Moslems – because we all believe in God – could also emulate this selflessness or if we could also share with the most vulnerable like the children, to give them potential and life, I am sure Uganda would be a better place than it is now. This would be better than selfishly trying to do our own things forgetting Uganda’s motto: For God and My Country. 

All of us should honour this lady. All of us should try to walk in her footsteps. But you know that is only possible if we are true Christians and believers in God. May her soul rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House pay tribute to the late Irene Gleeson as proposed and as emended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Clerk to write to the National Awards Committee to submit our request that she should be honoured posthumously with an appropriate medal; I don’t know which one.

In the gallery, we have residents of Adjuman who have come here to listen to debate on the report. They are up there. You are welcome. They are represented by hon. Jessica Ababiku and the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister. You are welcome.
I understand the other statements are ready. Can we now have the Minister of Health present her paper?

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH-CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I hope Members will get copies; they are being distributed. This is the statement on the Crimean- Congo Haemorrhagic Fever outbreak in the country. I wish to read.

The Ministry of Health confirms the outbreak of the Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever in Agago District, Kalongo Hospital, on 15 August 2013 at 6.00 p.m. This was officially declared to the public on 16 August at the Media Centre. 

Following this confirmation, the Ministry of Health deployed a multi-disciplinary rapid response team to investigate and support the initial response. A team comprising of officers from the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture, UPDF, WHO and CDC (Centre for Disease Control) were deployed to Agago District.

The patient admitted in Kalongo Hospital is a 68-year old male from Baroma Village Omot Sub-county. His illness started on 8 August 2013 with complaints of fever, headache, abdominal pain, jaundice and unexplained bleeding from the nose, conjunctival injections and hematitis. He was admitted to the isolation ward in Kalong Hospital on 10 August 2013 where a blood sample was obtained and sent to the Uganda Virus Research Institute. The sample tested positive for the Crimean- Congo Haemorrhagic Fever by PCR on 15 August 2013.

On 20 August 2013, another case was confirmed in Mulago National Referral Hospital. This was of a 27-year old female who had initially attended to her husband, a trader in South Sudan, who reportedly came back ill with symptoms of fever and bleeding tendencies. He was admitted to Mengo Hospital, treated and he improved. But later on his wife developed similar symptoms and succumbed to death despite the treatment. The gentleman’s blood was also tested and he was found positive. He is currently admitted in Mulago Hospital isolation facility and will be monitored until his tests turn negative.

Honourable colleagues this brings the number of confirmed cases to three: one in Kalongo Hospital and two in Mulago Hospital; the total number of admissions to two and the total number of deaths to two- one of the confirmed cases in Mulago, as I indicated; and the second of a probable case who passed away in Kalongo Hospital before samples were taken but had epidemiological linkage to the confirmed case. Both patients admitted in Mulago and Kalongo Hospitals are stable and progressively improving.  

A total of 36 contacts had initially been listed for follow up in Agago District. However, 15 contacts have since been released since the suspect case they had got in contact with tested negative, leaving a total of 21 cases, which had had contact with the current admitted case, for follow up for 14 days. In Kampala, a total of 11 health workers have been line listed for follow up and the exercise to line list the relatives is still on-going. 

The national response team has also collected 50 blood samples from goats and blood in Agago District as well as ticks from the home of the initial and index cases in Baroma Village, Omot Sub-county. The samples have been shipped to the Uganda Virus Research Institute Entebbe for testing, which is currently on-going. 

The district taskforce in Agago has been formed and has already had several meetings. A district response plan and budget have been drawn and submitted to the national taskforce for verification and approval. The district has been supported with adequate personal protective equipment and infection control materials and supplies. Health workers from Kalongo Hospital- this a private not-for-profit hospital- have been  oriented on infection prevention and control including barrier nursing and proper use of personal protective equipment. 

Similarly, for Kampala, a work plan and budget have been prepared by Mulago National Referral Hospital and is currently under consideration by the national taskforce. Both facilities handling the outbreak yesterday put in their requisitions for medicines and health supplies which will be delivered immediately by the National Medical Stores. 

The Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever is a disease of domestic animals and wild animals and is caused by infections with a tick-borne virus. The hard ticks – the hyalomma – are both a vector and a reservoir. Domestic animals serve as hosts for the virus. 

Transmission to the humans occurs through tick bites where the incubation period ranges from between one to three days; or through contact with infected animal blood where the incubation period ranges from five to six days. 

The Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever may also be transmitted from human to human through contact with infected blood or body fluid. The symptoms range from a flu-like illness which may wear off in 75 percent of the cases but when it progresses patients show mood changes which vary with mental impairment and subsequently bleeding tendencies through body openings. The mortality rate is about 30 percent but ranges from between nine to 50 percent, that is, if we have a number of people with these symptoms, then about 30 percent may die.

The Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever was first isolated in Uganda Virus Institute in 1967. This was then the East African Institute of Virology from febrile patients. Subsequently, in 1970, ticks from cattle in Kigezi, Ankole and Lango were found to have the virus. It had lately been observed in cattle in the Karamoja region. 

The Ministry of Health will work closely with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to ensure that the animals are constantly sprayed to get rid of the ticks. We also appeal to the population to remain vigilant and report any suspected cases to the nearest health facility.

That is all, Rt Hon. Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, this was mainly information to equip you to identify the symptoms and also be able to guide our people. Thank you very much- Shadow minister? Where is the shadow minister? Three minutes, hon. Bayigga.

4.42
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to thank the hon. Minister of State for Health for the information in this paper. The most important thing is not necessarily the symptoms and presentation of the patients; but we very well know that this kind of disease outbreak has been with us before and there have been certain interventions. Therefore, we would need to know why the recurrence. That is what the ministry needs to address because certainly this kind of disease is fatal. 

Of course, the public health component of the disease is very important and the minister has identified the kind of ticks that need to be sprayed but certainly falls short of telling us what kind of budget they want to undertake and how they want this Parliament to assist them; which makes this kind of statement short of mentioning the kind of activities that need for an adequacy of response. 

We know very well that there had been outbreaks of diseases before, including the Hepatitis B outbreak in eastern Uganda, and the statements were made in Parliament but because Parliament did not demand what series of activities and what kind of budgets they needed, they went out as lip-service. Therefore, we are seeing the endemicity of Hepatitis B in eastern Uganda. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, without having action points with the necessary budgets, this is going to be lip-service. For us as citizens we are interested in assuring the population that they are going to be safe. That patients can be identified is one thing and that they can be treated is one thing. But to ensure that the population is safe from this kind of disease is the most important thing that we want to listen to, with the preparation of this ministry.

4.45
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkinzi East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the honourable minister for the statement. I just wanted to raise one or two questions for clarification. One is that there seems to be a trend of emerging viral epidemics and they seem to be hitting a particular axis and Northern Uganda is part of it. I just wanted to know whether the Ministry of Health, because I know you have very senior epidemiologists, has studied this because we have seen Hepatitis, Ebola, and Nodding Disease though it is not viral. 

But there seems to be a pattern and now you can even predict with microscopic accuracy that after some time some other diseases will emerge. I don’t know whether the ministry has interested its self to study these patterns and be able to put in place remedial and preventive measures like hon. Bayiga was raising. 

Secondly, some of these emerging infections and re-infections coming again have a cross border dimension. I just wanted to know the kind of effort the ministry and Government are putting in place to collaborate with sister countries like Southern Sudan, Kenya, DRC, because this axis seems to be cutting across and going beyond the borders of Uganda. When you look at what is happening in DRC and Southern Sudan, some of these haemorrhagic fevers which are viral in nature seem to be along that corridor. I just wanted to know whether you are working in collaboration with these countries to find some solutions to these challenges.

4.47
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Madam Speaker, it is indeed very unfortunate that this viral disease time and again tends to hit Northern Uganda particularly the young people. Time and again we have been getting statements from the minister saying that they are trying to investigate and know what exactly is happening and the cause of these viral diseases ranging from Nodding Disease, Hepatitis B, now haemorrhagic fever. It is not very clear and everything is not conclusive. 

I think we don’t know the cause of each and every viral disease. The Ministry of Health through the minister should make a deliberate effort to see that they do a study of what exactly is happening in Northern Uganda causing an outbreak of an epidemic of a viral nature. Maybe the ministry needs to do sensitisation on the lifestyle of the people. Majority of the sicknesses is associated with living with animals. I am seeing because of haemorrhagic fever they want to do a study of whether they get the disease from animals or something like that. The ministry needs to know and understand the lifestyle of the people of Northern Uganda, if it is that they are living together with animals they need to do some bit of sensitisation so that we can avert this problem as opposed to looking at a preventive measure and saying that we are going to do a study because there is another outbreak which is going to come. I am not saying that it is really going to come but you never know.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, hon. Colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that as the people of Northern Uganda our settlements are so specifically separated. Unlike other parts of the country where animals are put inside the house, in Northern Uganda our animals don’t stay in the same household with the people. Probably they would take another angle to sensitise them but they don’t sleep with animals.

MS ANITE: Thank you hon. Anywar but I equally come from Northern Uganda. We cannot rule this out completely because we do not live with rural people on a day today basis. As Members of Parliament we live in the urban setting that is why I feel it is important that we need to make a deliberate effort to study the lifestyle because at the end of the day they say that these diseases come from animals.

4.50
MS JANEPHER NANTUME (NRM, woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the minister for having brought this statement to the attention of this House. I strongly believe in more of prevention than cure. Before the ministry approves its budget, I know how government money moves; it cannot be approved tomorrow even if it is written today. It must go through different processes. The ministry and the Government at large should go to those affected areas to sensitise people about the causes of these diseases so that they can help in preventing the disease that can affect them.
 
Secondly, before the ministry of agriculture goes to them, maybe in the spraying of the animals some people may afford having some money to spray their own animals at home so if they get the sensitisation it can help. 
Thirdly in some countries if you want to prevent a problem from entering another country - we have heard that this disease is so rampant in Congo. The people coming from Congo entering Uganda, why don’t we demand testing on the boarder so that they can come with the documents to Uganda as a proof that they are negative? It can help.

PROF KABWEGYERE: Thank you for giving way, I think we have a number of doctors here who can help us. The issue is not that you test at entry; the issue is interacting with one who has been infected. There is no evidence now to show that what we have now in the country is that of the contact with the Congolese.

MS NANTUME: Thank you hon. minister but I would think since the hon. minister has given that information I will take it as more reliable than even what you are giving me. Sincerely according to what she has said, we would test just like these malarias we test here before we go to other countries. We would test then minimise the rate of infection among Ugandans as we solve problems here we solve problems there and minimise the cost of Government expenditure here on the disease.

4.53
MR AMOS LUGOLOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am equally concerned about the emergence of this disease and my attention is particularly drawn to the paragraph that states that this fever comes from domestic and wild animals, and is caused by infection with a tick-borne virus and therefore ticks are the most important vector in this regard for transmitting this disease.
 
What is happening today may be the House needs to know that I am one of the livestock farmers in this country. One of the big problems we are experiencing today is the control of ticks. This is because the management of drugs, the acaricides, is becoming increasingly difficult. The other day, we had a serious invasion of ticks. I went to the market to buy acaricides, I tried them but the ticks could not die. I tried to drop a tick in the tin carrying these acaricides but the tick was just swimming all the way. So what is happening in this country? These drugs are very expensive and just to buy a litre of acaricides at Shs 80,000 - but you buy a litre and you put a tick there and it just swims. So I do not know whether they are fake drugs – I just do not know what is happening in this market. 

I thought that it is important for the Government to find a way of regulating this industry because farmers are seriously suffering and now with this epidemic, I think the consequences are going to be more disastrous because tick control is increasingly becoming a problem. Madam Speaker, that is my concern.

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Dr James Mutende): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. First of all, I want to thank my colleague for this update and also to assure most of us here that the response of Government so far in the circumstances is really the best it could be.  

First and foremost, we see that the area affected most immediately is Agago and we can see they have put in place a district response plan and budgets have been prepared as shown on Page 3 of the report and they have been submitted to the national taskforce for verification and approval. So quite frankly, there couldn't be a much faster response than that in terms of putting logistics together.

We saw how the cases which have been admitted were handled. Every case is well documented, every case that was identified was brought to the hospitals, blood taken, people were isolated and those that could be treated were treated and indeed we have seen success when people are being discharged after testing negative. So in terms of response, there is no better way that it could have been done. 

Secondly, we see from the report that -

THE SPEAKER: Point of clarification from hon. Ababiku.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for this opportunity and I want to thank the minister for giving way.

You are emphasising that at least adequate measures have been taken. I strongly know that animals move with the ticks and many of my people from Adjumani buy cows and goats from Lango and Acholi sub regions. So, I want to know specifically what measures have been taken in the course of movement of the animals. Thank you.

DR MUTENDE: Thank you. I was coming to that as the final stage but I was simply emphasising that in as far as response is concerned, what has been done is adequate. 

I was saying that if you look at the cycle of this infection, the report tells us clearly that way back in 1957 when this condition was first isolated and a policy was set up - so this infection obviously has a cycle and it appears this way; we are now among that cycle. 

But to get to point you have raised honourable member, first of all, let us first of all understand what Ozonolysis is. It is a disease that is transmittable from animals to human beings and this is one of those cases. And clearly it tells us that the tick is known and it is a hard tick and the only two ways to handle this situation - ideally for prevention under normal circumstances this being a viral disease, the best would have been vaccination but the report does not tell us whether there is any possible vaccine. Not every virus has had a vaccine developed for it and this could be one of them, which leaves us with the only option using the acaricide to prevent it. 

It is unfortunate that the ticks are not responding to the acaricide on the market which has actually been as hon. Amos Lugoloobi just mentioned, partly because of the policies that we had where we liberalised the importation of some of these chemicals and drugs and indeed Government is in the process of reviewing this.

My colleagues from the Ministry of Agriculture are not here but fortunately, Government is reviewing the whole idea of importation of inputs for agriculture and veterinary use so that this should not be a private sector function. It might be one of these that must go back to the central government because before you import acaricides into any country, ideally you should test to know which ticks or other pests you have and make sure that the acaricides you bring will be able to control those ticks. Today, people simply go to the market and bring in anything and some of the acaricides are deliberately adulterated and so it is an issue that Government is really addressing.  

Finally on the issue of comprehensive responses, I agree with you that it is a combined effort of the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Agriculture. Ministry of Agriculture certainly has to control livestock movement and not only for those within the country but even those being imported by whatever means and so it is something that Government is handling very well. I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

5.01
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I thank the minister for quickly organising to bring this report at short notice. 

I will just add to what hon. Mutende was talking about. Hon. Mutende has been emphatic on animals and left the human beings. You find that if we know that that there is a problem at least at a certain border post, much as we are in the East African Community, let there be a standing law that the people coming into Uganda should be checked. For example, we are in the East African Community but when you go to Arusha, they ask you for a Yellow Fever Certificate. So at least if we know that there is an impending problem from a certain place, let it be that people coming from that area are checked to limit the spread of certain diseases.

Madam Speaker, my second concern is that as we were emphasising on ticks and animals, there is not even a Minister of State for Agriculture to give us this practical requirement by Parliament. Much as we have the Leader of Government Business, sometimes they have too much on them when they go back to Cabinet.

Lastly, hon. Bayigga talked about the required funding to handle this situation. I am going to base on that to advocate that instead of every time the Ministry of Health coming with a financial budget request, much as we are going for the budget, we ask that the Ministry of Health’s budget should not be cut so that some of these issues can really be contained in that aspect or we can even seek that the Ministry of Health budget gets more funding in order to cater for such situations other than - (Member timed out_)

MS KABAALE: Madam, can I have half a minute?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute.

MS KABAALE: You see, when they talk about money, somehow problems come. (Laughter) But at least on a serious note, let us advocate for more money in the health sector so that when Ministry of Health gets a problem, it does not rush to Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otada, hon. Alaso, hon. Mujungu, hon. Ababiku and hon. Mugume, two minutes please.

5.04
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern number one is on the Kalongo case. The person who died before samples could be obtained and it looks like matters ended there. I was wondering whether in the spirit of line listing of relatives and infected people, whether the minister did not find it useful to get a post-mortem confirmation of this case so that in the spirit of line listing, you also confirm the Kalongo case because this seems to me to be a grey area.
Secondly, the minister talks about the human domestic animals and wildlife nexus in this thing and when you look at the national taskforce, you do not see anybody from the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. So, I think someone from that ministry should be part of that team if we are talking about the wildlife nexus. 

Finally, since line listing, which more or less is like quarantine for the human being is going on, I just want to find out what is happening to the animals. Have you considered line listing the animals or quarantining them so that you can have a complete and harmonious strategy to deal with the three issues which seem to be one and the same? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.06
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. First, I thank the minister but I would like to advise the minister that when bringing in such a statement which is supposed to be helpful to the public, please tell the technocrats to break down some of these words so that we can consume and apply them. When you leave me with “zonolysis” and “hematitis” how do you expect me to go to Serere and tell them about zonolysis and hematitis? They will not understand –(Laughter) 

Secondly, my concern is about public awareness. I think that the ministry should quickly use the emergency vote in the Ministry of Health, to which we give money annually, to step up public awareness. I want to inform the hon. Minister that in Teso where I come from and I believe in Northern Uganda, blood is a delicacy. People collect blood after cutting an animal and they boil it. Where my uncles the Karamojong are, they sometimes mix it with milk and take it raw. So, if you do not quickly take those messages down, you are likely to watch this situation as it escalates. I understand even our in-laws in Ankole take this blood. So, it is not only the Itesot.

Thirdly, I think that it is important for the ministry to quickly intervene by way of quarantine. When Foot and Mouth Disease hit the animals in the northern region, we stopped trading animals for a time until there was vaccination and we were sure that we had cleared off the disease. Unfortunately, there is no mention here that there are attempts to control animal movements. So, it is most likely that the animals will move with infected ticks and we will have a problem.

Lastly, I do not want to openly disagree with my sister Beatrice because of the socio-economic conditions of our people that they have been in camps and they have built just one hut. There is more than you can imagine. There is a likelihood of people sharing a house with goats in Teso, in Acholi, in Lango and wherever. Please deal with the socio-economic issues in that region. Thank you. 

5.09
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister for this statement. When the minister made this statement, I got afraid because I come from Ntoroko District which is a border district with Congo and of recent, we have had a war in Congo and we have refugees settling in the bordering districts, Ntoroko inclusive. As we speak, we have Congolese refugees who came with their domestic animals. This statement has really opened up our eyes because personally, I did not know all this. I humbly appeal to Government to give special attention to districts like Ntoroko that are on border points because even in the district, we do rear cattle and if one of the causes of this disease is ticks, then it is a problem. Controlling ticks has been a problem. The Ministry of Agriculture has not really addressed this problem fully. We already had a problem of ticks but again if the ticks are causing this disease, then we are likely to be the next victims in the shortest time possible. 

Like other hon. Members said on the issue of sensitisation, people should be sensitised such that they can know because they are always in constant contact with these animals on a daily basis. We have cattle markets every week and these markets bring in cows from all over Congo and other neighbouring districts. So, there is no way we can avoid being in contact with the animals and at the same time with these very people. Like the other hon. Members said, there should be some kind of texting. This should be done as soon as possible because in Ntoroko District, we really get in contact with people – (Member timed out.)

5.12
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, once again. The outbreak of this disease has been on and off; therefore, I propose that the primary strategy should be self-help and protection. We should be able to empower our people to know the signs and symptoms. I want to thank the Government of Uganda; when there was massive sensitisation about the signs and symptom of HIV/AIDS, many people in my village became keen. Should you move from Kampala to go and get a girl from Adjumani, they would first watch you and ask, “Do you have the card, have you tested? You do not look like us.” It was not part of stigmatisation but I think if we can make our people know the signs and the symptoms and it becomes part of the knowledge in their brain so that when a partner catches the disease, even if I am a wife to that person, I have to save the family. I will be able to take precaution. I feel bad about the death of a woman in this report who nursed the husband but died in the end. If she had known the signs and symptoms, I believe she would have protected herself.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, recently while travelling, as soon as I entered the plane, we were sprayed. So, I wonder why the government sees it impossible for us to manage our border – (Member timed out.)

5.14
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on page 1 where the minister tells us that immediately it was confirmed, the Ministry of Health deployed a multi-disciplinary rapid response team to investigate and support. My question is, what is the role of the UPDF? Whenever there is a problem discussed or whenever there is an epidemic, we talk of the UPDF. Tell us because at the grass root level, we have health workers. Why do you overshadow those health workers and use the UPDF? 

MR MUTENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable member for giving way. We know that world over, wherever there are emergencies armies have been called in to help. It is not surprising that in the case of this situation, the quickest force to mobilise – given also that in UPDF we have medical personnel who are well qualified; there is nothing wrong with asking them to come and help in such a situation. 

MR MUGUME: Thank you, but honourable minister, you are in charge of Trade and not Health; I thought it was the Minister of Health going to answer that. 

Madam Speaker, the other time we were discussing about the National Identity Cards, UPDF came up – I think we need to know the focal person to help us whenever there is an epidemic. I do not think the UPDF can do everything in this country – (Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Article 208 of the Constitution establishes the UPDF. Among the functions of UPDF in Article 209 of the Constitution: It shall “cooperate with civilian authority in emergency situations and in cases of nature disasters”. 

Is the honourable member in order to begin detaching the constitutional provisions of the UPDF when there are problems affecting the country?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know that UPDF is part of our society. So you cannot say, “You do not come here, I want to see only the doctors”. I do not know whether you saw the floods in India about two month ago. It was the army in India which airlifted people and carried old women on their backs and got them out of the disaster area. So they have a contribution to make in the community. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable member for giving way. While I agree that UPDF should be part of the response team, I want to seek clarification from the minister. Sometimes, as the ministry responds, one of the complaints we have received on the ground is that the national team seems to ignore the local health workers and they are edged out of these responses and they do not participate. That may not be for hon. Mugume to clarify, but the minister should clarify. While you constitute these multi-disciplinary teams from the centre, how are they able to work and re-enforce the local health workers; the health inspectors, health assistants, the nurses, and the midwives on the ground. Sometimes they have complained that you take over and undermine their effort. 

MR MUGUME: Lastly, Madam Speaker, we want to know from the minister what the surveillance systems of the Ministry of Health do to detect disease and to prevent outbreak. Right now, we are in the budgeting process and we want to know the budget attached to this. 

5.20
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank also the minister for the statement. I wish the team also comprises some people from the disaster area. It is a disaster and that is why UPDF is there. I would like to emphasis the vulnerability of the people who have been in war. You see how vulnerable the north has been; Ebola was in the north, now the Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever is in the North – everything comes to the north! 

We had PRDP funds and I think we would not even venture to dump our hands into the PRDP funds. Those funds were supposed to help address the vulnerability of the people who were in the war. Right now, we say we are in recovery time. The people are so vulnerable and they need a lot of support. They mix up with animals and so their primary healthcare needs to be addressed in a special way. 

We have the village health teams; we should not ignore these people. When it comes to budgeting, we need to budget even for the village health teams. These are the people who will help us address the primary health care of the local people and to reduce their vulnerability. 

Look at Hepatitis B; it affected the people of Kitgum very much. So we should not ignore the aftermath – and it will not take only five years; it will be for many years to come. This should be an eye opener for us. We should know that this is a disaster and the root cause is not really known. Some three weeks ago, we lost a woman who died after –(Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Thank you honourable member for giving way. I want to inform you that even if we see a problem coming and you approach one of these ministers – I remember I saw a problem in my constituency, Katerera County, where women were walking for long distance for Polio. I approached the minister and she said, “Write to me”.  So even if you see such cases in time and inform the minister, she is going to say, “Write to me”. And after deaths, they start coming here with reports. Are we going to continue like that, just watching our people die yet you already knew that there are people coming in from Congo? 

MS KWAGALA: This is supplementary information to the MP for Gulu. You are talking about disaster and we are in line because with health situations, we must look at any threat that we see. But we do not want to combine it with a disaster because a disaster is measured by the magnitude of the impact or the effects. So with health, we do not want to look at it as disaster. Even if there are three people who have lost life, we must come in. But with a disaster, they always consider how many people are affected. Thank you. 

MS AOL: Thank you for all that information; I think it is valid information. Some three weeks ago, we lost a woman in Gulu who died of – I think rabies. This woman did not know until when she was just three or four days to her death. Then they started asking what happened. It is then that she recalled that about two and half months before she was scratched by a dog, which dog they did not bother to trace its whereabouts and owner. And she died of the symptoms where she was behaving like a dog; and she died when she was mentally disturbed. So it is important that primary healthcare addresses this issue. Even if we think that this is not a disaster, when we talk about haemorrhagic fever, it sends chills down my spine because we lost a doctor to haemorrhagic fever who we still mourn up to today. Dr Lukwiya who died of Ebola was very helpful to our children in the north. So we should not take this lightly because it could have amounted to a disaster because we have registered a case in Mulago already. So it is important that we take this one seriously and I am very grateful to the minister for having brought this.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will ask the minister to wind up - No, but I am the Speaker; now honourable members have taken over my job by giving away opportunities. (Laughter) Hon. Minister, please wind up.

5.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH-CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank colleagues for their comments and questions. I had very good responses from my colleague, the Minister of Trade, to some of the concerns. But I would like to inform members that this disease is not necessarily from DR Congo. This disease was first reported in Crimea – a peninsula in Ukraine – and this is where we get the name “Crimean”. Later it was detected in DR Congo and that is how the name “Crimean Congo Haemorrhagic Fever” came about. 

It was in 1944 that it was detected in Crimea. So, I do agree with members that we need to do more health education but I also appeal to you that where we have given you information, please help us pass it on because not everybody has a radio and so we cannot reach the last person in the village. 

But also, most importantly, I think issues were raised on the UPDF. I just want to inform members that we have always worked closely with the UPDF. It is not any uniformed personnel who are sent when we have these outbreaks; we have a medical team in the UPDF who actually join us. We have a team that is trained to respond to emergencies like this and when we have them brought on board, they move down to the districts to carry out the tests. And of course training the district staff – in such an emergency you just cannot pick on village health teams and engage them. Otherwise, we shall have very many people dying. We need a team of medically trained and skilled personnel who can then train the village health teams and give them information to pass on to the populace so that they can protect themselves against the illness.

I think I have taken note of most of the issues that were raised; we are going to work closely with the Ministry of Agriculture. As the Ministry of Health, we cannot of course declare quarantine; it has to be the Ministry of Agriculture. But they are part of the taskforce and the team is already there. So the team at the district level feeds the national taskforce and it is against this that decisions of that nature will be taken. 

So as I indicated earlier, we are closely working and the ticks’ problem is more to do with the Ministry of Agriculture; we just come in on the health aspect because when ticks bite human beings, we end up with this challenge. So colleagues, I have taken note of the other issues that you raised. Thank you. 

5.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Alex Onzima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The background to the issue of the bicycles: As you may recall, during the year 2010, the President directed that bicycles be procured for LCI chairpersons throughout the country to facilitate their work for mobilisation and administration in their respective areas of jurisdiction. 

To implement the directive, the ministry initiated a procurement of 70,000 bicycles at an estimated total cost of $4,896,500. However, the initial procurement was met with challenges and as a result the ministry sought the assistance of the Attorney-General to initiate the recovery of $1,719,454.58 lost in the botched procurement of bicycles. The two cases were initiated on this matter.

In the case of Uganda v. John Kashaka and Others, the officers were charged with abuse of office, causing financial loss and neglect of duty. The matter is before Justice Wangutusi David and the officers put to their defence and concluded. Court is awaiting the assessors’ decision and judgement is to be delivered.

In the case of the Attorney-General v. NIKO Insurance (U) Ltd, civil suit No. 240 of 2012, legal proceedings were instituted for the recovery of $489,650 for breach of contract, of performance of security to the Ministry of Local Government and on behalf of Amman Industrial Tools & Equipment Ltd upon their default on their contract to supply the 70,000 bicycles. A ruling was entered in favour of Government and NIKO Insurance was asked to deposit a full sum of $489,650. The matter has since been heard before Justice Madrama Christopher in the Commercial Division of the High Court and is now awaiting judgement.

Status of the procurement of the bicycles

In light of the above, my ministry then initiated a second procurement of 30,000 bicycles at a cost of US$ 2,295,250 which was the outstanding balance of the initial figure. It is against this ground that the ministry, in its top management meeting, resolved to have the procurement of the bicycles managed at the district level. The procurement method recommended was open domestic bidding. 

I am proud to report that this has turned out to be a success. During first phase, 54 districts were identified and the mode of procurement used was open domestic bidding. To ensure proper procurement of the bicycles, the Ministry of Local Government signed a Memorandum of Understanding with each beneficiary district. The ministry, closely working with the districts, initiated the process by assuming the responsibility of advertising for the suppliers. However during the process, two districts of Kaabong and Amuru, although having successfully concluded the procurement process, were disappointed by the suppliers who expressed inability to deliver the bicycles due to access challenges to the districts.

At the moment, 52 districts have benefitted with a total number of 29,765 bicycles procured at a total cost of Shs 6,694,225,263 as of June 26th, 2013.

The challenges the ministry has encountered in the process is over supply and under supply of the bicycles procured due to inconsistency regarding information about the number of administrative units that is the villages and the parishes provided by the responsible district officers. For example, the districts of Kitgum and Namayingo have surpluses while the districts of Kibaale and Bulambuli have had deficits.

Plans for the remaining districts
As you are aware, there are actually 110 districts because one reverted to become a capital city authority. A total of 59 districts have not yet benefitted and to ensure that all the districts benefit, the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige, wrote to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for a special allocation to cater for the remaining 59 districts. The total number of bicycles shall be 34,306 at a total cost of Shs 8,576,500 since the open domestic method of bidding shall be applied.

The status of local council elections Colleagues as you may recall, an amendment to minimise election costs was initiated and the Act was assented to by His Excellency the President. As a result of the outcome, the Ministry of Local Government wrote to the Electoral Commission to organise elections for village and parish LC officials, newly created sub counties and town councils. The matter is before the Electoral Commission. Colleagues as you are well aware, the Electoral Commission is mandated to fill up the vacant positions in local government councils. 

In conclusion, therefore, and in light of the above, you may be pleased to note that the ministry has successfully been able to work closely with the districts to enable successful procurement of the bicycles. As regards the election of local councils at the above mentioned levels, the ministry shall continue working closely with the Electoral Commission towards achieving the same.

Madam Speaker, allow me to indicate here that attached are: one, the letter my minister wrote to the President seeking for additional funds to cover the 59 districts that have not received their bicycles. There is also a letter, which was written by my PS. I appeal to the honourable House to applaud this PS because she has behaved in a manner contrary to what transpired in the first attempt by the ministry to purchase bicycles and is the accounting officer responsible for this partial success in delivering bicycles to the 54 districts. 

Also attached is a list of the 52 districts that have so far received these bicycles. Kaabong and Amuru, the two districts which had problems, are now pushed to phase two of the districts to receive bicycles as soon as we get the supplementary budget from His Excellency the President.

If you look at the policy statement of the Ministry of Local Government on pages 313, 314 and 315, you will get the list of the districts in phase one and the list of the districts in phase two as stated here in my statement. Thank you for your kind audience.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Minister, I just want to know whether the money for elections has been budgeted for; the LC I elections and the women councils. Have you budgeted for them?

MR ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, in the 2011/2012 budget, the Ministry of Finance actually advanced Shs 19 billion to the Electoral Commission for these elections. Our estimate then, as Government and the Electoral Commission, was that following the amendment of the Local Government Act, which we undertook, the election would cost Shs 49 billion. The Ministry of Finance had pledged that in the 2012/2013 budget, they would release the balance of Shs 30 billion. So that is the position I know.

THE SPEAKER: Let us just have some brief comments but for only three minutes.

5.45
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we talk about procurement of bicycles and distributing them to LCs and put into consideration the fact that we last held LC I and II elections in 2001, one wonders who the beneficiaries are now. Indeed in the policy statement as brought to Parliament by the Minister of Local Government at page 28, it was reported that village and parish local council elections were last conducted in 2001. It continues that, “For a variety of reasons, the ministry has not been able to hold elections as scheduled for these vital grassroots governance levels.” It also states that as a result, “most of the political positions” – and I want members to take note of the word “most” – “have remained vacant due to death, change in residence, designation or abandonment of duties by the leaders.” This has greatly hampered local administration justice.

Madam Speaker, if the ministry is reporting that most of these offices are empty because the word used here in the policy is “most” then who are the beneficiaries? Who are the people receiving these bicycles when most of them are not in offices?

Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think it was this House that directed the minister to complete the exercise of giving LCs their bicycles.

MR KAFUUDA: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, recently I was in my constituency participating in the hand over exercise of bicycles to LCs. But I can tell you that there were a lot of questions asked about the bicycles. Most of the LCs had left their areas yet the bicycles had come in the names of such people. So, as of now, we don’t know – are the bicycles for the office of LC I or for individuals? If they are for the offices, then who will take care of their maintenance? Thank you very much.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, it is true that Parliament made an enquiry about the whereabouts of these bicycles. But this was because also an investigation had been done where it was found that some money had been stolen. Most probably Parliament made that recommendation because it did not have enough information that most of the offices were vacant as the minister recently reported in his policy statement.

When you read the statement by the minister, you realise that it is only talking about successful procurement. He does not talk about successful distribution of these bicycles.
I have seen my district, Mukono, listed here as having received 682 bicycles. But my constituency alone has about 41 and 35 villages in Goma and Central divisions respectively. I am one of the MPs who sleeps in the constituency. So, voters cannot even complain that they don’t see me. There is no way my people would have received bicycles, if any, without it coming to my attention, Madam Speaker.

So, it might be true that indeed money is being dispatched to districts and that indeed procurements are being carried out. But the fact of the matter is that there are no bicycles being distributed in the villages – yes, my district has been listed – and, Madam Speaker, therefore, I wish to propose -

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Betty Nambooze, your district and mine are in phase II; we have not received yet.

MS NAMBOOZE: Okay, I withdraw that, Madam Speaker. Otherwise, what I wanted to say is that the ministry having reported that most of these offices are vacant - we should not stop at the report of a successful procurement. It should be investigated further to make sure – (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, honourable member for giving way. Kanungu District is listed as one of those that have received bicycles. I want to confirm that actually Kanungu received bicycles for all the villages. I have 251 villages in my constituency but all the LCs have received their bicycles.
 
But I also went on to ask the same questions. I was told that the LC I council has nine members. So, in the event that the chairperson is no longer there, either through migration or death, the vice chairperson or any other member of the council assumed the chair and those are some of the people who received bicycles on behalf of the LCs. At least I can confirm that report from Kanungu.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I am so grateful for that information from Kanungu. I wish all districts were as lucky as that one. Anyway, the Electoral Commission hasn’t conducted elections for LC I office bearers. So, you cannot say that a chairperson of the LC I who died or migrated was replaced. You also know that villages are not allowed to conduct by-elections on their own. The fact of the matter is that either today or next year or some years to come, this Parliament will one day sit here to discuss a report on how this money was swindled. This is because the minister has properly reported that these offices are empty but with bicycles being given out to friends. In some districts, the bicycles are just lying at the headquarters. We actually got many of them just lying idle in the stores as we moved through Kampala. This is attributed to the fact that the beneficiaries are not there. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.53
MR KEZEKIA MBOGO (Independent, Budaka County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to thank the minister for the report he has given us. In the report, there are only two things that I want clarification on and one is in regard to the issue of surplus. I think when you are purchasing something, you should know the numbers. So, how come there was a surplus in some of those districts?

And on the issue of deficit, you mean when you were giving out bicycles, you did not look at the number of villages to benefit?

Last, I have seen my district being placed in the second phase. Could you kindly assist me to know the criteria used for placing it in the second phase? Thank you.

5.54
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for the statement. I would like to thank the ministry for revising the means of how best these bicycles could be procured and supplied - to see that they had left out considering local suppliers then they considered firms that are little known, hence defaulting or disappearing and causing financial losses. I am happy that at least they resolved to have the procurement of these bicycles managed at the district level.

Secondly, adding on to what my colleague has said about the oversupply and undersupply I expected the Minister of Local Government to have information on these administrative units. The fact that now we are going to hold LC elections- you do not have the information and you still depend on the local government. I am perturbed by how you are going to hold the elections- (Interjections) - I have little time. Okay.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. You are raising a very serious issue- the extent to which the ministry is actually informed on what is going on within its sector. The Rt Hon. Speaker asked a question: do we have the money for the LC elections? I was shocked by the response of the minister. At the time they brought the Bill to amend the law they had required about Shs200 billion to conduct the elections. When we amended the law, the money required went down to Shs39 billion. As we speak, there is no money for the LC elections in the budget for this year. Last year the Shs19 billion he is talking about was not released to the Electoral Commission. So, this statement that the matter is now before Electoral Commission, I think we need to examine a very serious matter. Are we committed to have elections this year, next year or is there no LC election? Without the money in the budget and without any preparations on hand, I am surprised the ministry does not seem to be really in grip with the information. 

MS NAMARA: I want to agree with hon. Magyezi that I do not think we shall have elections for these LCs because if the ministry does not have information- that is a first fact. You do not have information about these administrative units, then what elections are you going to hold?

Lastly, on the second phase of the districts that are going to get the bicycles, I would like to know from the minister, how soon are you going to supply these bicycles? Most of my neighbouring districts, even the ones far from Lyantonde like Sheema already got; and yet Lyantonde is just a transit route. So, next time I will make a roadblock when you are trying to supply to other districts. (Laughter) I thank you.

5.58
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to appreciate the minister for the statement that he has submitted to us. I have taken note of the price of the bicycles; each unit of the bicycles goes to about Shs220,000 to Shs250,000 which I believe is a fair price. I want to appreciate the department for that.

But Rt Hon. Speaker I find a discrepancy. In the first consignment which was booked, 70,000 bicycles had been ordered. In the second, combining both the subsidise done and the second one,64,000 bicycles were ordered, meaning that there was a deficiency of about 6,000 bicycles from the original contract. If I may ask, how many villages do we have in Uganda, Mr Minister?

Secondly, Kaliro District, where I come from, was included in the first phase and I am glad. But I also want to inform the minister that yes, we have received some bicycles- half of the district has so far received bicycles but the other half remains to receive. I am wondering, through the memorandum of understanding with the district, was the supply supposed to be made at once? Because as I speak, half of the district has not yet received these bicycles.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to know this from the minister. It was like a token to the LCs. I appreciate that but do we have a programme now that the LC elections are not far away? Do we have a programme that LCIs shall be supplied with these bicycles? Do we have a timetable or we shall take it that during every term the chairpersons shall be supplied with the bicycles? Can you clarify that one for us? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Those who contributed to the other will have to wait a bit.

6.00
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the report. When you look at this report and you look at the number of bicycles which were procured and you look at the prices per bicycle, first the minister did not tell us what type of bicycles they procured. Today when you walk to a shop in Nakasero and procure a Hero Bicycle you will buy it at about Shs150,000 or Shs180,000; but purchasing bicycles in bulk - 30,000 bicycles- and you find the price- In the first instance you procured 30,000 bicycles at Shs2,297,250, that is about $76.575 which is about Shs191,000 for 37; the price keeps increasing to Shs224,000. And lastly, if my people of Mbale District get these bicycles, each will be at Shs250,000. I thought when you buy in bulk the price goes down. 

Secondly, my concern is that these bicycles are being managed at the districts by NRM chairmen. So, we keep wondering whether these bicycles were meant for NRM mobilisers - the chairmen of NRM. We thought these bicycles were meant for the whole country, for all those ones who contested. Whether NRM or another party, if one contested to become an LC chairman then that chairman is entitled to a bicycle.  But we see this happening in the whole country.

Thirdly, I want to take the issue which my colleague raised. We have not had LCI elections for a long time and you do not tell us when this is coming. I want to assure you that those who got bicycles have taken those bicycles as their own property. What happens if you hold elections tomorrow? Will these people return the bicycles? Hon. Baryomunsi said they have got an orderly system in his place. But in the other places these people have disappeared with the bicycles. Not even people in that office are allowed to touch that bicycle; it is personal to holder. So, you can see the problem that is coming. 

I want you to clarify these issues Mr Minister. To whom did you deliver the bicycles? We want to know all these things and I want to know when the people of Mbale are getting bicycles. You as a minister, look at the figures. It does not mean anything. It means again the Ugandans’ money has been swindled and we have lost money. Thank you.

6.03
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have a few issues that the minister should shade light on. One, Members have asked for the criterion that was followed to select the first 54. Some of us have been under fire or were on fire because our neighbours were getting bicycles. Then they have been asking us, “What happened? Are you people sleeping or are you just seated there?” So, the minister should come out clearly to tell us and the country, the criterion they followed to select the first 54 put in the first phase. 

Secondly, minister I am sorry you need to be a little - maybe serious or sensitive. When you say in this paragraph that, during the process, you could not deliver to the two districts of Kaabong and Amuru because of non-accessibility, I think this is a sign of un-seriousness. I am sorry to say this, because by now you should have been able to say, “Since then this is what the ministry has been able to do,” or “We have written to the supplier compelling him to deliver these bicycles.” But if you come here lamenting, chest thumbing that the suppliers could not deliver because of inaccessibility – (Interjection) - Please, member bears with me I have taken long before catching the eye of the Speaker.

Secondly, the issue of LC1 elections should be taken seriously. There is a sub county which I am helping or I am serving as district councillor because the male councillor died, then the female councillor who is representing two sub counties married somewhere. So all the baggage of the district councillors are on the MP.

We are struggling hard. A borehole, they tell the MP “we don’t have a representative”. Whenever I go to the Electoral Commission to ask when they are holding by-elections, they say they don’t have money. No money to hold elections for LC3s, by-elections for district councillors, and LC1 there is no single shilling in the budget. I went to the public relations officer for the Electoral Commission and he told me there is no single shilling provided. When the minister tells us that there is some money provided, let us be open, we know the cost of campaigning. 

These people have been flag bearers with tickets moving everyday as flag bearers. They are campaigning everyday hoping any time they will be flagged off to begin campaigning.

MS KABAALE: The MP for Kigulu South was winding up and I thought I should bring out this one. The Ministry of Local Government is one of the oldest ministries in the country. You find that up to now Iganga district is also one of the oldest districts in Uganda. The information here that Iganga has 442 villages is not correct. So I would like to give information that Iganga has more than 650 villages. In fact, they are 778. So Mr Minister take note of that, don’t show our voters that they are covered, when half of the group did not get the bicycles. Thank you.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much; when my MP comes up I have no choice. I have to take the information and it has been good information. The issue of saying that they have written to the President about the deficit, I think this is also a general statement though they have attached a letter. We need to get an updated version of what is pertaining as of now. Has the President responded to this or not as yet? 

Then finally, I think the minister should just be bold. Tell this House, if we don’t intend to hold LC1 election, just tell the country that “Until 2016, we shall not have money; there will be no election” such that people know it once and for all instead of us playing hide and seek or creating a ray of hope.
6.08
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank the minister for the report. Bulambuli is one of the districts which received bicycles. They received bicycles but late. We wonder, they have been ex-gratia allowance payments to local councils, if they have been paying all people then bicycles come late. Those are the questions people are asking. 

Two, the costs involve engraving, but they are not engraving those bicycles of Bulambuli. Hon. Minister, what will happen with that money for engraving and delivery? They are supposed to be delivered at the parish. But now they are delivering them at the district headquarters. 

The issue of the letter to the President asking for cash for the second batch, as Parliament we have been discouraging this type of arrangement. Hon. Minister, when do you expect the President to get money? Is it going to come as a supplementary, or it is in the allocation because this letter is dated 28 June 2013? I think we need to work within the budget to avoid cases of supplementary. 

The issue of elections, I was with Chairman Electoral Commission a week ago, he is waiting for the Ministry of Local Government to give them a go ahead. But he told me there is no budget allocation for LC1 elections, and those residual elections in areas where elections were not held and those cases where people pass on. It is good and right to tell wanainchi what is happening because in other areas like Bulambuli people have started campaigning for LC1 elections with their allowance and the bicycle. It is worse that side. People are losing money in terms of running around to look for support. The message they gave me is if Government does not have money, why can’t Government allow the issue of parties to remain at LC3 level? Then bellow LC3 level they leave for individuals to choose since these are local leaders. There is no need to say so and so should be NRM, so and so should be FDC or independent. They have requested that if possible Parliament could allow the issue of parties to remain at LC3 level, then other levels down would depend on wanainchi’s choice.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you for being innovative. I am wondering whether we shouldn’t make an amendment of the law and use lining up for these elections.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what hon. Mudimi is proposing has been successfully done in Ghana, at the Local Government level there are no parties. The parties start at Parliament and the presidency.

MR WAMAKUYU: Let us try to see the best way we can handle this other than lamenting, we are saying no money, no elections, so let us agree as leaders what the way forward is.

6.12
MR PETER OKEYOH (Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I come from Namayingo where the minister clearly states that we received excess bicycles which I want to say is not true. The problem with Namayingo was that there were some villages where chairpersons were imprisoned and the names of the people who were imprisoned were the names forwarded and as a result, they missed the bicycles and therefore those are the bicycles the minister is referring to as excess. 

The other issue that I want to raise –(Interruption)

MR TWODONG: Madam Speaker, just three days ago, I was in Namayingo District and indeed I saw the bicycles parked in the chairman’s store. When I asked the chairman told me they have already distributed all other bicycles, and was seeking clarification from the ministry on how to handle the surplus. Indeed it is true that Namayingo District has surplus bicycles. I wanted to inform the area Member of Parliament.

MR OKEYOH: Thank you very much, Mr Minister, it is true those are the bicycles of the seven villages where these people were convicted of murder and the bicycles could not be given to the vice chairpersons or any other member of the council.

MR OKUPA: I just want to be clarified, under what circumstances did chairpersons of seven villages end up in prison? 

MR OKEYOH: I have been very clear that it is alleged that these people were involved in murder and they were all rounded up and taken to Kirinya and up to now, the case is still pending and now that is the problem. When we try to intervene with the chairman and request that these bicycles be given to any person from the council, it could not happen and they told us that we cannot have any other person because the Electoral Commission has not okayed any by-elections.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to get clarification from the minister whether these bicycles are supposed to be entirely handled by the chairpersons because in some villages like where the LC II chairperson actually got the bicycle, it has come to a point where he cannot ride but no other member of the council can access the bicycle. So, I request – (Member timed out_)

6.16
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also want to know what criteria was used to select which districts fall in the first phase and which districts fall in the second phase because I have been deceiving that they followed alphabetical order. But now I see districts mixed up.  

Madam Speaker, in this country, people tend to get services because of patriotism and now some of us are being ‘punched’ saying that we are lazy and we are not lobbying for our districts and that those who are good at lobbying are the areas where the bicycles were given.

So, I am requesting the minister to come out in the media and tell the public that we selectively used this criterion and such districts have got and for the rest will get and assure the public so that we can be saved of this burden.  

Madam Speaker, the same thing is also for the districts that are benefiting from the elderly grant. People think that for us who are not getting this grant are not good at lobbying. My neighbours from Kyegegwa and Kiboga are getting the elderly grant but in Mubende, we are not getting and people think we are dormant here. May the minister come out and tell the public so that they can know clearly.

The other problem which is in my district is that in the first and second year of this Parliament, there are some parishes that have been getting NAADS money. But this year, more than 20 parishes have been denied saying that local government does not recognise these parishes therefore they will not benefit. May I know from the minister, which are those areas that you are denying now but you have been serving in the previous years - though you may not be serving NAADS but the same thing may apply to bicycles –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amoding, hon. Awongo and then we shall close with hon. Jacinto. The others will speak on the other report and everybody will get a chance.

6.18
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the minister for finally coming through with this issue because it has been a highly contested matter every time we go to some villages in some districts.  

I am however perturbed by the fact that the ministry does not seem to be in charge. I am glad to have seen my senior minister coming up on this matter. I am a member of the legal committee and the other day we had the Electoral Commission appearing before us and they rightly noted that they did not have the money, and then the other day we had finance to appear to disprove or rather give emphasis on areas that have not yet received funding and it was clear from the Ministry of Finance that they have not budgeted for that money for election and they went ahead to indicate to us that the Shs 19 billion that the minister alluded to was returned to the Consolidated Fund, Madam Speaker.

This means that they are going to go back to zero to start afresh and the reason the Ministry of Finance was arguing was the fact that there is no relevant legislation under which they conduct these elections – (Interjections)- yes, it is in their statement and they are waiting for legislation. So, I was happy to see the minister noting here that the Act was assented to by the President and, therefore, I want to ask the minister when that happened and is it already a law so that the Electoral Commission can proceed to conduct these elections under the legislation you are presenting? 

But, Madam Speaker – (Interjection) - okay, I will take the information from my twin sister.

THE SEPAKER: Information from hon. Mujungu.

MS MUJUNGU: Thank you honourable for giving way. The information that I want to give on the elections of and these administrative units is that this is the third year of our term and these administrative units that have not yet been elected - we were supposed to be concurrently serving this third term and now if this is the third term and elections are not yet done meaning that almost in the fourth or fifth if it is to be done, I be going to another term. 

So, I am appealing to Government that as much as it has failed to get money for elections, it is likely to lose more money because it is going to hold two elections at the same time. They will hold elections in fourth of fifth year as the term is ending and then again elections in the next term. I thank you, honourable.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I shall want to know whether the law we made here in March or April has not been assented to. I cannot imagine the Electoral Commission reporting there is no law when we made it here.  Yes, Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, the Bill being referred to was assented to and it is now an Act of Parliament. I want to inform you from an authoritative position that that is law now. I may not recall the exact date from my head but I want to inform you because even yesterday, I looked at that law – (Interjections) - now let me proceed as you make your Point of Procedure.
 
Madam Speaker, as we passed the legislation in this House, there were a few challenges created. There were some amendments which were moved on the Floor of the House which are part of that law which completely changed the budgetary framework earlier anticipated. Because now you have to gazette - you know when the Minister for Local Government was coming here, he wanted to mitigate the costs of gazetting polling stations.  But while here, instead of mitigating that, we even added in that not only should you gazette polling stations but you have to gazette the register of voters. Not only must you gazette it in the official gazette but also in a newspaper of wide circulation. 

When the Electoral Commission calculated that goes to about Shs 900 billion just to do that exercise alone. I am informing you that this is the information that I got from the Electoral Commission. Now, what are we looking at? I, as one of the ministers in charge of justice and constitutional affairs, we want to engage the Minister for Local Government to look at other possible ways of having these elections held and one of the avenues is Article 68 because when you look at Article 68, it relates to voting at elections and referenda and clause (6) of that Article says, “Parliament may by law exempt any public election, other than a presidential or parliamentary election, from the requirements of clause (1) that it shall be held by secret ballot” – (Ms Nambooze rose_)– can’t you be patient? First listen to this.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, while here at Parliament and when the House is in session, you chair this House and when members want to say something, they get up and if they catch your eye, they are given an opportunity to speak. I have never known that some of these powers were vested in the Third Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali, that he can even sit in his chair and tell us to sit down and bark at us as if we are his children. I gather that when here; we are all Members of Parliament and deserve honour. Is the Front Bench therefore in order to start throwing their hands in the air when I seek clarification from the minister on the Floor in my capacity and even shout that I should sit down and that I have nothing useful to contribute? Are they in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, from where I sit, I hear from all sides. The General has really been quiet this afternoon. I did not hear him say anything to you, this afternoon.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I am doing exactly what those colleagues sometimes do. They shout at us sometimes. So, I thought it is normal – (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of order. Shortly there was a point of order raised and the hon. Deputy Prime Minister was said to have shouted at an honourable colleague. In your wise ruling, Madam Speaker, the General was protected. I was now set aback to cite your protection and guidance. The Third Deputy Prime Minister stood up and confirmed that indeed, he did shout at the honourable colleague. Therefore, was the hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister in order to shout at the honourable colleague? 

THE SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, are you admitting that you were actually in breach of the Rules of Procedure?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: First of all, Madam Speaker, I want to apologise to you because I did not actually hear what you said – (Laughter) – therefore, I withdraw my comment. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, let me repeat this for those who may not have heard when I was interrupted. Article 68 makes provision for voting at elections and referenda and clause (6) of that Article says that “Parliament may by law” - that means we may have to come here again- “exempt any public election other than a presidential or parliamentary election from the requirements of clause (1) that it shall be held by secret ballot.” So, together with the Minister of Local Government, we are going to quickly and expeditiously come up with a proposal on how best we can handle this matter and finish it. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amoding, please conclude.

MS AMODING: Thank you very much, for that information, hon. Attorney-General. I think that he has wound up some of the issues that I had and, therefore, one of the substantive issues that I still want to raise is the fact of the money. Now that the AG agrees that he is going to work with the minister, what is going to happen with the resources? Won’t you need some money? I agree with what hon. Mudimi noted that we need to make this election as cheap as possible and I think it is possible. We can make it the cheapest election and really have the will to put in place these structures. However, the issue of money is not catered for in the financial budget and perhaps we can help the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs because the last time we wanted to meet with the Electoral Commission, they were not there and our hands were tied because they could not comment on a budget whose defenders were not there. So, I think this issue is going to come back on the Floor. We need to make provision for some money to conduct that election because it is very important. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.31
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the minister for this report. For our case in Koboko, it is true that we have 439 bicycles. Out of these, already 200 have been delivered to the district and the rest will be delivered to Koboko next week. There is one important point that we have to take into consideration and that is the issue of the custody of these bicycles. I am told in the other districts where these bicycles have already been allocated, most of the LC1s are fighting over them. It is difficult to know who is supposed to keep these bicycles. I want to interest the minister to make it categorically clear here that it is supposed to be so and so to give these bicycles. 

Secondly, is about these changes and deficits. Madam Speaker, I think it is the work of the Ministry of Local Government to know this country is better than any other ministry. The Ministry of Local Government is supposed to know how many districts we have in this country, how many counties, sub-counties, parishes and even villages. Unless they get to know this, it becomes very difficult for them to allocate such things. 

In 2003, when I was RDC, I went to the Ministry of Local Government to get some information and I was so surprised when an official from the ministry asked me to deliver a letter to Kotido when actually I was in Adjumani. I was told, “On your way to Adjumani, please help me deliver this letter.” (Laughter) –So, I really think the Ministry of Local Government should learn this country better so that we are able to perform well.

Lastly, these bicycles have a development agenda. There is an issue – the cholera outbreak- which was mentioned here yesterday by hon. Olanya. It is actually the LCs who are supposed to mobilise people against such a thing and if these bicycles are properly delivered to all the LCs, then it will be very easy and better for them to manage this – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the hon. Member for giving way. The information I want to give is that you raised very important issues concerning the delivery of the bicycles. In a situation whereby the real LC 1 for that particular area is not there, we are sensing a lot of problems. In my district Amuru, when the LC 1 is not in place, either he died or resigned, the Eexecutive rival over the bicycle. So let the government come out clear and tell Ugandans whether the bicycle is for the office of LC 1 or for the individual LC 1. If not, we are going to divide up our people and there will be a lot of problems. 

MR AWONGO: Thank you very much. Finally, on the issue of election of the local councils, I think these elections are very important. It is high time we held them so that the rest of the things especially mobilisation in the parishes and the villages are conducted properly. I know that if we have all the LC I in place, we will have total peace and security and this country will move in a better way than it is now. 
 
6.37
MR DEUSDEDIT OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must thank the minister for the report on the bicycles. I seek a point of clarification. These bicycles are supposed to be given to every village in this country. I am aware that the terrain of some of the villages in this country renders it almost impossible to ride bicycles on those areas. I stayed in Fort Portal and I know there are villages where you cannot ride a bicycle. That also applies to Kisoro, Bulambuli and so on. 

There are a number of bicycles meant for those villages. Where are they going to be put? Secondly, the LCs who are affected by the terrain, what kind of means are we going to provide for their transport?

6.38
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Onzima. He made a promise two days back and he has come back with a statement. I think that is the level of efficiency we expect from the frontbench; thank you hon. Onzima Alex. That is exactly what he used to be on this side as shadow minister for defence. 

I need clarification, Madam Speaker, on whether it is not possible to exempt some areas from getting bicycles. Say the LC 1 of Kololo; you know the kind of people who live in Kololo, do they also deserve bicycles?

Secondly, the ministry needs to reconcile the districts were we have had surplus and deficit. But we must also know how many supplies bicycles Namayingo got and what was the excess in Amuru and so on. 

I also think the issue of having names tagged to the bicycles cannot work. Let us leave that to LC1. Where I leave, the LC 1 died, and the vice left. So we had to organise and gave the office to the secretary defence. So in such a situation, if the bicycle is tagged to the name of the LC 1, it may be very difficult because for accountability you may have to deliver it to the person named on it. 

You wrote to the President on the 28th June; it is now two months later and the President has not yet replied that letter regarding the additional funds. Can the Leader of Government Business ask the President to provide the funds before we pass the budget?

There are districts, as I heard Members contribute here, where half of the village got, but they are not appearing in the second phase to receive the second half. So how are they going to be handled? We need also to reconcile that.

Lastly, I saw hon. Otafiire here, but he left; good enough the Attorney General is here; he should be able to help us. I want to agree with the proposal made that the Attorney General should come here and make a case for exception for the way we are going to conduct LC 1 and LC II elections. The earlier you do it the better for this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.40
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This goes directly to the Attorney General. I remember when the Bill came here, the Minister of Local Government made it clear that they had internalised the problems of elections of LC I and II and they wanted to bring down the cost. We had to hurry this Bill in order for us to hold these elections. Now, when the Attorney General comes here with another innovation on how we should go around these elections, there is cause for worry and suspicion because it was, I think Shs 400 billion. And we were told that we only needed Shs 39 billion. We had to hurry to have this Bill passed. Now we are told that that cannot be done. 

Mr Attorney General, either you are not telling us the truth – the Constitution is very clear; you should have come up with that proposal, we would have passed that law. Now we have passed it; it has been assented to; we expect elections and now you are telling us to come up with a different formulation on what we have to do. 

I want the Attorney General to be frank and tell this country what the Government is up to as far as these elections are concerned. 

MR SEMUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the hon. Minister of Local Government, but I seek clarification on the information he has given. The number of villages he has mentioned for some districts are not accurate. For example, in Kyankwanzi, at the moment, we have 394 villages and he has mentioned 347; and we have 84 parishes. He should take note of that.

6.43
DR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement and say that a place like Kibaale District where the population growth is 5.5 percent, and it is the highest in the country, what was an LC I, today may qualify to be a parish because in the census of 1991, Kibaale had 22,000 people. In the census of 2002, it had 420,000 and the population growth was at 5.3 percent. We are now expected to be 1 million people. So, I am not sure whether Local Government Ministry updates their records because they are using the information of 2001 for allocation of bicycles yet what was an LC I in 2001 – Madam Speaker, I have got an LCI called Kikoola; it was one LCI in 2001 but today they are 19 LC Is out of it. The minister could be sending one bicycle and yet they should be 19. So I am not sure if they update their information so that they are able to move with the times.

Lastly, regarding the LC I elections, some of us participated in the NRM primary elections and during that time, people were writing – and with the vigilance that I saw, we can still use that system that was applied; it was cheaper and effective. I saw people were writing names from chairman, MP and LCI. So if the Ministry of Local Government and the Attorney-General can take time to study how it was done, I think we could conduct an election cheaply and effectively. Thank you.

6.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Alex Onzima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of the LC election, I totally agree with the concerns raised by the MPs because there is no way you can defend a prolonged delay of the election of LCIs which was last done – is it in 2002? – and now we are in 2013. I think we just have to be honest on this issue that as Government we must do everything possible to have these elections in the shortest time possible time. There is nothing like mincing words on this undesirable delay. (Applause) That is my position. Definitely, as Government, we have to go back to the drawing board to achieve this. And I cannot say anything more than that. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the surpluses and deficits in the bicycles in various districts, the information I got from our technical staff is that – which I think is true because for those of us who live in the rural areas, everywhere people are working hard to create new counties, sub counties, parishes, villages – call them districts. So the trick is that outside there, while the ministry and the Electoral Commission know the exact number of villages and parishes and so on, at the grassroots, people are creating villages, some of which are not known by the centre. So at the centre here, while we have our figures, then the field officers, the chief administrative officers, working together with the district technocrats, remitting to the Ministry of the Local Government a different figure. And then you have a technocrat in the ministry who probably does not take time to crosscheck what figures we have then you end up sending more bicycles to a district when there are actually fewer villages. That is possible. 

And previously, I am told under the previous arrangement, the leaders at the grassroots would sit down and determine where to create a new village or parish. But under the current arrangement, when they take such a decision, they are supposed to seek the approval of the Minister of Local Government. So those districts that have kept the procedure, to have approval at the centre, are those with surpluses. While those that take their own decisions without seeking the approval of the ministry may end up experiencing deficits. That one I admit because there is a mix-up here and the ministry will follow it up to ensure that we correct those inaccuracies. So in the second phase we will be able to deliver the exact number of –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The requirement that the country shall hold local council elections after every five years is a constitutional requirement under Article 181(4). Now, the Minister of Local Government has admitted here – and I want to thank him for that – that as a country, we are not able to move by that provision. Now, my point of procedure is this: Is it okay for us to proceed when an admission has been made to the effect a constitutional provision cannot be implemented. Are we right to move on when we do not get guided about the next step because this is an admission of a crisis and a violation of the Constitution to that effect or failure by all of us to implement a constitutional provision? Can we proceed in this manner, when we have discovered that we are in total default of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which all of us here took an oath to defend and protect at all times? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, the command for the elections is still in the Constitution; it has not been amended and so we must continue talking about it until we fulfil it. Minister, please continue.

MR ONZIMA: On the letter which was written by my minister to the President, the information I have is that the minister raised the issue of not having enough money to purchase bicycles to cover all the districts. However, I did not attend that meeting and the President is said to have agreed to the minister’s request. So the minister, in his wisdom, wrote this letter as a follow-up of what the President had accepted to do. So, for us as a ministry, we are optimistic that this money which the President pledged for the bicycles will be availed. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: The clarification I am seeking from the minister is whether this was included in the Budget or is being used as a delaying tactic that as we draw closer to 2016, the bicycles will be released at the last moment. Can you clarify on that please?

MR ONZIMA: I think we should be fair. If a section of the country has received bicycles, it is only fair that the other districts should also receive theirs. I also want to report here that according to the list that we have, we have districts like Kiruhura, Ntungamo, Masaka and Kamuli, among others which are in the second phase. 

These are parts of the country and the President- It does not matter in which form this money is going to come provided it is contained within the national Budget of this country. I think we should wind up. The issue is, is there the will by Government to cover the remaining districts in phase two? My honest answer is that yes, we have the political will to cover the other districts.

As to whether these bicycles are meant for the LCI chairpersons as individuals, the answer is no. These bicycles are meant for the offices of the local council villages. So these bicycles are not meant for the persons or individuals who are the chairpersons of the LCIs and the parishes. (Hon. Aol rose) I was asked to wind up, I think we have other business to conduct. That is the information that I have, let us take it in good faith and we shall definitely have these bicycles delivered to the remaining districts. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now does the Attorney General wish to make any concluding remarks?

6.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I do not agree that there is a crisis. Yes, we may have a problem but we are not having a crisis. If you want, you can google the definition of a crisis. We are not in a constitutional crisis.

You know, interestingly I was told of a story where one of the presidents somewhere in this part of the world was asked when is he saying good bye to his people and he answered, “Say good bye to my people? Where are they going? So, coming from where, we are here!” (Laughter)

So, hon. Jack Sabiiti, it is true that when the Minister of Local Government came here, he was convinced that we would actually get issues fixed and have these elections. The major problem came with the amendments, which were moved on the floor of the House here, which we have passed and which escalated the costs. That was one of the problems. The only thing we can do is for the Minister of Local Government, because he is the sector minister, to work in liaison with the Attorney General’s Office. I am there for him and we shall soon go to Cabinet and come back to Parliament in the shortest time possible.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, I wanted the minister to clarify on the issue of Shs 900 billion for the LCI elections, which is even more than that for the general elections for Members of Parliament and the President. So where did you get that figure from? Can you clarify on that?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is one other point that hon. Baryomunsi wants to bring.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I just wanted to raise another issue for clarification from the Attorney General. At one point, I think it was last year, the Electoral Commission had announced a date when it was going to hold elections in the new administrative units and also by-elections in the local governments. Indeed some parties like NRM prepared to conduct primaries and they were cancelled on the eve of the elections. 

More importantly, there are some civil servants who had resigned their positions like in my place where some teachers who wanted to contest to become LC III chairpersons and councillors for those units resigned. The elections were put off so I just wanted the guidance of the Attorney General as to whether you can help those people to be reinstated to their original positions since it was Government that frustrated the efforts and cancelled the elections. I just wanted to put it to you, the Attorney General.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Attorney General. Mine is a very small clarification because I think that this matter is being adequately addressed in this House. I would like to get assurance from the Attorney General and the line minister. They said they are going to take these proposals into consideration and they will come back with a position. The assurance I want them to come back with, if they can give it to me, is that, they are not coming back with the position advanced by hon. Atwooki Kasirivu that they learnt from the NRM primaries because these primaries were very chaotic and we would not like LCI elections to be very chaotic. Can I have that assurance? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a similar clarification to hon. Baryomunsi’s and mine came about as a result of the creation of a town council; Kakooge Town Council. The then LCIII chairperson of that sub county resigned to contest for mayorship. He was substantively elected as LCIII chairperson for this term but now that the elections are not forthcoming, the sub county has no substantive LCIII chairperson and no mayor. The civil servants are handling the money the way they want and that is not right.

In that circumstance, what happens? Do we have an avenue where we can allow them resume their offices, which they resigned before as they were substantively elected in those positions? Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Rt Hon. Speaker, we shall come back with the answers to most of these issues that have been raised. Take an example of what hon. Wamanga-Wamai is raising. Yesterday I was working on the statement on the issues raised by hon. Mpuuga and I was interfacing with the Uganda Electoral Commission. That is when I got a copy of that law that you are talking about. They actually cited provisions in the current amendments of the law, which escalated the costs and when they told me the costs, I also could not believe it. I said, “No, you go back and articulate that in writing. Show me how the costs are raising to that much.” 

So, when they come back, through the ministry and our office, we shall go to Cabinet to find the best positions that we can take to have this matter resolved expeditiously. Yes, I know you want me to give you deadlines, but it is not good to give you deadlines. All I can assure you about is that we are all concerned. You have heard the sector minister lament that since 2001 till now – we shall do our best to come back to the House on this matter. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you so much, honourable members. Let us go to the next item.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON BOUNDARY DISPUTES BETWEEN AMURU AND ADJUMAN DISTRICTS

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday we received a report and agreed to start the debate today, except I don’t see the Minister for Lands, but who was also missing yesterday. Okay, the junior minister is here.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. Given the fact that we have been discussing very serious matters and about to begin on other very serious matters, but that it is now well past 7.00 O’clock, I would like to seek your guidance on whether we cannot adjourn for today to begin with that matter next time when we are still fresh. This is because there are very serious matters in this subject where we might not pronounce ourselves very well because of our energy levels and that could be troublesome for this country. So, maybe you can guide if we can adjourn for now.

THE SPEAKER: You know, our plan was to deal with many of these matters this week so that we can start on reports from the committees next week. Maybe if we can agree to create some time; these are outstanding things. Yes, minister.

7.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Ms Rosemary Najjemba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to agree with what hon. Alice Alaso is saying – (Laughter) – just because the minister in charge of lands together with the junior minister have gone for a burial – hon. Sam Engola lost a mother. So, they are all away. I am the only one left here yet I am not very conversant with the subject at hand. So, I would rather agree with her, but you can guide the House that we deal with it in the next sitting. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, in view of the reasons advanced by the minister we defer the debate on this matter to Tuesday next week. But it seems you are also tired of listening – you are not ready to listen to another report? There is item six – can we receive the report from local government?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: No? Okay, it seems the ears are also tired. We also defer that report to Tuesday next week.  House adjourned to Tuesday next week. Thank you very much, honourable members.

(The House rose at 7.09 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 August 2013 at 2 p.m.)

