
Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.


Thursday, 8 August 2019

Parliament met at 2.24 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I bring you greetings from the speakers of the African parliaments. We have been meeting at the Pan African parliaments, for the 10th meeting. Several matters of concern were raised. The first one is to remind the honourable members and Cabinet that in 2017, after I had returned from the same meeting, I reported to this House the failure by Government to ratify the Malabo Protocol on the Pan African Parliament. Since then, no ratification has taken place. The Government is silent on whether it intends to ratify or not, or even whether it will ratify with reservations. As speakers of parliaments, we have been given the unfortunate tasks to report on action taken by December 2019. It is very unfortunate that our governments sign treaties and then shelve them.

I am, therefore, directing the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to report to this House on whether Uganda will ratify the Malabo Protocol or not. The minister should report to this House on Wednesday, 14 August 2019.

Honourable members, we also discussed the African Continental Free Trade Area Agreement, which has been signed, ratified and because the minimum ratifications have been done, it came into force in May 2019. I believe that as parliaments, we have not had the benefit of getting a brief from the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives or from the Prime Minister. 

Another unfortunate situation, the protocol of free movement of persons, which should be supporting the free trade area, has only been signed by two governments out of 55 governments. I, therefore, direct the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to come and update the House on this treaty on Thursday 15 August, 2019. 

Honourable members, another subject that engaged the Speakers, was the issue of refugees. It is quite worrying that the number of refugees has grown from 860 in 1968 - this was a few years after independence of many of the African countries. Despite craving for self-governance, the number of refugees in Africa has grown. By 1992, there were 6,775,000 refugees. Now that we are all independent, they have become 24 million. That speaks volumes about governance on the African Continent because many of the refugees go out for political reasons, violation of human rights, and mismanagement of the economies, among others. Honourable members, we need to address the issue of governance. 

During the debates, I made the case as I have done on other occasions to support the host communities and countries that look after the refugees. I hope that the United Nations organisation and United Nations High Commission for Refugees will listen to the voice of the host countries because of the damage and impact that remains in our countries after the refugees have gone back. 

There was also concern that not much effort is being made to return refugees to their countries, where the situation has normalised. They get forgotten, settle in the community and life just continues. For instance, last year, I went to Bukwo District; on my usual campaign against female genital mutilation. In Riwo Sub County where we were, there were thousands of Kenyans who came there in 2007. I do not know whether anybody knows that they are there. They are there and life is going on. Their children are born in Uganda and soon, they will start voting in this country. I reported here and it seems nothing has been done. I am glad our minister is here and he should take interest in that issue.

The other matter that was discussed was the concern of multiple regional economic communities. I do not want to say much about this because the Committee on Foreign Affairs will give us their opinion following the visit of President emeritus Thabo Mbeki on the proposal for a new regional grouping of the Horn of African, yet we are part of the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, Intergovernmental Authority on Development, East African Community and we are the same countries. I will not say more but our committee will tell us what to do.

I further used the opportunity to lobby Speakers to complete nominations for their Members of Parliament to the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference to be held in September 2019. 

Last week, I also attended the HRG Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in a bid to encourage them to send in their nominations as quickly as possible but also to convince them that they can come to Uganda and that it is safe. 

I would like to thank the organising committee, all the chairpersons and members and our staff for the work so far done to ensure successful 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference. Thank you very much.

2.31
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance about a person who is infecting the national herd with impunity. People lost their income for three years and the same person a one, Mr Mulindwa from Ssembabule District, has imported cows again from Tanzania. There is an outbreak of foot and mouth disease again. The quarantine had ended and I think action needs to be taken against this gentleman for his impunity. 

There is no vaccine because the vacation that was imported was fake. We were told lies about importation of vaccines from Kenya but it was discovered that this was not true and Government had spent money on fake injective drugs. Currently, there is no drug in the country. 

The same person who brought this fake drug is the same person, who brought fake acaricides, decaticks and allegedly, imported it from Zimbabwe under COPA. When COPA found out that they had not supplied to Uganda and it was a fake drug on the market, they revoked the license and the name was changed to MTK. 

My prayers are as follows:

Investigation should be carried out on this criminal act and we should immediately get an acaricide, call off the area and vaccinate to prevent residences with no income suffering.

Mr Mulindwa’s cows have been sick for a while. Rather than alerting the country, the veterinary doctors kept treating them and now, it has spread. These are the very cows that come to the markets in the cattle corridor. They come to Gomba and spread it. I do not know what is going to happen to us.

My second matter of national importance is to do with heads of institutions who take money from school children and parents, calling it registration fees and pocketing it. This morning, I watched a sad story on news about Hillside School. There were three men who were arrested. This hurts because the parents get the money from very far and the money is taken. Nobody tells us how these people have been punished. Can the ministry task these people so that they explain to us what is happening? 

Is it possible, in future, maybe for UNEB to set up certain centres during second term where registration fees can be paid directly? Those are the issues, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. On Tuesday next week, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should come and explain to us about the outbreak of foot and mouth disease in Sembabule and the neighbouring areas and the plans for combating it. 
Also, the quarantines are hurting our people yet they do not have incomes and if there is going to be another, I think our people are going to suffer.

The Minister of Education and Sports should come and address us on the plans to handle the issue of directors of schools conning students and parents under the guise of registration on Tuesday next week.

2.35
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to present this matter of national importance. My matter is about our role as Members of Parliament to monitor Government projects.

Unfortunately, for many Government projects that are being implemented in our constituencies and in the country, we rarely get to know the specifications and the details of the contracts as they are signed. Then you find a situation where the contractors are doing shoddy work and the MPs are supposed to monitor and make sure that there is value for money yet as a Member of Parliament, one does not have the specifications of what was agreed on with the contractor.

There is an irrigation project that was implemented by ministry of water in my constituency. That project was kind of commissioned last year. However, just one year down the road, the stands on which the tanks sit are almost collapsing let alone the irrigation project itself being non-functional. 

I feel that if I had the details and knew what was supposed to be done – because I was there when these things were being done – now the project is non-functional – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you want to be part of the procurement? What does the PPDA law say about our role?

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, I do not want to be part of the procurement process but I need to know the details. As long as the procurement process is complete, let the Member of Parliament be told that this is what we have agreed upon to be implemented in your constituency.

Madam Speaker, there is a Shs 7.5 million water project going on in my constituency but I do not know the details.

THE SPEAKER: Have you asked your chief administrative officer? Have you asked anybody? Have you attended the district council meetings? I am trying to see how Parliament can help you to get these answers but with difficulty.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, my prayer is simple. It is my desire as a Member of Parliament that once there is any project that is being implemented, let the details and specifications be given to the Member of Parliament so that it becomes the beginning point for that Member to monitor the project.

If it is a national project, let the committee responsible be – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I will take a look at the PPDA Act, the Public Finance Management Act and see how we can assist you.

2.39
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on matter of national importance to do with River Rwizi in Mbarara. River Rwizi is one of the main sources of water for Mbarara Municipality, which is a growing town with over 190,000 people. Mbarara Municipality is also a junction city and it has a high day time population. 

Amidst the challenges that face all other water bodies in Uganda, River Rwizi has now been invaded by the water hyacinth. This is a new development that is threatening the river and the livelihood of the people that depend on it with the growing population.

The community is aware and there has been some community initiative where people have organised themselves to go and remove the water hyacinth using rudimentary methods. This is however, not sustainable because within a space of less than two weeks, the water hyacinth is growing back and threatening the river.

My prayer is that the relevant ministry sends a team of experts to Mbarara to further assess the extent of the problem. 

I also request that the ministry avails the relevant equipment, trains and recruits some people to continuously –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is directed to examine the issue of the water hyacinth on River Rwizi and to report back to this House in a fortnight about action taken to train the population and to manage the water hyacinth.

2.41
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agaga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of very urgent national importance regarding a malaria outbreak in Agago District. 

The rate of death has increased. I cite an example of yesterday where in Kalongo Hospital, 12 children died of malaria. The rate is increasing day by day. All health units in Agago District are reporting over 90 per cent increase in malaria cases. 

The health units are failing to manage this outbreak because people that have been treated go back home and they get it again the following week. It has reduced the immunity of the people of Agago, especially children, which is very alarming. 

I would, therefore, like to find out whether Government has any plans to carry out indoor residual spraying of households in Agago District to prevent malaria occurrences. 

Two, all hospitals, especially Kalongo and the health centres III that are trying to manage this outbreak have complained of lack of blood. There is no blood; they have always asked for blood from Gulu Referral Hospital; there is no blood at all.

It is a truly alarming situation, which deserves urgent attention. I would like to find out if Government can take immediate action accordingly.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, almost a similar issue had been raised by the MP from Nwoya. I know the minister answered but he did not touch residual spraying. Can I ask the Minister of Health whether she has any response to this complaint?

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the matter of national importance that has been raised by hon. Franca Akello. As I informed this House, we have an increase of malaria cases all over the country. The rains are back and, Madam Speaker, we have different interventions in place. We started with indoor residual spraying in northern Uganda and when malaria cases dropped to almost less than five per cent for over a year, we moved to other districts in eastern Uganda. 

That programme was being supported by the US Government. We are actually constrained because we require about Shs 2.5 billion per district if we are to have indoor residual spraying.

Madam Speaker, we are constrained by resources to have this indoor residual spraying in all the districts. However, we have other interventions and we have our teams. We have appealed to the population to reduce these malaria deaths. There is need for people to rush the patients to the health facilities. 

Madam Speaker, health centres III, I must state, do not transfuse blood. The transfusion takes place from health centres IV upwards because of the complications of the cold chain –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, minister for giving way. The health workers are complaining of lack of blood in all the health units, especially Kalongo which is the only hospital in the district. The administrator had actually indicated that they do not have blood. Most of the cases that are reported in the hospital need blood. Therefore, they develop anaemia and die –especially children.

Therefore, the rate of death has increased. Imagine that yesterday in Kalongo Hospital alone, 12 children died. I am talking about children, not adults. It really deserves urgent attention. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you said each district requires Shs 2.5 billion but isn’t it a worthwhile investment to look for money to eradicate malaria? Isn’t it worthwhile to invest in the people of Uganda? We borrow money for roads – why don’t we borrow money to eradicate malaria?

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, it is important that we should focus on eradicating malaria from our country and we have a malaria reduction strategy. We may not wholly eliminate malaria because of the porous borders but we can reduce malaria incidences in the country. There have been various interventions in addition to the indoor residual spraying, which was limited because of the resources. 

We have the long-lasting insecticide treated nets, which we distributed. We are in the process of procuring new mosquito nets to be distributed. However, we also have the case treatment. 

The honourable member is raising the challenge of blood. Fortunately, the malaria test kits and drugs are available. However, let me follow up on the issue of lack of blood because it is also a very important component in the treatment of some of these cases of malaria since the children can actually turn anaemic.

Madam Speaker, you have been one of our champions in the fight against malaria. This Parliament has been involved. We actually indicated the shortfall in dealing with these malaria incidents. If we can have the money, we would have the indoor residual spraying, which is a very effective means in all the districts. We have been working with plascon paints – we now have the mosquito repellent paint which people can use. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, these malaria deaths have reminded me that some years ago, I went to Cuba with some Members of Parliament and they gave us a strategy for eliminating malaria and they were even willing to come and help us eliminate malaria as they have done in Latin America. I do not know why the Ministry of Health has not followed it up. You weren’t there but your predecessor did not follow it up.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I think it is important that we bring a formal statement which this House can debate. We can show you the gaps that we have and we agree on how to proceed. 

THE SPEAKER: I am going to check the Hansard and find what we reported when we came to this House so that it can help your ministry. You may not need all that Shs 2.5 billion.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.49
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Madam Speaker, today during our meeting in the committee on Public Service and Local Government, the Ministry of Local Government came with a document that on Tuesday all councils are putting down their tools. The reason is that, for example, a municipality such as Makindye-Ssabagabo, which collects Shs 4 billion and sends to the coffers of the Central Government, the Government appropriated Shs 800 million only for that local government for a whole year. Kira Municipality collected Shs 9.5 billion but only Shs 126 million was appropriated for that municipality. 

These figures mean that the local governments can neither collect garbage nor pay for council meetings because the system is now very clear that all money that is collected locally is sent to one collection account. 

It is our humble request, Madam Speaker, that the Ministry      of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes and explain this. Lira Municipality collects Shs 1.8 billion and they are able to get at least Shs 1.2 billion. However, a local government that collects Shs 9.5 billion is getting Shs 126 million only. How can you divide Shs 126 million to four divisions of a big municipality like Kira and you expect them to operate?

That means that those local councils are going to come for supplementary appropriations after every two weeks –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Go to your prayers.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: our prayer is that the Government comes out and clarifies whether this is an anomaly or intended plan. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister in charge of finance, the allegation is that you are eating big money from the taxpayers of Kira and giving them very little. Can you please come and update us next week about this? When are they downing their tools? [Mr Johnson Muyanja: “Tuesday.”] Minister, get us an answer on Tuesday next week so that we can stop further downing of the tools.

2.50
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the absence of electricity in Nsambya Police Barracks. Nsambya Police Barracks has taken two months without power, posing a danger to the public. The duty of the police is to keep law and order but there is no way these policemen will keep law and order when they are not facilitated.

It is worrying since a police facility is supposed to work 24 hours a day. I would like to get an explanation from the Minister of Internal Affairs as to why Nsambya Police Barracks can go for two months without power. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs should come and explain to the country why Nsambya Police Barracks is in darkness for the last two months, next Tuesday.

2.52
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent importance with regard to Mbale District Referral Hospital.

On the 3rd, Bugisu Kingdom organised a marathon, which had been advertised over a month and it was in partnership with Mbale District Referral Hospital.

On Saturday, the day when the marathon was supposed to take place, I went to participate in the marathon. Many people had been sensitised to come for testing and vaccination. The chairperson of the organising committee indicated to us that Mbale District Referral Hospital was bringing services nearer to the people and so, people came in large numbers. However, at around 11 o’clock, someone was sent from the referral hospital who communicated that when they checked the hospital stores, they realised that there were no stocks of test kits and vaccines.

Madam Speaker, this caused a lot of anxiety amongst people. Actually, people were sad given the fact that they had trekked long distances from different parts of the region to come and get the vaccination in Mable.

Madam Speaker, I would like to find out from the minister whether this was a deliberate move to frustrate the vaccination in the region. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health, we would like to know whether you have in stock test kits for Hepatitis B or not, so that we can get to know whether it was deliberate or not. Do you have stocks, honourable minister?

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Kindly, Madam Speaker, restrain hon. Abala from giving me a new name called “Hepatitis B” (Laugher). That is a joke.

It is very unfortunate that the incident happened the way it did. Otherwise, we expect everyone to be mobilising the population to receive Hepatitis B vaccines so that they can protect themselves against the disease.

Bugisu and Sebei sub-regions received the vaccines in the last financial year. I am surprised that there were no test kits. However, I would like to believe that maybe they were not collaborating very well with the facility. Otherwise, hepatitis test kits are at National Medical Stores for facilities that run short of them – together with the vaccines. They are actually supposed to make orders for them from National Medical Stores.

Madam Speaker, allow me to follow up this matter and get back to you before we close today or on Tuesday. Let me call the Director of National Medical Stores.

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall be happy if we got an answer today since people are going for the weekend. 

2.56
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance.

Madam Speaker, it is the duty of this Parliament to protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. However, it has appeared in the press that Internal Security Organisation (ISO) has been involved in illegal detention, arrest and torture of Ugandans contrary to the law. As a result, Uganda Law Society has sought to take action against Col. Frank Bagyenda in person, for this alleged act by ISO.

Section 4(2) of the Security Organisations Act, 1987, provides that no officer or employer of either ISO or External Security Organisation shall have power to arrest, detain or confine any person by virtue of being an officer or employee of the organisation.
		
Madam Speaker, in this case, an example of Patrick Makika Mugisha, a lawyer around town, was arrested over misunderstanding of a debt and his profession. He was confined until an order of habeas corpus was issued by court and he was released last Sunday, the 4th of August.

Another is Ms Oprah – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Another is Oprah Phoebe Kiddu who was allegedly arrested, detained and tortured for being the “NRM for Justice” leader opposing the sole candidature of NRM.
	
Madam Speaker, these increased cases of arrests, detention and torture by security organisations who are not mandated to carry out any arrest – if we sit and allow this to go on, this country will soon become ungovernable and security operatives shall take it upon themselves to arrest and detain Ugandans without any recourse to courts of law.

Madam Speaker, if the security organisations are becoming clearing agents and debt collectors - In fact, they are used in settling of petty scrabbles amongst citizens. I, therefore, think that it is the duty of this House to rise up and demand action and a statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security, who have abandoned that duty but got involved in land matters without supervising the entities under their mandate.
	
Madam Speaker, this is what is happening and therefore, as Parliament, we demand action and the position of Government whether these organisations have usurped the powers of police and now they are the ones carrying out these cases of detention, arrest and torture of Ugandans. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, two people have been mentioned as having been placed in safe houses. We would like to ask the Minister for Security to come to this House and explain the whereabouts of these people and why they are in the safe house.

Honourable members, this is a matter of possible violation of human rights. We, therefore, require an answer next Tuesday. Thank you very much.

3.00
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On the 5th of August, I visited Bombo Military Barracks Hospital to check on a patient from my constituency, who had reached the hospital at around 11.00 a.m. I was at the hospital at around 6.00 p.m. However, there was no one to attend to the patient and yet she was in critical condition. There was only one doctor on duty, Dr Angume Gordon, who was moving around all the wards.

When I talked to the patients in the ward where I was, I noticed that some patients bought their own medicines, which were lying on their beds because there was no one to administer the medicines on them. Secondly, most of the beds were empty; they do not have mattresses while others have pieces of mattresses. I would like therefore, to request you, Madam Speaker, to direct the Minister of Health and Minister of Defence to intervene because people are dying helplessly and many people are seeking treatment from this hospital because it is strategically positioned. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Does the Ministry of Health have jurisdiction inside the military hospitals? Does the minister supervise the military hospitals - before we can take a decision?

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES)	(Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, we do send drugs to these military hospitals however, their supervision is directly under the Ministry of Defence so the Minister of State for Defence is here, so I think he can respond.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister of State for Defence can you tell us what is happening at the military hospital.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col Charles Engola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Ministry of Defence and UPDF for accepting to help the civilians who are in problems. 

However, that problem was in the military hospital in Bombo. I have to go and inquire what was happening at that material time when the doctor was the only one working, and then I will get you informed.

THE SPEAKER: I think that whether they were civilians or soldiers, there should be beds and doctors. Even the sick soldiers need treatment.
 
Can you explain to us next week what is happening in the Military Hospital in Bombo so that we know whether the Ministry of Health needs to give you more support?

COL ENGOLA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A military hospital works all the time and that is why I said I was going to find out why the doctor was alone then I will bring to you a report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo you seem to be on fire. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam, Speaker. Health is health and it has no boundaries. The Military Hospital of Bombo is the best in the country in orthopaedic surgery. When cases of bones failed here in Mulago, they used to be referred to Bombo; as I served as Shadow Minister of Defence and Security, I visited that hospital.

The soldiers there are crying that in spite of the good things they do to the soldiers and the civilian population they are underequipped, under resourced, even their voices do not get to this Parliament the way my honourable colleague has said. We have army MPs here; what are you doing in this House if you cannot represent the issues in the barracks? 

We appropriated money for the construction of the National Referral Hospital at Mbuya; the problem in the military is worse than what my sister has stated in the area of health services. There is poor oversight, poor accountability of even resources which are extended to the -

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure?
 
MR FUNGAROO: The issue is that we appreciate the role you play; however, you as a minister and us Members of Parliament, both of the army and civilians, should reach there and help the army in the barracks. Equip them, provide human resource and other facilities because they are the -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have undertaken to come next Wednesday and do not disappear. Honourable members, we now go to item No.3 but Wait a bit. What is the issue hon. Mugeni?

MS MUGENI: Madam Speaker, last week we had the Prime Minister’s Time and we raised quite a number of questions. I raised a question concerning the bicycles that were pledged by the President to the LCIs, which I know that it is also disturbing you in Kamuli District.

The Prime Minister referred this question to the minister of finance and now that he is here, I would like to get the answer from him.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, where are my bicycles, even Kamuli did not receive, 55 districts did not receive bicycles.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)  Mr David Bahati: Madam Speaker, I will need to check whether we budgeted for these bicycles and then come back to the House on Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you should be sincere; we have talked about this matter many time on this floor and we told you that if you are buying for the new ones, first serve the ones who have outstanding demands. Wherever I go for meetings they ask me the whereabouts of their bicycles. This is not fair so we want serious answers, thank you.

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is that when you were chairing last week but one, I raised a concern of fire in one of my schools and that is your district, Kamuli Township Primary School which is a UPE school.

I prayed that at least the minister for education and the minister for disaster preparedness avail us with building material.

Madam Speaker, not even a telephone call to that school was made. Are we proceeding right when these ministers ordered by you are not going to those areas to implement what you tell them?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, children are about to do the mock exams and this is one of the biggest schools in the area with over 3,000 children. 

No shelter, hon. Ecweru, we asked you to go there and deal with the problem. 

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, it is not true that we do not take your directives seriously; to the contrary we take your directives very seriously. 

We received it at the same time when you had indicated to us the challenges that had happened in Buyende and parts of Kamuli.

I am happy to report to you that we were ready with the report last week and we were supposed to have briefed you on what we have so far done. We have responded to Buyende, part of Kamuli and even for this school, we have mobilised some iron sheets and we are in touch with the Ministry of Education to do its part. Otherwise, as a ministry responsible for disaster management, we shall do our first line intervention. The mabaati are ready. We shall be indicating to the honourable member. It was supposed to have been presented - particularly our first line response - by my senior colleague but we take your directives very seriously.

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Watongola, monitor and let me know whether they have actually reached there. Thank you very much. 

Now, I would like to introduce the young people of Uganda. They are children of Touch Primary School from Nyero Sub-County. Are you the ones? Please stand up. There they are, looking very smart, from Kumi District, represented by hon. Monica Amoding and hon. Charles Ilukor. You are welcome. Please sit down. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL YOUTH DAY CELEBRATIONS, 12 AUGUST 2019

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to brief Parliament about the forthcoming commemoration of the International Youth Day, 2019.

The purpose of this statement to Parliament is to provide information to Parliament regarding this year’s International Youth Day celebrations, scheduled to take place on l2 August, 2019 in Jinja District at St. Gonza Gonzaga Primary School in Kagoma. 

We will recall that every year on 12th August, we join the rest of the world in marking and celebrating the International Youth Day, in conformity with the UN General Assembly Resolution A/RES/54/20 of the 54th UN Session, adopted on 17 December, 1999. 

The International Youth Day provides an opportunity to all state parties to evaluate the various policies, programmes and strategic interventions aimed at empowering the young people. Additionally, the day provides an excellent opportunity to take stock of what has been done and what remains undone in positioning the young people to play a critical role in the social, economic and political transformation of the country. 

Commemorating the International Youth Day is consistent with the World Programme of Action for Youth, which is the UN framework for youth development. It also addresses the mindset change and empowerment. It is also consistent with the provisions of the African Youth Charter and the Commonwealth Plan of Action for Youth Empowerment. 

Madam Speaker, whereas the global theme for this year’s celebration is, “Transforming education” at the national level, we chose to customise it to be, “Transforming education for responsible citizenship and employment creation” to suit our unique circumstances in the country. 

The theme enjoins us to focus on the importance of education in nurturing citizens that are productive and responsible for the socio-economic transformation of their communities. It is important to emphasise that the quality of citizens is dependent upon the quality of their education. A transformative education is, therefore, a step in the right direction. Transforming education must, therefore, highlight efforts to make education more inclusive and accessible to all the youth.

Rooted in goal 4 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promoting long life learning opportunities for all, inclusive and accessible education is crucial to achieving sustainable development and can play a role in the prevention of conflicts. Indeed education is a development multiplier, as it plays a pivotal role in accelerating progress across all the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. 

As has been the case in previous years, celebrations will take place at various local government levels across the country though national celebrations will be at St Gonza Gonzaga Primary School, Kagoma Playground, Jinja District starting 9.00 a.m. on Monday, l2 August 2019. 

His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, is expected to preside over the function. Prior to the day, during the youth week from 5th to 11th August, various activities will take place. They will include but are not limited to: community dialogue, tree planting, community work, sports activities like football and netball and HIV testing and counselling, to mention but a few. This is in line with duties of a citizen, provided under Article 17 of the Uganda Constitution.

I would like to take this opportunity to invite colleagues to attend the national celebrations at St Gonza Gonzaga Primary School in Kagoma, Buwenge Sub-County in Jinja District on Monday, 12 August 2019. I also request you to support the day's celebrations at various local government levels.

Further, I take this opportunity to request my colleagues, through you, Madam Speaker, to appreciate the importance of the power of education in moulding the young people into responsible and development-oriented citizens. 

I also request colleagues to note that the theme for this year’s celebration is “Transforming education for responsible citizenship and employment creation” and to note that the venue will be St Gonza Gonzaga Primary School Kagoma Playgrounds. 

I also request colleagues to note that His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, will be the Chief Guest. Accept my invitation, dear colleagues. I wish you a peaceful Eid Adhuha on the eve of the Youth Day.  I beg submit. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether hon. Walyomu would like to let us know whether he is ready for us. Hon. Walyomu, two minutes before we listen to hon. Odonga-Otto.

3.20
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the ministry for deciding to choose Kagoma County, more so St Gonzaga Primary School in Buwenge Sub-County, to host the national youth day celebrations.

I would like to confirm to this august House that we are ready to host all Members of Parliament and all the youth in this country, including hon. Ssekikubo who is a good friend of mine. (Laughter)

On this, we shall discuss with the minister because as per now, with the remaining days, I would like to involve my youth so that they can welcome other youth from other parts of the country. Thank you. (Applause)

3.22
MR ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I would like to request that at an appropriate time, you invite the minister to give a comprehensive statement on what the Government of Uganda is doing for the youth. What she has read is a workmanship of a laptop warrior.

The youth are totally helpless. The Youth Livelihood Fund cannot be accessed by the ordinary youth. Many youth finish university and bring their wives into their parents’ homes. They are more disadvantaged than their parents. Many of them are unemployed. They are joining “People Power” massively all over the country. So, the Government projects are not in any way touching the youth directly. The projects are not growing at the rate of population growth.

Secondly, you directed the minister, two weeks ago, to bring a comprehensive statement on population. As we drive around the country, we notice that there is bound to be a population explosion. Yesterday, I drove from Gulu to here. The children you see from Gulu to Kampala, walking to school in the morning, are almost the total number of children you see in the entire Denmark. That is just one route. Go to Mbarara, Arua or Kapchorwa routes. So, there is bound to be a population explosion.

Through you, Madam Speaker, the minister should come and tell us what plans we have as a Government to start campaigning for birth control because no matter what good intentions the Government has, if the population continues to grow at this rate, we are bound to have a problem.

Madam Speaker, lastly, the campaign for birth control should begin even in this Parliament. It is because if we are to add all our children, as Members of Parliament, you may find we have a total of 10,000 children. (Laughter) So, this is a very serious issue we have to do something about. 

Otherwise, this country is not expanding in size while the population of the youth expands day and night.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, we Members of Parliament are very responsible citizens of this country. Indeed, we give guidance to and we are examples to the youth throughout the country. We are responsible; we know what we are doing and how to do it. Is it in order for the honourable member to suggest Members of Parliament produce anyhow and for that matter, birth control should begin in this House? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you listened to me carefully, at every Christmas function here, I give an account of the women who have delivered in the House. I always say I do not know how many children the men have fathered. (Laughter) 

On a serious note, however, honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I have been talking to you about this matter at different fora. We should have this debate.

Hon. Odonga, I do acknowledge that the funds may not be enough but to say nothing at all is being done for the young people is not true. I know that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development sends us an update on how many young people have received money. It may not be a lot but there is something which is being done. 

Honourable members, we have other work but – 

3.26
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The theme for this year’s youth day celebration is wonderful. Every year we graduate more than 40,000 youth from the university. At the end, those youth end up riding boda bodas because there are no jobs. I would like the minister to tell us the criteria she is taking in order to create more jobs.

Most of the people doing casual jobs like riding boda bodas or working at building sites are graduates from the university. I would like to find out what you are doing to create more jobs for the youth.

3.27
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I suppose the concerns are uniform across. When you see the theme, “Inclusive Education for Jobs Creation” but the activities for the day do not relate at all. 

So, honourable minister, we expected you to give us the relation between the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Education and Sports in ensuring that we have inclusive accessible education for our youth to cut down the huge rate of unemployment. 

We need to emphasise the issue of skill development for the youth so that we are not sending out graduates who are going to ride boda bodas. They should be able to create jobs or be employed because of their skills. Thank you. 

3.28
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If you are a serious planner, you would plan for human capital. That is what is done world over. You cannot be a first world country unless you have planned for your young skilled population.

The reason we are not moving very far is because we have wasted a very huge resource, the young people we have “manufactured” at a high rate. 

When it comes to the issue of national planning, every nation has got to plan and prepare for its population. However, when you are asked as a leader what the population strategy of Uganda is or how this is being realised, everybody puts their heads in the soil.

So, it is very unfortunate that the Youth Livelihood Fund, which is being given to youth, is being mismanaged. I am on the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government). You would cry if you see these resources go to waste. The technocrats we have just throw this money. The young people are suffering to pay back the money which is unplanned for. It is a disaster. 

I would like the minister to present to Parliament a state-of-the-art report on the performance of the Youth Livelihood – (Member timed out.)

3.30
MS SPELLANZA BAGUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her presentation. Even as we commemorate this day, I have these two issues to raise. The first one is about our curriculum. 

It is of big concern that our curriculum is strictly examination-oriented. Very many of us learned a lot of things in secondary schools. We did a lot of subjects which are not applicable in our work life today. This was a waste of time because the children’s talents were not considered from the day go. A lot of resources are wasted in things that are not helpful to children. Therefore, I recommend total curricula review for this country. It will help us a lot.

Secondly, I would like to talk about the girls. Out of the girls who enrol in P1, 35 per cent drop out of school by P7 and 25 per cent of those girls drop out due to unwanted pregnancy. 

In this Parliament, Government has been preparing the National Adolescent Health Policy and it has been dragging on for a very long time. 

I would like the Minister of Health to expedite this process so that we are able to pass the policy and implement an adolescent responsive health care system, that provide quality health information and services to all adolescents including those in the hard-to-reach areas and those in humanitarian and fragile setting. Thank you.

3.32
MR DAVID GUMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the women of Uganda for their high fertility rate– (Interjections) Honourable members, listen. I have come to make a serious observation. The production of more Ugandans is a total blessing. We only need to look at the planning function – a point which hon. Samuel Odonga Otto raised – so that we can replace them with these energetic young Ugandans. Rather than condemning it, you must praise God that we have fertile women and we are producing children; we only need to plan for them.

In economic terms, Britain which is the exact land size with Uganda has over 60 million Britons. Here we are the same land size but we are about 40 million; how can you condemn it? Rather than talking of rationalisation of planning, you are here condemning population growth rate - that there will be a population explosion; which explosion are you talking about?

Madam Speaker, I would like to invite leaders in this country including – look at the planning so that we absorb these Ugandans into useful sectors. A point has been made by hon. Baguma from Kyenjojo that we need to revise and turn around the curriculum of this country and –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have asked the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come with the issue regarding population and we shall debate it when the minister reports. However, I do not think that Members are condemning but they are talking about the quality of life of the citizens. If children are not eating, sleeping and have no clothes, how can you be proud that you have them? It is a quality of life and we shall debate it when hon. Bahati brings our report.

3.34
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister for the statement. In the short time you have given me, I would like to point out that I am one of the people who are convinced that this country is being misguided concerning the population issues.

We are not planning for these children and when they grow up, they want to become family owners, earn and work yet all these are not catered for. Therefore, we have a population which is unprepared for.

Speaking about education; just last week, I visited a school in Iganga. There is a project of the “Musana” schools; the curriculum of these schools is different from these other schools of ours that in addition to the normal curriculum, they do practical skills in electrical, plumbing, construction and carpentry which are examinable.

When somebody leaves senior two, that person is able to do plumbing and construction. They have put up huge buildings that all the electrical work has been done by senior one and two students of this school. This is what is lacking in our schools because we are only teaching our children things, which are not going to be very helpful in case they drop out at senior four.
 
Therefore, the review of curriculum is very important and it is important for the ministry to get interested for instance in what is taking place in these schools in Iganga such that it can be - (Member timed out.)

3.37
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to add on my colleagues’ voice and first of all explain more on the loan scheme issue. It would be helping our youth seriously but even the little which comes there is not distributed equally.

For instance, when they have applied to get Shs 11 million, in most cases they are usually given like Shs 8 million or below yet when they are signing they sign for Shs 11 million. Therefore, we have been talking about it for a long time yet I do not see the ministry coming up with any solution about it. And it is hampering the progress of that project.

Madam Speaker, much as we are talking about the youth, even UWEP we give to women is also facing the same challenge because when the women get this money, for instance - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very important for our women especially. When they receive this money and we ask them to return it within a year, it has not done a lot. It also needs to be revised. However, when they bring it back within one year, they do not pay any interest on it. They are getting challenges with it because within a year, the businesses they set up on the ground are not profitable or have very little profit. It would be returnable after three years without any interest. Maybe that is when the women would appreciate as it has been their prayer wherever we go. Thank you very much.

3.39
MS MARGRET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to thank the minister for helping us to understand what the Government is trying to do and particularly as we commemorate the Youth Day.

My advice is that we need to create child-labour free zones because we have areas in this country where children are vulnerable and they cannot stay in school. They go and do odd jobs where we have stone quarries, fishing, and sugarcane and rice schemes. 

Therefore, they do not stay in school because they want to get an extra coin. Because those areas are known, then the Government should come up with a policy to make sure that the children stay in school by creating a child-labour free zone in each of those areas. That is when we can attain quality education and know that there will be completion of school at the end of the day.

The other issue is that the Education White Paper which was a guiding principle was written about 25 years ago and is no longer relevant to us today. Today, we come up to say that “this has to be done in education” but what are we following?

There is need to write a new education white paper because in the last one, we had comprehensive education where children right from senior one were given skills either in tailoring, brick laying -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you could bring a formal motion identifying the existing gaps and the areas of change, we can debate it here and make a resolution that the Government works on another white paper. We need more details in order to do it properly. Thank you.

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will do that.

3.42
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for organising the International Youth Day and for coming up with this very nice theme of the day.

I would like to request the minister and the relevant regulatory bodies to follow up seriously on the many mushrooming institutions disguising as foundations. Those have set up skills training for young people and are training them for two months in tailoring, mechanics, hair dressing, electrical installation, name it. They graduate them in two to three months and let them to go into the community giving those items like sewing machine and some other equipment. When they go to the field, they cannot even perform. Even hair dressing, the clients end up doing it themselves. 

I request that they do the quality control and monitoring and making sure that we do not abuse our children under the disguise of imparting skills, which are not going to benefit them; only to destroy their lives. Thank you.

3.43
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. All the 16 sub-counties of Agago District will send leaders of young people to Jinja to celebrate. I would like to assure the minister about that.

However, they will be interested in hearing what Government is to provide in terms of enabling them access quality education and afterwards, access quality jobs or activities that will change their lives. At the moment, they are at the district attending a meeting on education.

Their objective for attending this occasion for the first time in the history of Agago District is to listen to the President’s speech on the plight of young people.

Therefore, I would like to urge Government to do a policy shift towards enabling young people access quality education. Majorly our young people may finish ordinary level education but are not able to access advanced level. You know that young people in Northern Uganda were affected by the armed conflict for so long, so their parents are unable to pay school fees at higher institutions of learning.  

Therefore, majority of these, especially from the Acholi sub-region, have not been able to access advanced level education. That is why most members of Parliament who come from the region have suffered from paying school fees. It is not easy for them to pay school fees for all young people yet it is very important for these young people to access this quality education.

We would like to see a policy shift towards providing that quality education as well as skills training for them to access jobs. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think it is only the members of Parliament from the north who are suffering. Actually, welcome to the club because all of us have that problem.
 
3.46
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also add my voice in thanking the minister for the statement on the commemoration of the World Youth Day.

Of the activities that were highlighted by the minister, I heard of football, HIV/AIDS testing, among others. If we are talking about skilling the young people, I would be interested in knowing whether there will be exhibition of innovations by young people to encourage them. If my youth are coming from Amuru District, what are they coming to learn from the youth of Jinja, Kamuli, among other places?

Secondly, about skilling; I was fortunate that I went to Iganga Secondary School for my Ordinary Level education. Here, we had practical subjects; for example, I took Home Economics. It is holistic. You learn how to cook. Right now, if I wanted to open up a bakery, I could do so because I know how to bake. I can make very good cakes or bread. These are the skills that I was taught without having to pay additional fees.

Today, people go to Jinja and pay a lot of money to study catering to get the skills. These were skills that one would get as part of the subject. Unfortunately, these are subjects that have been rendered useless. If you talk about woodwork or technical drawing, how many traditional schools now take on these subjects?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Akello’s contribution re-enforces the request by hon. Rwabushaija that we take a look and demand for a new education paper.

3.48
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for the statement. I am very happy about the theme, “Transforming Education”, which shows that education is very important and hence the need to make it accessible to all youth in Uganda.

I would like to implore the minister and the Ministry of Education and Sports to take keen interest in Universal Secondary Education (USE) schools. Students go to those schools to get education but end up not getting it. They go back home empty-headed and become bad people in the communities.

Regarding the skills we are talking about; let us have some skilling subjects in the USE schools to help our young Ugandans to become important people in future. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, Government is withdrawing from USE schools.

3.50
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will put my emphasis on the quality of education with specific reference to menstrual hygiene for the girl-children whose ability to continue with education has been stifled by lack of sanitary pads. I know that His Excellency the President pledged during his campaigns to offer these, to children.

I would like to implore the honourable minister who happens to be female too, that being the minister for this young population, kindly remind our head of state that these children are suffering especially in the rural areas.

Also, on the issue of quality education, the head teachers of these Universal Primary Education (UPE) schools are suffering. The resources you put in place to teach these young Ugandans are not enough for the head teachers to run the UPE schools.

One of the parameters of quality education should be the completion rate. Have you taken keen interest in finding out whether the children who enrol in these schools complete at the end of the seven years? What kind of graduates come out of these UPE schools before we talk about celebrating?

Yes, it is good to celebrate but we need to celebrate a positive achievement that is going to add value to the young population of Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: To answer for the Ministry of Education and Sports, a book was published about UPE products. Some of them are Chemical Engineers in certain countries. At least I got a copy. Their success story is not all bad.

3.52
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to join my colleagues to thank the minister for presenting this statement to the House.

However, I was a bit upset that whereas the minister talks of this celebration taking place so that we can evaluate the policies of how to improve the welfare of the youth, she has not come out to tell us whether they have changed policies to improve education, the general welfare, employment and everything including the girl-child education. 

Where we have come from in the last five or ten years, how have we improved the girl-child education? I was so envious to see the President of Kenya lifting the pen and putting it down to sign for free distribution of sanitary pads -

THE SPEAKER: And the laptops.

MS OGWAL: Yes, for sanitary pads and laptops. So, I am surprised that in this era, and we are also concerned about this, that the girl child is dropping out of school. I am shocked that the Ministry of Education and Sports cannot take care of that, yet, we have female ministers there.

Madam Speaker, I am devastated. Next year, when you come to address Parliament, come with the statement, as you have stated here, on the evaluation of the policies and programmes and how we are – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, before I invite the Leader of the Opposition, on the issue of the distribution of sanitary pads, you may recall that the President of this country pledged to supply to the children in the schools, sanitary pads. We need an answer. Is he going to supply them or not? It is important. 

Therefore, the Minister of the Presidency should come and explain to us what happened to that pledge because it was public. 

3.54
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (MS BETTY AOL): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, thank you for the statement and the information because transformation of our education is very important though it is easier said than done. 

We have some institutions that would help us to improve the lives of our youths but somehow, we have decided to use institutions like Kyankwanzi. We would use those institutions to help our youth. 

When you talk about transformation of education, you will notice that while Universal Primary Education (UPE) has taken very many years, we have not taken steps to try and improve UPE for our children. Also, Universal Secondary Education (USE) is now in force but we have not bothered to find out whether our education system is going to help our youths to become self-reliant, to make them strong and productive. 
We know the number of youths in this country. Instead of just making it a one-day event, you should have actually put that one day as the climax. For example, you could have set aside the whole of this week with different programmes probably in different regions, not only in Jinja. The function in Jinja should have been the climax. We would have had different activities. For example, we could have picked 100 youths from different regions to take part in these celebrations. This would have been better because if you save one soul, it is better than not saving at all. We – (Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: I just want to inform the Leader of Opposition that in the past – and you know that by virtue of my age, I have seen a lot of things probably earlier than some of you - on such celebrations; the youth days and women days, ministers were spread out to various districts or regions to go and preach the same gospel after deciding on a particular theme. Although the national venue has been set for there, all these ministers would have to go out there to give us the same message. 

What I am saying is: can we try to borrow from the past? You may not like the past but can we borrow the good things from the past? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, honourable Leader of the Opposition. 

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you very much for the information. I hope the minister has listened. 
However, I would also like to tell you that when you talk about transformation, let us also try to look at how institutions or schools used to perform in the extra-curricular activities. For example, take a look at the young Christian societies, scouting and those extracurricular activities that were used to build up people to become productive in the future. However, these days, they are no longer there. If they are there, they are negligible. 
Even when we talk about success stories of UPE and USE, we want to see a big number. Sometimes, the number is not commiserating with the population that has gone through that kind of institution. 

I wish you could carry out a very comprehensive research or study to help our youth better. Otherwise, these youth may be a time bomb for us. Today, we are crying here but they might become a time bomb in Uganda, yet, we could actually tap these resources and use them properly to benefit the country because they are strong and have the energy to do a lot of work and be innovative. They have the brains, as long as we accept to spend on them. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, most of it was advice to you for improvement; so; you do not really have to respond. 

However, it is important for this House to discuss exhaustively the plans for the youth of this country. Yes, the Youth Livelihood Fund is there but it is small. How many will it affect? It will affect very few. What about the others? What about those out of school? What about those who are hanging somewhere? 

Therefore, we want you to bring a paper here on the comprehensive plan for the youth employment in this country. You should do it quickly before we go into the budget cycle. If it could come in by early September, we would be happy.

Honourable members, the celebrations are on Monday. Unless there are serious committees doing work on that day, I think it would be good if we all go to support our children. They should know that their parents and relatives here support them. Hence, please, go to Jinja and support the International Youth Day Celebrations.

Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have Pupils of Stella Maris School from Kagadi District; they are very smart. They are represented by hon. Janepher Mbabazi and hon. Eric Musana. You are welcome.  (Applause)

Please, take note that the Speaker will provide transport for members of Parliament to go to Jinja. The Minister of Health had something to report on. Please, do that quickly.  

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the Member who raised the issue on the adolescent health policy that a draft is now available. Yes, we have dragged on but very soon it will be presented to Cabinet. 

The other issue I was supposed to give response to was regarding hon. Connie Galiwango’s statement on the health camp that has been organised by the cultural institution; the Inzu Ya Ba Masaba. 

Madam Speaker, I have called the Director of Mbale Regional Referral Hospital. I have also spoken to the District Health Officer of Mbale. The director of the regional referral hospital indicated that he was called on the day of the camp. He had no idea of this health camp and was just surprised. So, they could not just give out vaccines like that.

The District Health Officer also indicated that he was approached by one of the youth ministers in the Inzu Ya Ba Masaba about this health camp. 

Nevertheless, we need to appreciate that we send vaccines and test kits to districts. Therefore, you cannot mobilise the people in the entire region to go to Mbale in order to be given Hepatitis B Vaccines because the ones in Mbale are for people in Mbale; they are for that population. 

Therefore, one cannot just bring people from other districts to come and get this vaccine because it will distort. Madam Speaker, we also take stock – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the people who wanted these vaccines are Ugandans. They have actually made the work of Government easy by congregating in one place. If the Government was not lazy, you would be thanking them for gathering in one place. Is the minister in order to create an impression that there is no planning and you cannot move vaccines wherever they are, to go and vaccinate people who want them after they have congregated? 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, let us be realistic. You cannot just wake up and say, “Bring here.” I think it needs planning and informing the ministry that “we shall have 500,000 people approximately. We need your staff and refrigeration.” No, honourable members, let us plan better.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, hon. Ssemujju needs to appreciate this. If we have sent vaccines for 1,000 people in Wakiso, imagine we mobilised the entire Buganda to come to Wakiso without organising with us, it becomes difficult. The people who were behind this function had been told that that can only happen once they have organised with the other district health officers so that they pick the vaccines from the other districts and bring them to one point. Furthermore, it is not just a matter of vaccinating. There is need for follow up and that is why we designated all the health centres III, so that the vaccines are provided closer to the people to enable them get all the three doses as required. If they come and get them from Mbale, yet, they will want to go back to their districts or subcounties, to get the second and third dose when all the doses have been taken to Mbale; what will happen?

There was no planning. The District Health Officer’s office, the Mbale Regional Referral Hospital were not involved including the Minister of Health of the Inzu Ya Masaaba, who is a consultant in Mbale Regional Hospital. I am informed he was not part of the organising committee. The function was poorly organised.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister. I would like to inform the minister that Mbale is a business centre for the region. Many people come to the centre to buy goods and do business. I feel that some of those people who come to Mbale to do business and go find it easier to get that vaccine from Mbale Regional Referral Hospital. Remember Mbale is a referral hospital. If you are telling us to go down there, yet Mbale holds a lot of people – I think more drugs should be put in Mbale and allow people to access them.
I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to encourage the organisers of the programmes to plan ahead of time and coordinate with the relevant institutions so that their outreaches are successful. That is what I can say for now. Thank you.

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we conclude, I would like this to go on record. Before the Youth Day, we hold a session for youth leaders within the region. Yesterday, I was privileged to host the leaders from Busoga who were led by the Jinja Youth Chairperson. In their report, they greatly highlighted and held the Speaker of Parliament altogether with the President for helping them financially and materially, for the time they have been in office. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. We wish you a good celebration.

RESPONSE TO THE REPORT ON OVERSIGHT VISIT BY THE OFFICE OF THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN PARLIAMENT

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I have summarised the response to the Leader of the Opposition’s observations. During the recent oversight visit in some of the refugee settlements, the Leader of the Opposition made some observations that formed the report which she presented to this House on 18 July 2019. Key among the critical issues that she raised and observed included but not limited to the following:

a) 	Access rights to the refugee registration system
b) 	Plight of rejected asylum seekers
c) 	Inadequate funding, accountability and transparency
d) 	Definition of host community
e) 	Police deployment in the settlements
f) 	Concerns on environmental degradation 
g) 	Over-stretched health facilities
h) 	Over-stretched education structures
i) 	Titling of the settlement land.

Madam Speaker, in clarifying some of these issues, I beg to start as follows: 

1) 	Today, Uganda hosts 1.3 million refugees mainly from South Sudan, DRC, Burundi, Somalia, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Rwanda, among others.

Uganda has the most progressive refugee policy in the whole world. This makes our country occupy the highest moral position on the global stage because we are globally respected for being rich in compassion. 

Refugees are victims of a dysfunctional global system, world over. Today, Madam Speaker, as you correctly observed in your opening remarks, 70.8 million people have been forcefully displaced and therefore, the refugee question is a shared international responsibility. I am happy to report that at the global stage, Uganda is seen as providing leadership in this area because we host a large number of refugees in our country. 

Indeed, in the words of one person who was kind to speak to us very positively, he said that ”Our wealth is in our hearts”.

On access rights to the refugee registration system, the Government of Uganda working with United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) jointly launched a biometric verification of all the refugees in March 2018, in which 1.15 million refugees were verified. Following the completion of the verification exercise, the Office of the Prime Minister and UNHCR finalised a Memorandum of Understanding that put in place a framework for the use of the new registration system tools called the Unhcr Progress V4. 

The Office of the Prime Minister is currently using the said system, to register all asylum seekers and refugees in the country while UNHCR and other partners continue to use the generated data in their roles of providing interventions including delivery of protection services and humanitarian aid to the refugees.

Madam Speaker, concerning the question of the plight of rejected asylum seekers, when the Refugee Eligibility Committee (REC), which we have put in place, combined with the policy of Government, when this committee rejects an asylum seeker’s application, the applicant is notified of the decision and they are duly notified of their right to appeal to the Refugee Appeals Board (RAB). It is important to note that both the REC and the RAB are established under the Refugee Act.

When the RAB rejects the applicant's appeal, the person is duly notified and given 90 days within which to either: (i) leave the country (ii) legalise his/her stay under immigration laws or (iii) appeal to the High Court for judicial review if not satisfied with the decision of the RAB. 

All dismissal notifications are also shared with the REC Secretariat, Commissioner for Immigration (Inspection and Legal Services), Directorate of Criminal Investigation and Crime Intelligence (CID) and Uganda Police Force for further management. 

c) Inadequate funding, accountability and transparency (especially focusing on the resources from the Solidarity Summit) 

Madam Speaker, during the Solidarity Summit which was convened from 23-24 June 2017, donors pledged a total of $ 516,965,195 to support Uganda in the Refugee Response and Management.

The countries, which pledged towards this cause are listed and I invite the honourable members to look at that list.

It is important to note that of the above mentioned figure, only few countries have honoured their pledges and only $ 1,500,000 was received by the Government of Uganda, which money still remains unused. 

I would like to make this very clear. Many people out there and sometimes honourable members of this Parliament think that we received this money and we have probably misused it. Only $ 1,500,000 has been received from two countries - the Government of India and the People’s Republic of China.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you might be happy to know that I told them off. I told off the UNHCR man there.

MR ECWERU: We are very happy about that.

THE SPEAKER: I told him that they did kiwani here. (Laughter)

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, this money is on the account with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development awaiting a very properly written plan. We have three critical plans that we have put in place; the education plan for the refugee-hosting areas, the health plan and the environment plan. We are discussing how we can factor this resource into the completed plan, particularly in education and health.

The Office of the Prime Minister is working with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and I am happy that you have added your voice, Madam Speaker, to remind these countries to honour their pledges to this great cause.

d) 	Integration of refugee matters into National Development Plan

There are on-going engagements between the Office of the Prime Minister and the National Planning Authority (NPA) on the development of the revised District Planning Development Guidelines. Efforts are being put in place to include Refugee Protection and Management as a national programme component.

On this note, Government and the NPA are working together to strengthen the integration framework into the National Development Plan III

e) 	Definition of “host community” 

Technically speaking, the term “host community” is used to mean the governmental, social and economic structures within which refugees utilise and share with the nationals the limited resources. It is also used to include the places, which have geographical proximity to the areas where the refugees live.

f) 	Police deployment 

It is important to note that there are on-going engagements with the Uganda Police Force to increase the number of police personnel, both male and female in refugee settlements across the country. 

Currently, there are 495 police officers posted in all the 13 refugee settlements. Police management has also designated an Assistant Commissioner of Police to head a police refugee coordination/liaison office based in Kampala. 

It is also important to note that there are other non-uniformed security personnel evenly deployed in the refugee settlements to buttress the efforts of the police and other institutions to ensure security and peaceful coexistence in the settlements.

g) 	Concerns on environmental degradation 

Addressing the root causes of environmental degradation and increasing action to restore degraded areas is a high priority for Government, with an ambitious target of planting and growing at least 20 replacement trees per refugee every year to contribute to afforestation and reforestation. 

By mid-2019, over 2.3 million trees in refugee and host community areas have been planted with more planting planned in the second rainy season of 2019 along with a scale-up of tree nurseries to meet higher targets in the first planting season of 2020. 

Further, 40 per cent of refugee households had access to energy saving stoves by the end of 2018. To scale this up, over 10,000 energy-saving stoves were provided to the refugee and host community households by the end of June 2019.

The National Forestry Authority working with Office of the Prime Minister and UNHCR also initiated an operation-wide project to boost availability of indigenous and fruit trees, to restore three affected central forest reserves, including Bugoma in Kikuube, Achwa River in Lamwo and Era in Moyo and to establish bamboo nurseries and plantations in three refugee-hosting districts. 

Government through the Development Response to Displacement Impact Project (DRDIP) is also going to address environmental related issues, particularly in refugee-hosting districts.

I would like to add something that may not be captured here. Under the directive of the President and the Prime Minister, I was made to direct all our implementing partners in refugee-hosting areas to factor in environmental intervention in all their interventions. This is so that if you are doing health, there must be a component of environment in it; if you are doing education, there must be environment and; if you are doing livelihoods, there must be environment. I am happy to report that that is being adhered to very religiously in all the camps.

h) 	Over-stretched health facilities 

The Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Health alongside various other partners are working with the refugee-hosting districts to support and upgrade the existing health facilities to increase their capacity to deal with the large numbers.

Relevant documents are being submitted by the health facilities for the purposes of upgrading and accreditation. There are also temporary health facilities that are set up whenever there is a refugee influx. These serve to decongest the existing Government health facilities in those particular locations. 

Government through the Development Response to Displacement Impact Project (DRDIP) is putting up extra health wards and structures in existing health centres in all the refugee-hosting districts.

i) 	Overstretched education structures 

Government of Uganda in partnership with other stakeholders, like the UNHCR, continues to support the host districts and the schools in the delivery and monitoring of quality education.

Government through the Ministry of Education and Sports, partnering with other entities, have come together and enabled the facilitation of the "Education Cannot Wait" programme. This is an initiative to support increased access to quality education in the 12 refugee-hosting districts in Uganda. To date, "Education Cannot Wait" has contributed over $14 million to education in Uganda and has further committed $ 11 million for 2019/2020.
The Ministry of Education and Sports is working to code more schools to ensure that the national standards are upheld.

Government, through the Development Response to Displacement Impact Project is putting up extra classroom blocks in existing schools in refugee-hosting districts to cater for the increasing number of pupils and students. I am pleased to report to you that the team led by the Prime Minister has already begun commissioning many of these buildings.

Madam Speaker, on titling of the settlement land, I would like to report that all refugee settlements in the mid and south western Uganda (Kiryandongo, Kyangwali, Kyaka II, Rwamwanja, Oruchinga and Nakivale) have titles in the name of Uganda Land Commission, with Office of the Prime Minister as a user entity.

There are cases of encroachment on some refugee gazetted land, however. The Office of the Prime Minister is closely working with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development as well as the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to address these challenges.

Madam Speaker, the Office of the Prime Minister officially launched what we call the Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework (CRRF) on 24 March 2017, adapting the principles and objectives set out in annex 1 of the New York Declaration of Refugees and Migrants to the Ugandan context. The framework is a multi-stakeholder coordination model on refugee matters, focusing on humanitarian development needs of both the refugees and host communities.

The Government has set up a robust secretariat and has a policy-making steering group, with the Office of the Prime Minister providing leadership. Other stakeholders are donors, the UN, Non-Governmental Organisations, refugees’ representatives as well as the local governments that are hosting the refugees.

Conclusively, Madam Speaker, the most durable solution of refugees – and you rightly said it – is to return to the country of origin. I, therefore, thank our leaders in the Great Lakes Region, particularly led by H.E the President, for their very strong commitment to resolving conflict from refugee-generating countries in order to facilitate their return in dignity.

In the absence of peace in these countries, I invite Members of Parliament to support my ministry in making Uganda a second home for those people. I sincerely thank the Leader of the Opposition and all Members for the continued support and advice. I know that the struggle continues. 

Before I sit, Madam Speaker, allow me to make one observation. Do we have a lesson that we learn from this exodus of refugees – 1.3 million people running to Uganda? 

They run to Uganda because Uganda is peaceful. They run to Uganda because their countries have failed to protect them. I would like to make it clear to this House that there are things that I have personally observed in the last few days. I interact with refugees every day. In our country, there are actions and statements by leaders that are meant – if not checked – to make Uganda join the bandwagon of refugee-generating countries. 

I must make it clear that this must be stopped. No Ugandan should do anything that compromises the peace we have. No Ugandan should be allowed to do anything that can compromise the unity this country has. No Ugandan should be allowed to do anything that could cause Uganda to become a refugee-generating country. 

Having said that, we will stand ready and we will command all peace-loving Ugandans to stand ready to defend the peace and unity this country has so that we can never become a refugee-generating country. I thank you very much for your kind attention.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this arrangement of the Leader of the Opposition presenting a report is new and we have not actually developed the process thereafter. Therefore, I will ask the Committee on Presidential Affairs to look at the report and the minister’s response and identify the gaps.

4.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Office of the Prime Minister and the minister for the quick response to the issues raised. The last issue is for another time – we need freedom of Ugandans and all must be given that freedom, while observing the Constitution.

There were some issues, which after going through what you have given us, we feel they have been left out. Maybe the Committee on Presidential Affairs will take them up.
  
    1. Does the Commissioner for Refugees have full access and custody of refugees register as required under Regulation 45 of the Refugee Regulations 2010?
    2. Does the Government of Uganda have full access rights to the progress system?
    3. When will Government table a status report regarding deportation of persons who have been denied refugee status?
    4. When will the findings of the audit exercises into the refugee operation of both UNHCR and Government be made public?
    5. What is the criterion for selection of beneficiaries within the host communities for Development Response to Displacement impact Project (DRDIP) and Uganda Support to Municipal infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF)?
    6. When developing indicative figures for social services in host districts, do you incorporate refugee population in the budget allocation figures?
    7. Regarding the definition advanced for host communities, what are the parameters for geographical proximity?
    8. How many health facilities within the host districts have been assessed and considered for upgrading?
    9. How many schools within the host districts have been assessed and considered for coding?
    10. How many cases have been registered regarding encroachment of settlement areas?
    11. Have exemptions on creams used by albinos in treatment of their skin, as provided in the Excise Duty Act, had effect on the pricing of some creams? Thank You.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, they are new issues for interrogation. I stick to my proposal that the Committee on Presidential Affairs takes the report of the Leader of the Opposition, response of the minister and these new issues and interrogate them and bring us the report.  Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION OF THE ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE PETROLEUM AUTHORITY OF UGANDA FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Mr Speaker, I have come from Kisoro and so, I have no idea.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you have the report?

MR LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, I have come from Kisoro after a serious tour. Thank you very much. Allow me make this report or you could allow me to come next week, when I am well prepared. (Laugher)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Rukutana, could you please lay that report on the Table? The Member is a bit tired.

4.33
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Annual Report for the Petroleum Authority of Uganda for Financial Year 2017/2018. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources for perusal and report back. Thank you. 

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA AT THE 140TH IPU ASSEMBLY HELD IN DOHA, QATAR, FROM 2ND TO 11TH APRIL 2019

4.34
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to lay this report on Table. The full report has about 45 pages but I have an executive summary of less than six pages. I am, therefore, going to be very brief, Madam Speaker.

This is a Report of the Delegation of the Parliament of Uganda at the 140th of Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU) Assembly held in Doha, Qatar, from 2nd-11th April 2019.

Introduction

Over 106 parliamentarians, UN partners and experts from around the world met in Doha, Qatar for the 140th IPU Assembly, from 2nd to 11th April 2019.

Under the theme “Education for Peace”, the Assembly considered ways in which parliaments can boost gender equality particularly in the region, take measures to counter terrorism, promote human rights and invest in renewable energy.

The Shura Council State of Qatar hosted delegates from 160 countries including 80 speakers of parliament, 40 deputy speakers and over 800 members of parliament, of which, 30 per cent were women and 19 per cent were young members under the age of 45.

Qatar joined the IPU in 2006 and it was hosting its first IPU Assembly. The IPU also took one step closer to achieving universal membership with the participation in Doha of St Vincent and the Grenadines, which would join us as 179th Member Parliament of IPU. Several small islands, developing states that are not yet members of IPU also attended the Assembly as observers.

The composition of the delegation was as follows:

    1. Hon Mourine Osoru
    2. Hon. Esther Anyakun
    3. Hon. Abdullatif Sebaggala
    4. Hon. Francis Mwijukye
    5. Hon. Paul Akamba 
    6. Hon. Rose Kabagyenyi 

The following key topics were discussed at the 140th IPU Assembly:

Education 

Members of Parliament explored the relationship between education, peace and democracy in the general debate on Parliament as a platform to enhance education for peace, security and the rule of law.
	
Gender equality 

The IPU Forum of Women Parliamentarians met during the Assembly to consider ways to encourage more women to join politics. As reported recently by IPU in its Annual Women in Parliament Analysis, the share of women in the Parliaments of Middle East and North Africa regions stood at 18 per cent compared to the 4 per cent in 1995. There is, therefore, need to raise more awareness, information and get a common strategy for our countries. The forum urged women parliamentarian’s to legislate for the other women in their countries.

The forum also noted that there is a predominant gender based violence and abusive conduct against women. 

Further, it noted that 85 per cent of female Members of Parliament or staffs in parliaments had suffered some kind of sexual violence and harassment. So, it urged women parliamentarians to fight for other women and raise their voices for the next generation.

Counter terrorism

Global parliamentary coordination to counter terrorism and extremism conducive to violence was a prominent theme at the Assembly. Delegates considered what action parliaments could take to disrupt and mitigate the effects of terrorism activities.

Human rights

The IPU Standing Committee on Democracy and Human Rights considered the key role parliaments play in allocating resources and legislating to ensure a universal heavy coverage by 2030.

The committee also examined parliamentary responses to attacks on freedom of expression and the right to information particularly, in the changing media landscape, where privacy and individual freedoms are under threat.

The IPU Committee on Human Rights of Parliamentarians met to consider the cases of 183 persecuted members of Parliament from a dozen countries.

Energy and poverty 

At a panel discussion of the Assembly, parliamentarians evaluated policies to reduce poverty by mobilising more investment in renewable energies. 

It was noted that today, over one billion people still live without electricity. Nearly, three billion people cook or heat their homes with polluting fuels such as wood, resulting into air pollution that causes adverse health consequences.   

Meetings attended 
The Assembly commenced its general debate on 7th April 2019 under the theme “Parliaments as Platforms to Enhance Education for Peace, Security and Rule of Law.”

At its sitting on 10th April 2019, the Assembly adopted resolutions and their documentations as follows:

    1. The Doha Declaration on Parliament as platform to enhance education for peace, security and rule of law;
    2. The resolution on the appeal for urgent support to Malawi, Mozambique and Zimbabwe affected by cyclones proposed by the Netherlands; 
    3. The resolution on none admissibility of using machineries  and foreign fighters as a means of undermining peace, international security, the territorial integrity  of States and violating human rights;
    4. The resolution on the role of fair and free trade investment in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals especially, regarding economic quality, sustainable infrastructure, industrialisation  and innovation; 
    5. The report by the Standing Committee on Peace and  International Security; 
    6. The report by the Standing Committee on Sustainable Development Finance and Trade and;
    7. The report by the Standing Committee on United Nations. 

The Uganda delegation ensured country representation in the following meetings:

    1. The Governing Council;
    2. The Assembly;
    3. The executive committee;
    4. The four standing committees namely; the Standing Committee on Peace and International Security, the Standing Committee on Sustainable Development, Finance  and Trade, the Standing Committee on United Nations Affairs and the Standing Committee on Democracy and Human Rights.
    5. Two forum meetings - the Forum of Women Parliamentarians and the Forum of Young Parliamentarians of IPU;
    6. The Association of Secretary Generals of parliaments; 
    7. The Parliamentary Union of Organisation of the Islamic Conference  Member States (PUIC);
    8. The following geopolitical group notably at the meeting of the Africa Geo-political Group, hon. Paul Akamba, Member of the delegation was elected as a Member of the Bureau of Standing Committee on United Nations Affairs and approved by the Assembly on its sitting on 10th April 2019.

At the 140th IPU, hon. Mourine Osoru, President of the forum of the young Parliamentarians concluded her term of office and expressed gratitude to the IPU for the support rendered to her throughout the term.

The delegation also attended workshops, meetings and events that were organised on the side-lines of 140th IPU. It was announced that the 141st IPU Assembly and related meetings would take place in Belgrade Serbia from 10 to 17 October 2019.

The delegation actively participated in the meetings and side meetings of 140th IPU; contributed effectively and presented the position of Uganda on matters that arose in the course of the proceedings.

The delegation further noted the issues that will be addressed by the Parliament of Uganda; for effective delivery of its mandate to the people of Uganda.

Allow me to express our inner most gratitude to the Government of Qatar because we interacted with many Ugandans there; we have many Ugandans working at the airport, Government installations, hotels and nobody was complaining.

The labour laws for Qatar especially protecting the rights of women are very strict and we never met any female Ugandan complaining. We are very grateful that there were many Ugandans and we never had any complaint as it is in other countries.

Therefore, Qatar, thank you very much. We are looking forward to further engagements. They requested for a bilateral agreement so that they can be like other countries, like the Philippines so that there is an understanding between the two countries in as far as labour laws are concerned. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Sebaggala for that report-

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on Table the Report of the Delegation of the Parliament of Uganda at the 140th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union held in Doha Qatar from 2nd to 11th April, 2019.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. May be just for the Prime Minister’s action, we are supposed to open a mission in Qatar. They have given us a building, two cars, they have furnished it but there is no ambassador and these have been sitting there for over a year.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, because of your effort, we were hosted at our new embassy in Doha, which was operational and we were very grateful.

4.46
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much. On the motivation by Qatar to have an embassy, Government should also be motivated by the number of Ugandans working in these countries now. Just the other day, the Minister of Gender reported that when there was a ban on externalisation of labour, during the period of the ban, 40,000 Ugandans went to Oman alone.

The embassy we have serving all these countries apart from United Arab Emirates is in Riyadh but you have Ugandans who are crying calling the office of the Speaker. At least, start with a consulate. 

4.46
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, if I may say a word or two about this, first of all, I thank hon. Sebaggala for the report and I confirm what he says because I was in Doha some time ago and I was impressed because I found the hotel I was in, Sheraton, employing a number of Ugandans.

The person in charge of the training programme in the hotel was from Uganda. Therefore, it is true that there is some good work being done by Ugandans there.

Secondly, on the question of the Embassy, in principle, the Government of Uganda has accepted the hospitality of Qatar and it is closely working with the Government of Qatar to operationalise the embassy.

The third and last point is that a number of embassies are already in place, apart from Qatar, which we are talking about. The embassy at the UAE is very operational; Riyadh, the embassy is very operational even the embassy in Kuwait has been opened.

Government is gradually expanding its influence in terms of embassies in the middle East-(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that I am raising a point of order to my friend Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, the Prime Minister. 

The knowledge I have about this Parliament is that there are Rules of Procedure and the Constitution. When an ambassador is appointed, he goes through the Committee on Appointments in Parliament.

For the Prime Minister to come on the Floor of Parliament and state that they have opened up embassies in Kuwait and others, it disturbs. 

Is he in order to inform this House that they have opened embassies and appointed ambassadors where Parliament has not been involved and yet, we are the ones who are supposed to allocate money to those embassies?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, I think you are slipping a bit because we do not have a mission in Kuwait. We have not appropriated, vetted but we would like you to expedite the one of Qatar because the building, the cars and flag are there but they are just waiting for the person whom you should send here quickly so that we can vet him or her.

Honourable members, now we go for the Prime Minister’s Time for 45 minutes and the Members who took up the Floor last time will not be given opportunity. I will start with those who did not; I have the list here.

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

4.50
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I should not be raising this but if you look at our Rules of Procedure particularly, Rule 41 (1)-(5). The Prime Minister’s Question Time is supposed to begin at 4.00 p.m. for 45 minutes meaning that it would end at 4.45 p.m. and we are past that time.

Will we be proceeding in accordance with our rules if we allowed the Prime Minister’s Question time to commence past 4.45 p.m.?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you want the Prime Minister to answer the citizens of Uganda or you are looking at time? Anyway, if there are Members who would like to ask the Prime Minister, he is here.

4.50
MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, the education policy of a seed secondary school in a subcounty, a primary school in a parish and a vocational institute per constituency is not in my district, Sironko.

How are you helping the people with terrains like that of Sironko especially that our children move more than 10 kilometres to access education and most of them end up pregnant and in early marriages? Thank you. 

4.51
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for articulating the very reason Government is embarking on this programme. 

It is true that Government is mobilising resources to ensure that our children at different levels can study near their homes. Those who want to ambush some of them on the way will find it more difficult, as soon as this programme is implemented. 

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Nakate comes, I would like you to join me in welcoming the children of Mulungi-Omu Primary School, Nakasongola, represented by hon. Noah Mutebi and hon. Margaret Komuhangi. Can you stand up? They are here, looking very smart. You are welcome. (Applause)

4.52
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are aware that the National Backbone Infrastructure is now into another phase. Like recently, we were in Koboko and it has been reported that coverage is indeed enormous in a number of districts.

I would like you to confirm to this country what you actually mean by “coverage”. Is it where the optical fibres have passed or “coverage” means that wherever the fibres have passed in the districts, the Government institutions are all connected and are benefitting from the service? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that the National Backbone Infrastructure is now in the final stages covering West Nile and Karamoja. It has gone to other areas. It is also true that the focus has been on connecting the major national institutions in order to promote eGovernment.

We are aware that it is a phased programme. We are also aware that the districts have departments, some of which have not been connected. However, the intention of Government is to connect these departments as quickly as possible to make the running of Government much easier and to make services to the people much easier.

4.54
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get an answer from the Prime Minister. The Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees last month submitted a budget of Shs 40 billion to this House, as a contingency for buying food and quick-maturing seeds to be supplied to areas like Karamoja.

However, up to-date, nothing has been done. The food, which was supposed to go to Karamoja is being diverted to Katakwi, Amuria and other districts in this country. It is really unfortunate that the name Karamoja is being used to solicit funds and at the end of the day, we do not benefit.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware that the food is being diverted?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am not aware of food diversion. (Laughter) I will, nevertheless, take up the matter, follow it up and come back to the House to report about this serious allegation of food diversion.

4.55
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Kenya put a ban on charcoal burning. Uganda is exporting charcoal to Kenya. What plans have you put in place for this country to deter the people of Uganda from exporting charcoal, as you curb deforestation?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, charcoal burning is discouraged as much as possible; although I know we are still using charcoal. That is why we are extending power to as many areas of the country as possible, in order to give people power so that they do not have to depend on vegetation.

So, on the question of exporting charcoal to Kenya, to the best of my knowledge, this was banned and should be banned because it promotes deforestation and environmental degradation.

4.57
MR TONY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government sometime back requested members of Parliament to submit areas without or with poor mobile telecom network in their constituencies, which we submitted.

However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, up to now, most of these areas still do not have network. I would like to know what Government is going to do or what has been done. Since we were requested to submit, we submitted but when are we going to have these areas connected with mobile telecom network? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the whole country is supposed to be covered by the telecom companies, either collectively, in partnership or in some other form. If there are areas that are not covered up to now, Government will work with you and the Minister of Information and Communications Technology and National Guidance. The Prime Minister’s office should be informed as well, so that we can reinforce you to ensure that the whole country has network.

4.58
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am at pains to raise this issue again but it is being instigated by the casual way, at times, the Prime Minister responds to the questions raised to him.

I raised an issue to do with the inquest into the death of our colleague, hon. Nebanda. This is the fourth time the Prime Minister casually stands up and says, “We shall report back next time.” 

My question to him now is: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is the fourth time I am raising this matter. May the House know when the report will be out because hon. Justice Paul Mugamba was appointed to do the inquest by the Chief Justice Emeritus? May I know when the report is coming out? This was our colleague.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the victim does not necessarily have to be our colleague. It is a right of every Ugandan, whenever there is an inquest or investigation, to know. There has been a delay but I expect that the minister responsible will respond to this House within the next few weeks.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who is the minister responsible? 

DR RUGUNDA: The minister responsible, in this case, can be the Minister of Internal Affairs or the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Nevertheless, the Prime Minister will ask one of the ministers to make a report available to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think four years is a long time. The Government is directed to bring a response to that issue next Thursday. (Applause)

5.00
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Government has established municipalities across the country. There are some municipalities that can no longer benefit from the rural electrification programme because they are municipalities. An area like Bugiri Municipality up to now has areas that have no electricity yet it is a municipality. When you go to the Rural Electrification Agency, they tell you; “It is a municipality and must access from some other programme.”

I would like to find out from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister about Government’s programme to ensure accessibility and availability of power to these new municipalities that cannot benefit from the rural electrification programme.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the question of supplying power to the people is supposed to be seamless. People are not expected to know whether it is this or that. Government will ask the departments of Government concerned, that is Rural Electrification Agency and Umeme, to ensure to ensure that this gap that you are talking about is closed so that there is coverage of our municipal and rural areas in a similar manner. 

5.02
MR ROBERT KYAGULANYI (Independent, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister about the increasing kidnap, torture and even murder of the citizens of Uganda. 

Just a day before yesterday, a woman called Nalongo Kibalama came to me. She is a wife to one of my constituents called John Bosco Kibalama who was last seen on 03 July 2019. The case has been reported to the police but nobody knows whether he is alive or dead. That is one of the very many cases of people who disappear and are later found dead. Many who survived have narrated being tortured by the security forces.

Recently, two lawyers were abducted and kept in illegal detention by Internal Security Organisation (ISO) and one of them spoke of how he was forced to sign documents. That is not all. One journalist, Joseph Kabuleta, was abducted and bundled into a private car. Later on, he also narrated how he was tortured in detention.

Therefore, my question to the Prime Minister is whether their human rights record is any better than that of Idi Amin who they love to castigate. 

I would also like to ask why they keep targeting the supporters of People Power. Just yesterday, a 21 year old young man called Hussein Ssekamwa was killed by a police truck while I watched with my two eyes. He is being buried today. The registration number of the police truck is UP2525. He was one of the young men who saw me coming from Gulu Court. He was waving to me and the police truck deliberately knocked him.

So, my question is; why is ISO, Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence and Military Police taking over the constitutional duties of police while detaining citizens of this country beyond the mandatory time and murdering them in cold blood? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, to compare the human rights issue of the NRM Government with the human rights record of Idi Amin and his regime is close to being an abuse of the freedom of speech. The facts are known by everybody. 

Secondly, the points raised by hon. Kyagulanyi that some security people like police may have misbehaved; we take them seriously in the sense that everybody is supposed to behave in accordance with the laws of the land. If somebody strays, the law should take its course; whether he is a member of the security forces or the public. The critical point is that the law should take its course irrespective of who the person who has clashed with the law may be. 

5.06
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Ndugu, it is our desire that our farmers export high quality Uganda branded products. However, what has the Government done to provide market information to Ugandan farmers on available opportunities in the East African Community Region and overseas to enable them export high quality branded products? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is a very important question in promoting our exports. Uganda has been very active both in the region and internationally. We have just had a team, which returned from China on an exhibition where Uganda and China were co-hosts. Indeed, we have been participating in other exhibitions. The other day, I was in Abuja, Nigeria and I was happy to see some young people from Uganda exhibiting their designs.

Therefore, Government, through the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of East African Community Affairs is promoting, encouraging and supporting Ugandan producers to tell the world what they are producing. 

Let me also say that the use of internet is a very important tool for purposes of promoting our products so that the international market can easily come and cash in what Ugandans are producing. 

5.08
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is on Kahengye Water Project, which started in 2014 and it was expected to be completed in 2017. Can the Prime Minister explain to this august House and the people of Rukungiri the reasons behind the project not being complete? As a result of that delay, the people of Rukungiri have no access to water. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am happy that Government has started that important project, which is going to liberate the people of Rukungiri in as far as water is concerned. There may have been a delay and we will find out the reason behind it and expeditiously deal with it so that services to the people, especially with regards to water can be actualised.

5.09
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am again standing on the issue we have raised severally; that is the resettlement of the people of Sebbei sub-region. 

The issues between Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) and our community are getting worse every day. Last week, people were killed in Bukwo. Three days ago, there was another incidence in Kween though we did not lose anyone. However, the houses for the staff of UWA were burnt down.

The relationship between UWA and the people is getting worse because we have not resettled the people and yet we have always promised them. Five months ago, you told us that you have constituted a committee from among the ministers. We are waiting. We do not have a response to our people. 

Mr Prime Minister, what are your plans? What is this committee doing? What is the progress? What should we tell our people about the resettlement of those who were never resettled? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue of resettling the people in Sebei sub-region has been quite interesting because as you all well know, my sister, the amount of land required to resettle the people was demarcated. The Government cut it off the park. However, instead of the people who deserve the land getting it, other people hijacked that process.

Meanwhile, - (Interjections) – Yes, there is a Government but also there are criminals. The Government will ensure that the criminals are dealt with wherever they may be. Therefore, the other issue as you know my sister, Gen. Oluka has been handling the issue of resettlement of some of the people that have not yet been resettled and we know that there has been some progress made.

Thirdly, it is true that the relationship between the wanaichi and UWA, especially in Sebei and Bugisu areas, has been rather rough but Government is taking steps to ensure harmony by expeditiously concluding the on-going disputes.

5.12
MR DAVID LUKYAMUZI (Independent, Busujju County, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Government has opened up two town councils in my constituency. However, these town councils are not facilitated and are becoming a laughable matter in my constituency. Everyone is putting pressure on me about these town councils; that is Zigoti and Banda town councils.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, hon. Kyagulanyi has raised a pertinent issue here regarding kidnaps and killings of Ugandans. However Ndugu Prime Minister has not answered it very well. We need clarity on that. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, on the question of town councils and subcounties and others that have not been operationalised, there is a problem that Cabinet has addressed by setting up machinery to ensure that this problem of non operationalised town councils, subcounties and the like is ironed out. Let us wait for the Cabinet team that is working on this. This matter will be resolved either wholly or in a phased manner.

Secondly, on the question raised by hon. Kyagulanyi - and I am glad that you have brought it again - regarding kidnaps, killings, torture, murder and call it whatever you may want, is a serious problem.  However, you also know that police has made amazing discoveries and arrested a number of criminals; some of those who have been arrested have been on our televisions. CCTV cameras have already started showing visible results.

Therefore, in a nutshell, these criminals are there but their days are numbered. Secondly, we will leave no stone unturned in as far as investigation, follow up and capture of these criminals is concerned. The law will definitely catch up with them.

5.15
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, what has caused the delay towards normalisation of our relationship with the Government of Rwanda?

DR RUGUNDA: First of all, Rwanda and Uganda are brotherly and neighbouring countries. Secondly, our two leaders, President Kagame and President Museveni, are pursuing the matter and they will get a solution.

5.16
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): In 2006, a number of schools were given out in Kampala and among them was Mbuya Army Primary School, which was accommodating over 800 children of the soldiers. Also at Naguru, there was land where we had Government houses. 

May I know the owner of that land at Mbuya Army School?  For the last nine years, that school is not operating yet nothing has taken place. Who is the owner of that land? Who is the owner of the land at Naguru where houses were demolished and nothing is taking place up to now?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, my brother hon. Ssewungu must be referring to the Naguru land, which Government intends to develop; where part of the land will accommodate an ultra-modern Aga khan Hospital. I do not have details about the land he is talking about in Mbuya but the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development will be able to give us specific details.

THE SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, about that Naguru land, we would like to know who has built the incomplete structures, which are inside. If you fly over that area, you see new incomplete houses. We would like to know who is building there.

5.17
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, my question is about refugees’ policy. Currently, we have people who came to Uganda as refugees but they are settling permanently. A case in point is in Amuru District. We have refugees who have bought land and are very happily living in this country. My concern is: what is the plan of the Government in resettling those refugees back to their countries of origin? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA:  Madam Speaker, one becomes a refugee because he or she has run away from problems, danger and persecution in their country of origin. The objective of the whole system of refugees is; let them come when they are troubled, however, when their country settles down, they go back to their respective homes and countries.

You very well know that, for example, we have seen many Ugandans who were refugees during those difficult days, coming back home as soon as Uganda was peaceful. We have also seen South Sudanese in particular, going back home when South Sudan became peaceful.

Therefore, in a nutshell, the policy of Government is to receive and look after them but encourage them to voluntarily go back home when their countries are settled.

5.19
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, my issue regards tea suppliers in Kanungu that have never been paid. We were informed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADs) refused to pay them because they say that there were a lot of “air” supplies.

However, my people in Kanungu request that you cause a team to go and look into that matter and sort them so that those who supplied the tea seedlings and are clean without any problem be paid because most of them borrowed money from commercial banks when they were working on tea nurseries.

Therefore, there is a great danger. Rt hon. Prime Minister, it is a humble request and I need you to do it immediately because you know how our people are suffering. I know the money is there and you have it.
 		
DR RUGUNDA:  Madam Speaker, it is true tea seedlings were supplied. It is also true, as my colleague says, that some bad elements exaggerated what they supplied. Therefore, Government is carrying out a verification process and Kanungu has either been reached or going to be reached shortly so that the genuine suppliers are paid.

5.21
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, MANJIYA COUNTY, BUDUDA): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, around August 2018, the prices of maize sharply dropped. Government pledged to procure from the farmers at Shs. 500 per kilogram. Indeed, Shs 100 billion was injected to stabilise the prices of maize.

What happened to the Shs 100 billion and where is the maize?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true, as hon. Nambeshe says, there was increased maize production and collapse of the maize prices. Government came in to support the farmers.

However, to the best of my knowledge, it is true that it was not Government buying the maize. Government was supposed to support the marketing and selling of the maize while the prices improved. Therefore, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would be the most qualified to give us a short statement and an account of how the whole process was carried out.

Nevertheless, the intentions were excellent. The fact that Government came in and said, “We are coming”, that in itself had a positive impact on the prices.

5.23
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): Mr Prime Minister, Uganda’s financial systems are now being bombarded by a number of digital or crypto currencies, which are unregulated at the moment. When does the Government intend to bring up a law to regulate the currencies?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, hon. Kasozi raises a very serious point. It is true that crypto currencies - and there are many of them - have become an increasing reality in our environment. It is essential that some regulatory mechanisms must be put in place. 

I am happy to say that Cabinet is addressing this matter, after which, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will come and tell this august House the steps being taken by Government on future regulation.

5.24
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, we have a lot of rain in our areas today. There is likelihood of having a bumper harvest in the whole country, which is a blessing to us.

When will Government, as we have always discussed here, start building storage facilities in our constituencies? We have always brought up this matter but there is no indication that it will ever be done.

Secondly, I would like to know when Government will bring integrated, vocational and formal education policies in this country so that we can start training our pupils right from primary one hands on education, which will go a long way to fight the syndrome of unemployment and poverty in this country?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, on the question of an integrated education system, bringing the usual curriculum and vocational training is a matter that is under discussion but no formal position has been taken by Government.

On the question of storage facilities for the expected bumper harvest and subsequent harvests, it is also a good one that Government has been considering but the resources are not yet available. However, Government has deliberately encouraged the private sector to invest in this area. I am glad that a number of good storage facilities for food have been or are being opened in Kampala and beyond. 

Therefore, let me take this opportunity to encourage the private sector to invest in storage of food for both local consumption and to prepare Uganda to do more regional and international trade from our food crops.

5.27
MR FREDRICK ANGORA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Mr Prime Minister, many Government services recently are being accessed using the national identity cards. This includes telecommunication services.

When the elderly people go to register their telecommunication numbers, they are required to present national identity cards and at times fingerprints are taken. Many complaints have come up that the fingerprints that are taken by the telecommunication companies do not match what the identity card holders have. This has led to identity cards being punched by the telecommunication companies, rendering them useless because they suspect that they are not authentic –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we had a lengthy debate on this issue with the Ministry of Internal Affairs not too long ago. I disqualify that question.

5.28
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is about national identity cards –(Interjection)– no. It is on the national registration exercise, which took place five years ago. 

The computer did not capture thumbs and fingerprints of majority of the people in Kabale District. Up to now, those people –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a very lengthy debate on that issue hardly two weeks ago. Sorry, I disqualify that question.

5.29
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, last week, the Committee on Natural Resources visited Hoima District. We were going round Bugoma Forest, which I think is in Kikuube.

On our way back, we visited Global-Woods Uganda, a factory which is just between Hoima and Kyankwanzi. These people have invested in tree growing. One of the major challenges they are facing is the issue of export permits for their timber. We have learnt that Government suspended export of timber from Uganda. The investors have injected a lot of money in growing trees. Right now, they are not sure when the temporary suspension of export of trees will be lifted. May I know when Government intends to lift this ban?

Secondly –

THE SPEAKER: No, please.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member has raised a pertinent issue. On Monday, Cabinet addressed this matter of export of timber. We realised there was a problem. 

Cabinet set up a committee under the Minister of Water and Environment, hon. Sam Cheptoris, to study the matter and report to Cabinet. After that, we will come and report to this august House. However, we share the concern. 

5.31
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Women and youth groups in Buhweju were encouraged to pick money for livelihood projects and also invest in nursery beds. They were supposed to supply seedlings to Government through NAADS in March but they were asked to wait and supply in September. However, they are being told that in September, they may also not supply yet this money is attracting interest and they do not know what to do. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what should these young people, women groups as well as some other individuals do with the nursery beds? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I suppose the problem of nursery beds, in the case of Buhweju, is perhaps coffee and tea. In te case of tea, the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and his team have already advised the people of Uganda to go slow on the question of tea nursery beds. This is because of the challenges of payments that we have been talking about. I do advise that we, the leaders, communicate to the people accordingly. 

With regard to coffee seedlings, again, I think there is already reasonable supply and I have not heard of any problems on them. However, for tea, yes, there is advice by the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that they should go slow on creation of more nursery beds. 

5.33
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the road from Buhweju to Ibanda, Kitagwenda through Kabujogera down to Lake Buhindagi to Kyambura then Kabujogera, Kamwenge or Rwenjanza had been prioritised by the Government. 

In the Financial Year 2017/2018, there were numerous efforts by the Government to evaluate the road. At one time, people woke up to find the letter “X” marked on their houses. I sought the intervention of the Minister of State for Works and Transport, Gen. Katumba Wamala. We went down and spoke to the people comforting them that the “Xs” were to indicate that the Government had now come close to making the road. Therefore, we told them that those with houses highlighted with “Xs” were going to be compensated. 

Somehow, hon. Prime Minister, the road has erroneously fallen off the priority list of the Government. The houses with the “Xs” cannot be improved or used for loans and nothing can be done with them as they are.

My constituents would like to know when Government intends to reprioritise this road. This is in order for it to be tarmacked and either people are compensated for their property or if it is going to take a longer time, they can then use their property for something else to make it more beneficial. Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I know when Government has prioritised a road, the road is a priority. There may be delays in actual implementation. Therefore, I ask my brother, hon. Abbas Agaba, to tell the people that Government means business and the road will be done. It is a question of time and mobilisation of resources. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we started the Prime Minister’s Question Time at nine minutes to 5 o’clock and we have now clocked the 45 minutes. I have seen the other Members and I will give them an opportunity next week. I will give time to the Leader of the Opposition.  

5.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, at one time we were told that there were going to be mergers of some Government agencies and authorities such as the Uganda Revenue Authority, the Uganda National Roads Authority and others. We were also informed that some were to be disbanded. How far have you gone with that? Could we get information on those so that we are kept abreast? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: On the issue raised by the Leader of the Opposition, it is work in progress. Some additional studies are being carried out to ensure that the decisions taken by Cabinet and the country are indeed very correct. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to inform the chairpersons, deputy chairpersons and clerks who form the forum for chairpersons, that we shall have a retreat at Lake Victoria Hotel, Serena, Kigo from Wednesday, 14 August 2019 to Saturday, 17 August 2019. Hence, create time for that.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DEVISE LONG-TERM MEANS OF STOPPING THE RAMPANT MURDERS AND ROBBERIES SUFFERED BY BODA-BODA RIDERS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the mover of the motion was here but his seconders were not; so we have agreed to move the matter to next Tuesday. Please go to the next item.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. BETTY NAMBOOZE ON THE MEDIA REPORTS ON GOVERNMENT PLANS TO PHASE OUT SOLE OWNERSHIP OF MINI-BUSES IN FAVOUR OF GROUP OWNERSHIP

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Works and Transport here? He is not there.  

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. SULAIMAN HASHIM ON THE LACK OF HEALTH CENTRE IIIS IN ALL THE THREE DIVISIONS OF NEBBI MUNICIPALITY

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Do not harass the minister. Honourable minister, please proceed. We are happy that Members recognise your regular presence and participation in the debate. (Applause) 

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues for those kind words said off-mic. Hon. Sulaiman Hashim, a Member of Parliament for Nebbi Municipality, raised an issue regarding lack of health centres III in all the three divisions in Nebbi Municipality.

Madam Speaker, I would like to first of all state that Nebbi Municipality has Nebbi Hospital, which is actually in the central division. If we are to go by proximity to service, the people in Abindu and Thatha Division can actually access health care services from the hospital. 

Despite that, Madam Speaker, you recall that the Ministry of Health presented here a detailed statement on the state of health in the country, in which we indicated that we have 132 - both old and new - administrative units that do not have any health centre at all. Abindu and Thatha fall under the category of divisions, subcounties and town councils without any health facility. 

Madam Speaker, the current funding is for upgrading existing health centres II to health centres III in subcounties that do not have any health facility. We do not have funding for constructing new health centres IIIs in those subcounties that do not have.

In June 2018, the Ministry of Health submitted this proposal for funding construction of health centre IIIs in the 132 subcounties, of which Abindu and Thatha are captured there. As we speak, due to lack of funding, I cannot be definite but let us wait for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide us with the necessary funding and then we can be able to provide the service. 

Otherwise, the hospitals within the municipality can access the services in the meantime - even if we had limited resources, Madam Speaker, our focus would be on the mountains, islands and those distant subcounties from a health facility. We would be looking at that but we know that these will come when we have sufficient resources. 		
Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. Let us go to item 10.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I would like to be on record to thank the Minister of State for Health for being available in the House every time Members bring their queries. This spirit should be applauded by the House and put on record. (Applause)
	   
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Odonga Otto. I am sure the House has endorsed that view. Thank you, honourable minister. Keep it up.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

Clause 14

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as you recall, we had gone as far as - I think we are going to clause 14. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 stand part of the Bill. Does the committee chairperson have an amendment?
        
MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As a committee, we made our proposal to have a department to coordinate physical planning in the metropolitan areas with Kampala. We had a justification but it was stood over for harmonisation. I request the minister to report on that. If they agreed with our position, we can proceed. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We had an engagement with colleagues and we agreed as follows;
Insert a new clause after clause 14, which reads,

“There shall be a Metropolitan Physical Planning Committee, which shall consist of the following:

a) 	The minister responsible for Kampala Capital City and metropolitan affairs will be the chairperson.
b) 	The minister responsible for Lands, Housing And Urban Development.
c) 	The minister responsible for Local Government.”
     
THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not think we have it. Did you circulate it?

MS NAMUGWANYA: No, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think let us stand over that so you circulate it first; so that we understand the combinations you are putting together. Let us go to clause 15.

Clause 15

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. For clause 15, we are repealing section 22 of the principal Act. 

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is that section 22 of the principal Act be repealed. I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 16

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Insertion of new sections: 22A, 22B, 22C, 22D, 22E, 22F, 22G, 22H, 22I, 22J and 22K. We are deleting the entire clause. 

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising from the repeal of section 21, which is the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed.
	
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson, we made a new clause; amendment of section 27 of the principal Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it also under clause 16?

MS ABABIKU: Yes, before we went to clause 18.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it under clause 16?

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson, we did not amend clause 17 but we made a new insertion still within clause 16.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 16 has very many “legs”. Are you deleting all of them? There is 22A, 22B, 22C, 22D, 22E, 22F, 22G, 22H, 22I, 22J and 22K.

MS ABABIKU: Yes, it is because we have totally removed Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. What we are now amending is to separate the titles of the mayors. We have the Lord Mayor at the city level and mayors at the division level.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that the new proposal?

MS ABABIKU: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us start by dealing with clause 16. I put the question that clause 16 be deleted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You can now deal with the new proposal.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Section 27 of the principal Act is amended in paragraph (a) by substituting for paragraph (a), the following:
“(a) A mayor of the division urban council;”

Justification

Following the proposal to introduce the Office of the Speaker of the division urban council, the requirement for the mayor to be the chairperson of the division urban council becomes redundant. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We would like to introduce a new clause by amending in paragraph (a) substituting for paragraph (a) the following:
 “(a) A mayor of the division urban council;”
       
Justification

Following the proposal to introduce the Office of the Speaker of the division urban council, the requirement for the mayor to be the chairperson of the division urban council becomes redundant because now it will be the Speaker to chair and not the mayor.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are deleting the entire clause 18, which is section 28 of the principal Act. 

The justification is to enable the people of Kampala District exercise their constitutional right to elect a division mayor by universal adult suffrage as opposed to the proposal in the Bill to have division mayors elected from among members of the division urban council. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: When are you bringing in the new one?

MS ABABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have a new section that we inserted. We are inserting two new clauses immediately after clause 18 to read as follows: 

“Insertion of new sections 28A, 28B. The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after section 28, the following new sections:

28A. Division executive committee

(1) 	There shall be a division executive committee for a division urban council who shall perform the executive functions of the council. 
(2) 	The division executive committee shall consist of: 
(a) 	A mayor of the division urban council, who shall be the chairperson or a political head - we changed that to be “the head of the executive” instead of “chairperson” when we were handling the one at the city. 

Therefore, we are replacing the word “chairperson” with “the head of the executive” - then we have 
(b) 	on a deputy mayor of the division urban council, who shall be the vice chairperson and 
(c) 	three other members appointed by the mayor of the division urban council from among the division councillors with the approval of the division urban council and at least one shall be female.

(3) 	A mayor of the division urban council shall constitute the division executive committee during the second sitting of the council.

(4) Members of the division executive committee shall serve on a full time basis. 

28B. Functions of the Division Executive Committee
    (a) Perform the executive functions of the division urban council; 
    (b) Present the annual budget of the division urban council to the Council; and
    (c) Assist the mayor of the division urban council in the performance of his or her functions under this Act.

The justification is to provide for executive body of a division urban council, which shall also support the mayor of a division urban council.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Chairperson. Under clause 19, we are amending section 29 (1) (b) of the principal Act by repealing paragraph (b).

The justification is that the requirement for a mayor to preside over meetings of the council is redundant, having introduced the Office of the Speaker of the division urban council. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

MS ABABIKU: We are inserting new clauses, immediately after clause 19 to read as follows:  

"29A. Speaker and deputy speaker of the Division Urban Council
There shall be a speaker and deputy speaker of a division urban council elected from among the division councillors.

29B. Election of Speaker and deputy speaker of the division urban council

    (1) The speaker and deputy speaker of a division urban council shall be elected through a secret ballot; 
    (2) A person shall not be declared elected speaker or deputy speaker of the division urban council unless that person gets more than 50 per cent of the votes of all members of the council cast in his or her favor; 
    (3) Where a person does not obtain more than 50 per cent of the votes cast, the elections shall be repeated between the first two persons getting the highest votes until one of them gets more than 50 per cent of the votes;
    (4) Where, during the election of a speaker or deputy speaker of the division urban council only one person is nominated, that person shall be declared elected speaker or deputy speaker of the division urban council; 
    (5) A Chief Magistrate shall preside at an election of a speaker or deputy speaker of the division urban council; and
    (6) Except for the taking of oath of the members of the council, no business shall be transacted in the council before the election of the speaker and deputy speaker of the division urban council at any time that the office is vacant.

29C. Functions of the speaker and the deputy speaker of the division urban council. 

The speaker of the division urban council shall:

    (a) Preside at all meetings of a division urban council; and
    (b) Be charged with the overall authority for the preservation of order in the division urban council and ensuring the enforcement of the ru1es of procedure of the division urban council. 

29D. Removal of speaker or deputy speaker of the division urban council from office 

    (1) The speaker or deputy speaker of the division urban council may be removed from office by the division urban council by a resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members of the division urban council on any of the following grounds:
    (a) Abuse of office; 
    (b) Incompetence; 
    (c) Misconduct or misbehaviour;
    (d) Such physical or mental incapacity as would render the speaker or deputy speaker of the division urban council incapable of performing the duties of speaker or deputy speaker of the division urban council; or 
    (e) Failure to convene two consecutive meetings of the division urban council without reasonable cause. 

    (2) The office of speaker or deputy speaker of a division urban council shall fall vacant if the holder:
    (a) Resigns the office in writing addressed to the division town clerk 
    (b) Accepts appointment to a public office; or 
    (c) Dies.

The justification is to avoid conflict of roles between the mayor of a division urban council and the speaker of the division urban council.

MR MUDIMI: Madam Chairperson, I have heard the chairperson of the committee putting a threshold on the election of a division speaker. Why can’t we amend and go by simple majority other than saying, “…50 per cent of the…” 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. When introducing the office of the speaker for the authority council, we adopted this for the reason that it is even what is used under the Local Government Act. We said that we can maintain it for consistency and the House agreed. We thought that we would use the same for the speaker of the urban councils.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Supposing you have a situation where the political parties are represented in such a manner that they cannot get 50 per cent in that council, what happens?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, it is provided for that in the first round, if nobody gets 50 per cent, the best two go for a re-run and out of that, automatically one of them will get 50 per cent.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Chairperson, I think we are not taking whatever is in the Local Government Act into the KCCA (Amendment) Bill. For this matter, I suggest that we go by the simple majority.

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson, I concede. It is true that the previously, we had approved for the city council these same conditions that we are putting. I feel it is fair to go with the simple majority.

MR ABBAS AGABA: Madam Chairperson, even after the concession of the committee chairperson, sub-clause (2) as stated is still ambiguous. It reads, “A person shall not be declared elected speaker or deputy speaker of the division urban council unless that person gets more than 50 of the votes of all members of the council cast in his or her favour.”

The provision should refer to “members who have voted” not “all members of the council” because they may not all be there. It should be a percentage of the members voting not all members of the council.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can three members sit and vote?

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson, there will be quorum for the election but it should be a percentage of the members of the members who have voted.

Like we stated, the election of the speaker is done in the first meeting. We believe that all elected councillors would be present. That is what was on our minds and not three or four people.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the election of a speaker is serious business. Really, can you abdicate your responsibility and say I will not go today?

MR ABBAS AGABA: Madam Chairperson, some members may attend the council but abstain from voting – (Interjections) - this is not far-fetched. It is practical

THE CHAIRPERSON: If they abstain, they would have voted. Their vote is abstention.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Chairperson, when we were handling the clause that touches the speaker of authority at KCCA, I moved an amendment with a justification that we do not need to make the battle for the speakership a protracted process. However, I was defeated and the amendment was adopted. 

If we introduce simple majority at the division yet at the KCCA level we have the old set up of more than 50 per cent of the votes, we shall not be consistent. For the sake of consistency it would be safer to leave that clause the way it is now. If we are going to introduce the idea of a simple majority, then we shall have to recommit the clause we passed the other day.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have different types of voting in the same law?

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson, that is why I said that while you were away, the conditions here were what was approved. It is true she raised that issue and that is why I said that a concern was raised and I have conceded to this. You can guide us on how we can undo what we did the other time. To me, going with the simple majority is okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we stand over this and think further about the implications of having two different types of voting in the same law? You have already passed the other. You had your reasons and you supported the position and we are changing position in some areas.    

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, we need to be consistent. This time we tried to borrow elements that are in the Local Government Act where if they work, we adopt them. We also adopted the way of electing the speaker of the council. To be consistent, we should have the same procedure on how we elect the division speaker. Much as she had conceded, it is our humble view that it should stay the same way.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we should not confuse the people. These laws are not going to be used by us but other people.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, I have looked at section 11 of the Local Government Act where this provision was borrowed. History shows that we have been having elections of speakers and deputy speakers for as long as we have had local governments in this country. We have not had a challenge of this threshold. I am of the view that we maintain the proposal as suggested by the Shadow Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority. 

Already, when we were discussing the speakership for the authority, this is the provision that was adopted. For purposes of consistency, it would also be right to maintain it for the urban councils. Since we have not had a history of any challenges, I do not find any justification for deviating from the positions stipulated in the Local Governments Act.

Finally, when you look at the KCCA Act that we seek to amend, one of the provisions therein is to the effect that in construing the KCCA Act, where it is not clear on a certain matter, it will apply mutatis mutandis of the Local Governments Act.

Madam Speaker, this is one of the areas where I think there is consistency. We, therefore, do not need to recommit. I think we should just maintain the provision as is because we already passed it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we should not confuse the public. Let us give a position, which is common and known. Otherwise, they will go to court and say - let us help the people to do their things. Honourable members, I now put the question that the proposal made by the chairperson be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson, we propose to replace the entire clause with the following:
“Amendment of section 31 of the principal Act; 
Section 31 of the principal Act is amended in sub-section (2) by substituting for paragraph (d), the following:
(d) Preparing the annual budget for the division urban councils.”

The justification is that the division town clerk should remain the accounting officer of a division urban council and prepare the annual budget of the division urban council for presentation by the division executive committee to the council. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20, be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, amended as, agreed to.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Chairperson, I beg for your indulgence on the clause we have just voted on.

We discussed that when handling the higher level of KCCA and we amended it so that the town clerk offers technical assistance to the executive in coming up with the budget.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal?

MS NAMBOOZE: I beg that we reconsider that issue. I am actually reminding colleagues that for the sake of consistency and the fact that a technical person has no powers under the laws to make a budget because it is the work of politicians. However, under this law, the role of the town clerk would be to offer technical assistance to the executive in drawing the budget.

The position of the law in the principal Act was usurping the powers of the political leaders who are supposed to appropriate - the way we do it here in Parliament where the budget comes from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the President at the national level. While for KCCA, the budget comes from the Lord Mayor and his executive. At the division level, it is from the division mayor and the executive with technical assistance from the town clerk and the technical staff.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you say about it?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, Chairperson. I think she has a point. Otherwise, the provision, which we have in the current law, is for the town clerk to present the annual budget to the division urban council, which is irregular. 

In fact, we corrected this for the authority council, where the executive director will offer technical support in the preparation of the annual budget and then the executive will present it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying we should not touch clause 20?

MS NAMUGWANYA: We are amending paragraph (d) to replace the words “presenting the annual budget to the division urban council” with the words “the town clerk will offer technical guidance in the preparation of the annual budget for the division.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, can you state what the minister is saying so that we do not take out the powers of the elected leaders?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As relayed here, we agreed that the technical officers will only give technical support in terms of making a draft but the entire preparation will be taken over by the council and then, it is processed to the executive committee who will proceed with it to the council. I agree with the proposal made by hon. Nambooze because it was what we had adopted - that the technical team gives technical support.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That means (d) would read, “Provide technical support to the executive committee in formulation of the budget.”

MS ABABIKU: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause - 

MR NAMBESHE: Here, we are only talking about the budget yet there are other documents like the annual work plan –(Interjections)- Have they been mentioned? 

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson, we handled that under the functions of the executive committee, where we provided for the role of the technical team. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MS ABABIKU: We are deleting the entire section 32 of the principal Act.

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising from the deletion of clause 18.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us first deal with the deletion. Honourable members, I put question that the clause 21, be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

New clause 22

MS ABABIKU: We are replacing the entire clause as follows:

Amendment of section 34 of the principal Act

Section 34 of the principal Act is amended -
    a) In sub-section (1), by substituting for the word “Authority” with the word “Council”;
    b) by inserting immediately after subsection (1) the following –
(a) 	for the purposes of subsection 1, the town clerk shall, within seven days from the date of a decision of the division urban council, transmit the decision to the council.

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising from the change of nomenclature of the governing body from authority to council. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, do we have a new clause?

MS ABABIKU: We have a new clause, amendment of section 35 of the principal Act; insert a new clause immediately after clause 22 to read as follows;

Section 35 of the principle Act is amended -
(a) in the head note by substituting for the word “may” the word “shall”, 
(b) by substituting for the word “may” in the line (I) the word “shall.”

The justification is to make it mandatory for the central Government to devolve the functions and services specified in part (b) of the third schedule of the principle Act to the urban council for effective service delivery and representation. Thank you.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee is not making it mandatory for the Central Government; instead it is for the authority because it is the authority that is supposed to devolve these functions. In the justification, they have put it to the central Government. 

I am making a correction in the justification by the chairperson that they want to make it mandatory for the central government to devolve the functions and services but it is supposed to be the authority council to devolve and not the central government.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The function of the local government will go to the Capital City Authority to devolve to the smaller ones?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Yes, it is not the central government but the authority council to devolve the urban councils.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I think there has been a big quarrel between divisions and the centre for a while on this issue. I would like to know whether we are satisfied with the debate about it.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Chairperson, I propose that instead of saying, “the KCCA council shall devolve these functions to the division urban councils” I propose that we just state that these are their functions and do not even create a procedure where these people will have to first of all sit in the council and then pass a resolution even if it is mandatory.

Why don’t we just state these functions as functions of the division councils right away without going through the procedure of requiring the KCCA council to sit and then devolve?

Even when we make it mandatory, why is it necessary to involve them; why don’t we just legislate right away that these are the functions of the division councils?

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Chairperson, one of the reasons as to why division councils have been complaining was because of the other clause that the authority may devolve some of these functions to the lower divisions.

What we would like to cure is that these divisions have the mandate to carry out these functions and I believe that if we can stipulate specific functions for the divisions, it will be much easier for them. That way, they do not have to go to the headquarters for inoculations but they know that these are the functions that they are supposed to perform as division councils.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have to think very carefully about this one. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. What we realised as a major problem was the word “may” because the power was not devolved to the lower urban councils and they were finding a lot of problems in service delivery. You would be required to go up to the authority to even get toilet paper. We, therefore, suggested that it should be a must and we feel by using the word “shall”, these shall be automatically done by the authority immediately when this law comes into effect.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If you do not state the things to be devolved - suppose I said that in Rubaga, I am devolving only this and in Nakawa I am not devolving anything; what will happen?

MS ABABIKU: We made reference to a schedule and it is related to the budget.

MS NAMBOOZE: I wish to propose that this clause reads, “The division urban councils shall perform functions specified in part (b) of the third schedule of this Act.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is the old one, isn’t it?

MS NAMBOOZE: Without even going into devolving, let them be their functions from the start. That the division urban councils shall perform functions and services specified in part (b) of the third schedule of this Act.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, I support the proposal made by hon. Nambooze. In the report, reference is made to the third schedule. Unfortunately, that third schedule has two aspects, it has functions by the authority but it also has functions by the division councils. When you say function in the third schedule without specifying whether it is (a) or (b), there is still a lacuna.

By making specific reference to part (b) and making it mandatory, you are in effect outlining what these division councils are supposed to do. 

Part (b) has 29 functions for the divisions, specifically outlined so the idea of just making a general reference to the third schedule will still leave a very big a lacuna.

The proposal by hon. Nambooze solves that lacuna by making specific reference to the functions that are in the Act that we seek to amend.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, how do you want it to read before the minister comes?

MR BASALIRWA: It should read, “The division councils shall undertake functions outlined in the third schedule, part (b) of the Act.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, is that okay?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam chairperson, in the implementation of this Act, the only problem we found, as the chairperson said, was with the word “may” to make this mandatory because what informed this kind of drafting was that you may find that you do not need to develop all these at ago because some of these functions have big responsibilities, which you cannot start with.

For instance, if we look at (6) on maintenance of secondary drains; that is something very big that one cannot go at once and say this is the responsibility of the division urban council.

Therefore, I would like to request colleagues that we leave some kind of authority with the authority council to sit and discuss with the mayors – (Interjection) - can I please first finish this – and agree on what they can develop and at what time but not devolving it once and for all to make them mandatory functions?

Madam Chairperson, we need to do it bit by bit and slowly by slowly but not to push it all to the urban councils. 

MR AGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The explanation of the minister is persuasive but then it beats the spirit of the amendment. If you still feel that there are reservations on the devolution of these functions, then the word “may” should stay because they may or they may not.

If you say “shall” as being proposed by the committee that KCCA shall devolve these functions to the divisions, it makes it mandatory that they devolve them. Therefore, if there are reservations on which one should devolve and which one shouldn’t, then you better keep the section as it is without amending it such that there is leverage. That which can be devolved will be devolved and that which cannot be devolved will be left.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Chairperson, if we do not cure that clause, especially the “may” part - the reason divisions have been complaining is that they are left with nothing to do but only refer to the headquarters. The word “may” has not been used to the fullest to have some of those functions devolved. In fact, no function has ever been devolved.

Therefore, to cure that, we must have specific functions that the divisions can do, without leaving it to the discretion of the headquarters. Let us have specific functions. Those functions that are outlined are around 29. Let us remove either 10 or 11 of them and say, “These are the functions squarely for division councils.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: It means we must interrogate the schedule.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Chairperson, what the minister said is very important because saying “shall” is going to cause us more problems. If you look at the schedule, there are certain things which the division councils will not be in position to do, whether we say “shall.” We shall instead be embarrassing the division councils.

For example, if you look through sweeping roads, HIV/AIDS, education, you can select any randomly. The list is very long that the minister is being cautious. If someone goes to court and says that the law allowed you to do this and you did not do it, it will bring us another secondary problem.

Therefore, this needs a little more dialogue. I do not think we are in position to dispose it now because even to leave it to the central Government to choose which powers to give to the divisions defeats the actual purpose of devolving the local Governments. So, it looks like there are too many loose ends to tie.

THE CHAIRERSON: I do not know whether we are really in position to propose which ones should go directly or which ones should wait; I do not know.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, the law, as it is, already anticipated what these division urban councils would undertake. In fact, what we seek to amend only relates to the use of the words “shall” and “may.” 

Whatever is underlined under Part B of the Third Schedule as a function is something that the law anticipated would be undertaken by these division urban councils. Therefore, to say we pick out some and make them mandatory and leave out the others to be subject to discussion would actually be going against the spirit of the existing law.

Two, these functions we are talking about are subject to availability of resources. I know there will always be a budgeting process. Money will also be available to do these various aspects. If anybody went to court - as hon. Odonga-Otto is suggesting - and it is proved that there is no money to do X, Y and Z, there is no way court is going to make it mandatory for a division to carry out an activity where there is no money. I would like to reiterate the submission that we make these functions mandatory to the division councils, as it was envisaged in the law.

Finally, to make reference to the Local Governments (Rating) Act - when you read this law, you realise there are property rates that are collected by these local Governments under that law. The Local Governments (Rating) Act is very clear. The money that is collected as property rates is supposed to do some of the things indicated here and that is what the Act says.

Therefore, once it is even proved that the city has gotten property rates, then it only becomes incumbent for the city and divisions to avail money to undertake these services, as outlined in this law.

We need to cure the ambiguity where division urban councils are at the mercy of the authority because that has been a very big concern. Petitions have been made so if we amend this law and do not cure that, we will not have done justice to the division urban councils.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But what about the minister’s concern about the availability of funds? Are you going by the proposals of the chairperson?

MR BASALIRWA: No, the proposals of the Shadow Minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: She has no proposals.

MR BASALIRWA: No, she had made an amendment.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Chairperson, let me restate the amendment I had made.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I keep telling you to circulate the amendments so we study and look at them but sometimes, we make discordant laws.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Chairperson, what we were going to provide for was to create a situation where Kampala Capital City Authority Council will be under obligation to devolve these roles. My suggestion is why even go to that extent of devolving? Why don’t we put those functions there and then? If we say it is mandatory that they have to devolve them, what is the importance of having their councils sit and devolve, instead of us writing a law that is clear from the start?

Urban division councils have been redundant. It is very bad to create a Government and you do not give it functions but you leave it at the mercy of those seated at the centre. When you look at these functions, they are even done by sub-counties. Yes, they are 29 but most of them are about division council expenses, poverty eradication, administration of licences, health education, vector control, secondary drainages, curative services and immunisation. These are roles that can be performed even by sub-counties.

The division councils of Kampala are powerful bodies that they can do these simple roles.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you now agreeing with the chairperson because that is what she is saying? We say “shall” because that is what she is proposing.

MS NAMBOOZE: What I would like to adjust from her proposal is to give the centre the opportunity to devolve. My suggestion is, let us not involve the centre. Let us legislate that these are the functions of the division council right away.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to persuade my honourable colleagues to take the position of the chairperson as it is. Reason being that – I am sorry to take you into this – their concern is that for so long, since the inception of KCCA, these functions have never been devolved. This financial year, the functions were devolved.

The Authority council sat and devolved those functions. We have even separated the budgets for the various divisions. The reason it took so long was that we had to devolve those systems within the requirements of the Public Finance Management Act. 

After finalising this discussion with the offices of the Accountant-General and the Attorney-General, we came up with a structure where devolution can be possible and it has been done. 

I would like to urge colleagues that we pass it as it is because we do need that little authority at the Authority council because some of these responsibilities are big; you cannot wake up, without thinking through, and throw them to the urban councils. 

I have given an example of secondary drainages. We have primary drainages like Nakivubo, which are so big and then we have the secondary ones, which are equally big. We are not talking about the tertiary ones, which are very small. You cannot throw the big ones to the urban council.

When you look at Clause 22, hon. Nambooze; “Assist the metropolitan Police Force in law enforcement.” We, too, need this to be centralised. Look at the neighbourhood structure plan.

Therefore, we still need to have some control at the centre. Slowly by slowly, devolution can be done and if we feel we are ready to devolve everything, then we can devolve 100 per cent. Even in the discussions we have had with the Division mayors, devolution had started small and we said that was enough at the moment. We will then devolve as we grow and devolve the systems gradually.

I would like to persuade the honourable members that we leave this clause as the committee recommended. The position of the committee is to substitute for the word, “may” with the word, and “shall”. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Has she finished? Let us receive information from hon. Basalirwa.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, thank you. Again, in the spirit of borrowing from the Local Government Act, the information I would like to give is drawn from Section 30 of the Local Government Act, specifically sub-section (3). It reads: 

Urban council shall have autonomy over their planning and financial management when carrying out the functions and services specified under part 3 of the second schedule to this Act. 

Madam Chairperson, the information to the minister is that already, under the Local Government Act, there are services specified that urban councils are supposed to undertake where they have autonomy and control. 

The proposal by the committee will also lead to inconsistency because in one law, there is “shall” and in another one, there is “may”. That is the information I would like to give the minister.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for the information. Much as we can borrow a lot from the Local Government Act, we cannot transplant everything from it to this law because we are managing a city; we are not managing a local government. For example, one of the issues we are grappling with today is solid waste management. It is a very big problem in the city but where we are going is to procure a system which will be able to handle all the solid wastes in the city and have one destination where we shall recycle them.

Therefore, still to manage some of these things, we still need a centralised authority. I just would like to beg.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have received many petitions on this issue. I have had so many mayors come to my office to complain at different times. I think we should sleep over it and do it on Tuesday when we are satisfied that the mayors will be happy. This is a very sensitive area because there are so many petitions on this issue.

MR AGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My submission was actually in line with the guidance you gave. The minister seems to agree with the committee. I think she does not see that when she agrees with the committee’s proposal, then she is directly agreeing with hon. Nambooze. 

The problem is, the moment you replace the word, “may” with the word, “shall”, then you make it compulsory for the urban councils to devolve these functions to the division councils directly.

Now, hon. Nambooze is saying, “If that is what you are doing, then state them directly.”  I agree with you that we sleep over it such that we can see out of the 29 functions in Part B, which one can be devolved directly to the urban councils and which one can be kept at the centre, just like the minister is proposing. Let us segregate them to see which one can go down and which one stays. We can then come back and pick it up. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I invite the honourable members to think through this thing because the issue of KCCA has been a headache. That is why the Bill took so long. I believe if we want to do it, we should do it right so that both the centre and the divisions are happy. 

Let us defer it. We can complete it on Tuesday. Please, honourable members, study it and network to see how we can harmonise this. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and passed clauses 15, 16 and 20, inserted clauses 27, 25 (a) and (b), 19, 29 (a), (b), (c) and (d) and deleted clauses 18 and 21. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: We stood over clause 16 I think –

MS NAMUGWANYA: We stood over clauses 14 and 22. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not think so.

MS NAMUGWANYA: We passed clause 14 and stood over clause 22. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: No. You had made amendments, which you need to circulate. We did not pass clause 14. Can I encourage Members that, on the rest of the clauses, if you have amendments, please circulate them so that we can study and understand them for us to move with ease on Tuesday? 

MS NAMUGWANYA: We stood over clauses 14 and 22. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have done quite a lot of work today. House will be adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.  Do not forget to join the youth.

Honourable members, let me wish you a very good Eid Adhuha. I wish I had some animals I would - (Laughter)- is it on Sunday?  Parliamentary Imam, please tell us.

6.51
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Eid Adhuha will be on Sunday, Insha-Allah. We would like to invite everybody because it is a day for slaughtering animals and I believe that everybody here will slaughter an animal and we wish Madam Speaker and the rest of the colleagues a happy Eid Adhuha and happy celebrations.
  
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.52 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 August 2019, at 2.00 p.m.)






