Wednesday, 12 August 2015

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and let me thank you again for yesterday and the day before, when we hosted President Uhuru Kenyatta. I think the spirit of the House is strong and that is how we should move until we take a break to go and interact with our constituents - somewhere there is “we”? We will handle those administratively. – (Laughter)- I think that will be it for now. We have looked at the Order Paper and there are matters that are urgent that need to be discussed. Let us move on with business.

2.13
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, this is a matter of national concern. It is in regard to the on-going strike in all the public universities of Uganda, including Makerere University.

I would like you to remember that on 06 May 2015, I stood here on the Floor of the House and presented a petition on behalf of all these workers - the non-teaching staff - in all the public universities, complaining about the discrimination that was exercised over them, more so in regard to leaving out the non-teaching staff without any increment and only increased the salary of the academic staff, yet both categories are quite important.

When I went for certification of my academic documents in Makerere on 29 July 2015, these workers promised me that on 3rd August, they were going on strike. They had told me to pick the copies of my certified academic papers on 3rd August. When I went to Makerere to pick the papers, I found that all the offices were closed and no lecture room was open. The whole place was quiet and it automatically occurred to me that these people had gone on strike.

I have got continuous calls asking what the government has so far done since that time. They said that they will not open the offices for the next semester until Government has attended to their problem. May I know how Government has handled this? 

Yesterday, I tried with Makerere University but I was surprised to find that the Vice-Chancellor’s office was equally closed. This is therefore a concern and I would like Government to tell us how they have so far handled what the workers are complaining about. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for raising that issue. Mr Speaker, it is true that the non-teaching staff of universities are on strike. We have had engagement with the leadership of the non-teaching staff association. We have so far had two meetings and today at around 5.00 p.m., we will have the final one where we think we are going to have a breakthrough so that the universities can open around 17th or 18 August 2015. The negotiations and dialogue are going on with a view of ending - (Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Clarification –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he hasn’t said it.

MR SSEWUNGU: He has said that negotiations are going on. I would like to thank the minister because he is behaving in a modern way by allowing me to seek clarification. Much as the workers’ Member of Parliament has stated the same problem of workers striking, have you taken interest in knowing that there are also teachers who have taken three months without getting salaries and they are also going to strike, in the same spirit? These teachers are from Masaka District and this is very dangerous for the teachers. Thank you, Mr Minister.

MR BAHATI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, as I said, today at around 5.00 p.m., we will have a meeting with the leadership of the non-teaching staff association and we hope that we will resolve this. We also hope that universities will go back to class in the course of next week. 

Regarding the non-payment of teachers, as we communicated here, we agreed and communicated to all accounting officers that every person who works for Government should be paid by the 28th day of every month. If that has not happened, I am glad that you have given us information. I will follow up and give you feedback tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. in regard to what is happening in Masaka.

We are not going to tolerate accounting officers who are not paying people who have worked for Government when actually the funds are available. (Applause)

2.18
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance and this is not the first time I bring this matter before this august House.

I have made the Minister of Works and Transport aware of the same. The road corner from Kilak to Adilang has been contracted to a one P&R Contractors - I do not know whether it is a Chinese or Indian contractor - to do gravelling and really do a serious job and put first class murram on that road. However, this contract was awarded over two years ago but work on that road is not progressing. As I speak, for the last seven months, the contractor has disappeared from the road and it is so bad. Mr Speaker, I would like this contractor to be investigated by the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

I also would like the minister, if it were possible, to update the people of Agago District on the progress of following up this matter. As I speak, that is so far the only major road we have in the district. Government has already given the contract to somebody to work on it; you wonder why for the last two years, they have not worked on the road. So far the part of the road that has been worked on is less than 20 kilometres. I would therefore like Government, especially the Ministry of Works and Transport, to take keen interest in investigating this contractor because I suspect some shoddy game behind the contract.

One wonders about the large sums of money awarded to a contractor of that kind. They removed all the equipment from the road and there is nothing taking place in as far as making sure the work is done. I therefore would like to get an answer from the minister. Thank you very much for this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, any response on this matter?

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Government Chief Whip is settling in but I know something about the roads. I would like to thank my honourable colleague, for raising this issue. As you know, there is an on-going probe and the information we are getting from the road sector is very disheartening.

Some of the contractors finished some parts of the roads and have certificates but they were not paid. I can give you an example: Last year, UNRA would return some money without paying people who have certificates but this year, we have good news. The new Executive Director was given over Shs 200 billion and she was able to clear contractors in one week. I suspect that that lot is in one of those categories where some people wanted kickbacks so that the contractor can go on. However, we will contact the Minister of Works and Transport to come here in the course of this week to give specific information about that. 

I just would like colleagues to know that UNRA has been given good leadership and I think in the next two or three years, the country will never be the same again. I thank you. 

2.22
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the influx of South Sudanese people, mostly cattle keepers, into Uganda. As I speak, they are settling at Atiak Sub County, Okidi Parish. Okidi Parish is the parish bordering South Sudan.

Mr Speaker, these people crossed to Uganda six months ago. They came with their herds of cattle. Right now, they move with guns and their cattle are destroying people’s property, crops and people within that area are so much scared. I am praying to Government to take this very seriously. 

The unfortunate part of it is that they do not cross from the border; they find their own way with their cattle. We are therefore praying that Government intervenes and lets these people go back to South Sudan because our people are not very happy with their presence in their area. I beg to move.

2.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MS Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Every district has a district security committee that is headed by the Resident District Commissioner. The honourable member has informed us that people started coming into Uganda six months ago and yet he is requesting Government to take the matter very seriously. 

Security is not the concern of an individual; it is a concern of many people. I would like to request that we get more information because this is both a social and security matter. Having worked in that area as a minister in charge of defence and security, I promise that when we get the information, we shall immediately swing into action. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This matter is fairly serious and I think you need to notify the minister responsible to come and guide us on how to proceed with it because the situation is very disturbing.

2.25
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance particularly concerning the road construction from Oluiyo to Gulu Municipality. I wonder whether UNRA is closely monitoring the road construction and the kind of technology these contractors are using.

Mr Speaker, on the valleys where we think culverts and bridges should be put, the technology these people are using is where they excavate, put hard core down and then they compact. On one of the sections where they did it, they excavated only the sides and the middle of the road was not excavated and compacted. If you have not followed and monitored, you may think they did the whole section of the road. In one valley where they did it, recently it rained and the road was flooded.

I am therefore requesting the Ministry of Works and Transport or UNRA to make sure that they use technology that is compatible with our weather and the roads. 

Again on the road from Custom Corner to Gulu Municipality, aware that Gulu is soon becoming a city and we need the road although we do not have more money to widen it - from Gulu Town to Custom Corner, even two vehicles moving in the opposite direction can harldy move. They have not even created stages where you can offload or load people. The roads are hardly seven meters aside. I really do not know what technology they are using. 

We have to plan ahead. We do not have to wait until Gulu is a city to begin redesigning yet we wasted our money. I beg that the ministry takes it seriously to widen the roads. 

There is a junction that finally leads to Gulu town. Instead of creating a roundabout, they have created a T-junction and I have taken a picture. You should see how narrow the road is – for instance if a vehicle stops to drop passengers, you have to wait behind because you cannot overtake and even passengers cannot walk alongside the vehicles that are moving. 

Mr Speaker, that is how serious it is. I request that UNRA do not make us remain behind and starting planning for Gulu city when it is already late. Thank you.

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I think this House deserves some information and update on the work that UNRA is doing especially with the new leadership at that agency.  Therefore, we will get in touch with the Minister of Works and Transport to come to this House to update the House on a number of contractors. 

Having said that, I was not aware that Gulu is becoming a city. I thought Kabale was becoming faster than Gulu but I am glad to hear from my honourable colleague that Gulu is becoming a city. Thank you.

2.29
MR EDDIE KWEZIRA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, upon enactment of the Uganda Financial Intelligence Authority, about 25 people were offered appointment but it is surprising that they have summarily dismissed all of them even when some of them had left their jobs and had been offered appointment. We do not know if the Minister of Finance could throw light on why they should violate people’s rights when you had even appointed them.

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I know there are budget constraints at the Uganda Financial Intelligence Authority and this has affected the staffing levels of the Authority but to be fair to the House, I will come back tomorrow with specific information regarding that. 

MR KWEZIRA: Mr Speaker, they have sacked everybody except the Chief Executive Officer because of the budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is coming back tomorrow; so, let us wait for tomorrow, honourable member for Bufumbira East.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have Paulina Nursery and Primary School in Agago District, represented by hon. John Amos Okot and hon. Akello Judith Franca. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have St Catherine Day and Boarding Primary School represented by hon. Ruhindi Frederick and hon. Nabilah Sempala, Woman Representative. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome.

 MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE AFRICAN UNION RECOGNITION OF THE COUNTRY’S PROGRESSIVE POLICIES ON GENDER EQUALITY AND THE EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN

2.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I am pleased to inform you that during the occasion of the 25th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the African Union held on 14-15 June 2015 in Johannesburg South Africa, Uganda was one of the AU member states that were given awards for the country’s progressive policy on promotion of gender equality and empowering women. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, the African Union Commission introduced the African gender scorecard awards to recognise the African Union member states with good progress in empowering women.

The inaugural Continental Gender Scorecard was introduced on the 25 Ordinary Summit of Heads of State and Government of African Union which was held on the women’s empowerment for the realisation of Agenda 2063.

The African Gender Scorecard is a tool to monitor progress on the achievements of Africa and Global instruments on gender equality such as the African Union Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality, the Maputo Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa, the Beijing Platform for Action on Women among others. 

The tool has indicators to measure progress in participation and empowerment of women and girls as the continent implements Agenda 2063.

The aim of the scorecard is
i) To set a baseline for women empowerment and gender equality in implementation of Agenda 2063. 

ii) To encourage good practice across different sectors and to aspire countries to do better to reach the targets in as many indicators as possible. 

Mr Speaker, the selected indicators of the score card are: business women-owned firms and women in management, employment labour force participation and employment in non-agricultural sectors, women in politics and decision-making, national Parliament and Cabinet, education, youth literacy, secondary and tertiary enrolment, health, maternal mortality, child health, life expectancy, HIV, access to land, ownership and access; financial inclusion - women holding bank accounts and able to borrow from financial institutions; water and sanitation facilities, access of households in rural and urban areas.

Mr Speaker, for the 2015 Gender Scorecard awards, countries were given awards for progress on a selected number of the indicators. Uganda was recognised for having performed well in the political arena, with 34 per cent of women representation in Parliament, which is above the 30 per cent target set in the Beijing Platform for Action on Women.

Uganda is also close to meeting the target of reducing maternal mortality by one third. The purpose of this statement is to inform the august House about the importance of this achievement.

In conclusion, the Government of Uganda reiterates its commitment to the promotion of gender equality and empowerment of women. The priority areas for carrying forward the agenda include economic empowerment for women, education and literacy for women and the girl child, ending gender-based violence, sexual and reproductive health with special focus on maternal health, women’s voice, leadership and participation in public and private institutions; social protection with focus on persons with disability and older women, widows and orphans and other vulnerable children, ending teenage pregnancy and child marriages, gender and equity budgeting that is critical to ensure that funds are ring-fenced in the national budget for funding gender equality and women empowerment issues.

Mr Speaker, at a later stage, I will be laying this award that was given in recognition of Uganda’s progress policies on gender equality and empowerment of women. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member, for bringing that up. We are only not very happy that you did not come with the certificate; we should have received it today but since it is not there, we will wait for when you are ready to bring it to the House. Honourable members, this attracts a small debate and if there is no debate, next item.

2.36
MS OLIVIA	KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for reading that statement. My concern is that as a ministry, at least you should organise regional meetings so that you brief people about the progress of such conferences and our achievements. Whenever we go to the field as members of UWOPA, you find that it us who sometimes sensitise people about the progress and the protocols. 

I think it is incumbent on the ministries to be organising because I feel that you are funded to organise and sensitise people and the requirements of how we will be gauged as Uganda regarding the progress in the ministry. I thank you very much.

2.37
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for that statement and for the award. However, we still have a very big gap in gender equality unless we take up girl child education more seriously. We have a lot of drop outs. Our gender sectors in the districts are not working so hard. Not that they do not want to work but I think what we budget for gender is not enough to allow our gender officers to move out into the communities, to encourage our people to take up education of the girl child seriously.

At the beginning of may be primary one or nursery school, we get a lot of our little girls in schools but by the time they reach P.6, P.7, you find that almost a half of them dropped out of school. Therefore, unless we accompany this with a budget, we shall talk because we are very many in Parliament and visible but on the ground, the majority of women are not going to be empowered. It is education that empowers our women. We must budget a little better for gender, labour and social services. Otherwise, it is a disaster even at sub county, district or municipal level.

I would like to give an experience of commissioning on the status of women. When some of us visited New York, it is true that the report we give to the bigger committee is very good.
However, you find that very many countries are involved in side meetings. Twice I only saw the Forum for Women in Democracy. I wish we could take up this more seriously so that we are very visible. 

What we are doing is not enough but we are very grateful for the award. We appreciate the level we have reached but we must work a little harder to empower our local women; sometimes they are very critical on us. They say, yes you are empowered, you are there; but how about us? We need to empower them economically, socially and politically. I thank you.

2.40
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to thank the minister for the statement because as far as policies that propel and espouse the rights of women in this country, there is no doubt that those policies are there. It is because of those policies that we see that we have a sizable number of members of Parliament, especially the women representatives of the various districts. This is why we see that in the universities, we have women being given additional points especially in government-aided institutions. 

However, I think we need to go an extra mile because when you look at for example most of the laws that protect the rights of children, for instance the Bill on Children by hon. Bernard Atiku, which was recently not taken seriously. Hon. Bernard Atiku had even secured a Certificate of Financial Implications but the Bill will not be considered in this session.

I also see that if we cannot have the rights of children including girls protected, then it means we will not have a clear direction for women in future because the girl children are the ones who will in future constitute the women of this country. Therefore, I would like to ask the minister that it would be pertinent for him and Government to resurrect that Bill so that we can debate it and ensure that the rights of children, especially the girl child, are protected.

Finally Mr Speaker, when you go into the tradition and culture of this country, there are still cultures that undermine the rights of women especially those cultures that encourage children especially girls to marry at an early age and looking at women as a source of wealth especially in the rural communities where girls are traded for bride price. I think the minister needs to critically look into that because once we have children marrying at an early age, it means they will produce many children whom they will not manage and be able to educate – (Interruption)

MR PETER LOKII: Thank you, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable colleague that court recently made a ruling on bride price and therefore cannot be a basis for him to argue that early marriages will be driven by bride price due to the court ruling.

MR NZOGHU: Court has not compelled anybody to stop charging bride price. It has only given its opinion and therefore, honourable member, if I had known I would not have given you the opportunity to speak. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, what I am specifically talking about is that not even church, Government or any institution can make a binding ruling to families in our country because families have pertinent issues that they consider of value and therefore, you cannot make a ruling in such a direction. 

My prayer to Government and especially the minister is that we must ensure that there are sufficient structures within our communities especially at the village level that track the number of girl children of school-going age that must therefore be monitored closely to ensure that they are in school and that they complete school. 

2.46
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to congratulate Government and the people of Uganda for this award. It shows how Uganda has moved on the path of gender equality and empowerment of women. 

The empowerment of women has not just started now; it has been the agenda right from the 1960s, 1970s, 1980s, 1990s until when it now appears that the NRM has indeed moved a step or notch further to strengthen and empower women. Therefore, the challenge we have on our hands is not that we have originated the empowerment of women and certainly the empowerment of women is not here in Uganda alone but it is a global chapter and I think when we fit in well, we should really do our best.

However, the fact that the statement was being read by a male minister speaks volumes. Where are the women for whom we are celebrating their empowerment? I do not know whether we have transgender yet in this country but certainly hon. Madada is a true man and I hope he remains as such. (Laughter) It really goes a long way to show that the people who are the object of this motion ought to be visible and more visible for that matter.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I do not know though I would like to challenge Government; can Government for instance inform this House of how many how girl children are enrolled in the Universal Primary Education and how many are in the Universal Secondary Education? I know they are many but I need the total sums so that we can trace from the Universal Primary Education to the Universal Secondary Education the level of school dropouts

Often times, if a male and female child are both in a UPE school, it is usually the male child who is likely to stay in school and the female drops out. I think the challenge now should be on Government to monitor the progress of children right from primary level to secondary level and even to tertiary level. I would even imagine some more affirmative action on the placement. What is the end result of our education to these women? Do they fall by the wayside? Where are they finally? 

Mr Speaker, I represent a rural county. We have done a lot to empower women in leadership; we have members of Parliament representing women and even councillors right from the district to lower local councils. I do not know what the experience with my other colleagues is but when we are representing the constituencies, you do not have to say these are women and these are men; we shoulder the burden.

The effort of our women members of Parliament need to be augmented. There should be a serious effort by Government to ensure that our women colleagues are empowered to galvanise and take care of the women folk in our rural areas – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that you have given a very pertinent statement about our women leaders in Parliament. It is common knowledge that I am a teacher and I would like to tell you what is happening in Uganda in most of the UPE schools; you will never find a single incinerator for girls – (Interjections). You can see many are turning on me - it is where pads are disposed. Hon. Kamuntu, a former UPC member, would like to know what and incinerator is and I am going to teach him.

Mr Speaker, where you have a mixed school, there must be an incinerator and most of our schools are demanding for this. We said in the Committee on Education that all girls who have reached menstruation stage should at least get sanitary pads from Government. However, if you go to shops, they are still expensive.

Therefore, hon. Ssekikubo, when you talk about your rural area which is similar to mine, these are the problems we must address to keep girls in school 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are now debating, honourable member.

MR SSEWUNGU: That is the information I wanted to give, Mr Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Ssewungu, for that good information. Mr Speaker, my main point is that let the representation of women be translated into material facts so that the women can feel – yes, we are represented but what is next? Short of that, we shall all be lumped up as leaders; you are male and she is a woman member of Parliament and you are charged with the same responsibilities. The role should be clearer to the woman member of Parliament so that the village woman can say yes, we have been empowered as women and are fully represented and that representation is able to translate down into material facts and circumstances to help the poor of the poor. I thank you.

2.52
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the minister for the report but also for Government to attain such an award. As women, every time we get such an award, we celebrate ourselves and it is important that such reports should be brought to the Floor of Parliament such that the world should know that Uganda is doing very well in empowering the women of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, what has been mainly talked about is the arena of politics where women have been visible and seen. However, we still have a big room to fill with regard to the empowerment of women. You know that majority of our women are engaged in the agricultural sector; they feed and produce for the country. However, they are still bogged down by the use of the hand hoe.
 
Looking at our families, you find that in a family of 10 people, it is only one woman fending for the whole family and I think Government needs to come up and support the women of this country in that sector if we are to transit from subsistence to commercial agriculture.

I would also like to speak on the issue that was raised by hon. Ssewungu. I remember one of the members brought a motion on the Floor of Parliament with regard to sanitary towels and these are some of the things that we do not treasure in as far as the education of the girl child is concerned. Many girls drop out of school because these pads are still very expensive.

Mr Speaker, cervical cancer is becoming a huge problem with regard to women and because it is because of the very funny things they use when they are in their menstrual periods but we do not appreciate that we have many girls who cannot afford to have sanitary towels that can take them throughout the entire time they are in school. 

Therefore, Government’s responsibility is to look into this issue such that our girls can complete their school cycle so that we can have very important women to serve this country; after all, we have tested and seen that women can perform and they have performed very well and we need to support the women. No wonder when the President of America recently visited Kenya, he said that without the education of the girl child, countries cannot develop. Therefore, Government should take it seriously to ensure that our girls get better education and complete their education cycle. 

Mr Speaker, the other issue is on our ministry which is on social, economic development - a vehicle for development for our communities. The ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs touches everywhere; the youth, women, elderly and disability but their budget has remained slim. I do not know why the ministry of Finance does not see that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs is a driver to development.

If we boosted all these sectors, especially looking at their contribution – the women in the informal sector contribute heavily to the taxes; all these would indirectly boost the revenue in this country. However, we usually keep an eye when it comes to budgeting and we do not give it adequate budget to ensure that this ministry delivers what we require of it.

Honourable minister of Gender, when are the elections for the women councils? This is something that has been on our neck.  Since I came to this Parliament, we have been talking about it. People have been asking us and seeing now that people are in the mood of elections for various categories of people in this country, women when are silent there and we do not know when the elections for women are going to be held and yet they want to continue doing their business. That is a big task that they ask us.

Finally, the issue of affirmative action and reviewing it; when is it coming on board? We usually hang ourselves on the issue of politics. What about affirmative action in other arenas, acquiring job opportunities and other sectors - (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Nyakikongoro. The clarification I would like to seek from you is that as a country, civil society and Government – in the civil society and private sector, I have seen some of the jobs advertised encouraging women to apply but it is only in Government that I see that most of these positions are left open. The clarification that I would like to get from hon. Nyakikongoro is how best do you think this issue of employment can be handled? First both Government and the private sector will want results and that jobs have to be competed for and that you have to account for the jobs. How best would you think the issue of gender would suffice in this? 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you so much. You have seen how gender has been handled in the politics and you have seen our women performing in different levels of politics in this Parliament and even at lower levels. Likewise, if women were given the opportunity to perform moreover in terms of population - by the way we are the majority; we need to create room for them to have access to various employment opportunities such that they can serve this country.

You have seen the women that have performed well in different sectors and that is why we are emphasising that affirmative action should be open and widen and no wonder the civil society looks ahead to ensure that it gives us room such that the women are given priority to come and work.

Mr Speaker, finally on the issue of maternal health, much as we are doing well, we are still losing women. The mortality has increased by the way from 16; every day we lose more women. I think Government and the Ministry of Health - thank God the Minister of Health is here - this is an area that you need to refocus. Much as we have health centres, the issue of health workers is still a big problem. For women to go to the health centres and they do not find health workers there because they do not have accommodation, they sleep quite far away from the health centres, is a big challenge. Procreation is something that does not give opportunity for you to prepare and say that let me wait until tomorrow.

This is something that you need to look into – finding accommodation for the health workers to sleep near the health centres such that when women are procreating they are given opportunity to produce without losing their lives. I thank you.

3.00
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I would like to congratulate the Ugandan government, through the report given by the minister, about the achievements in reproductive health. The NRM has made a record because by the time the NRM came to power, the maternal mortality rate was between five and 700. It took a very short time to bring the maternal mortality rate down to 438 in this country.

In fact, when we were counting the MDGs, I was very worried because it took a very long time for this rate to be brought down and those of us who are professionals attributed it to scarcity of midwives. It was two years ago when the Uganda Government realised that we should open the training of midwives afresh but I believe that is not enough. I think Government needs to go further by giving scholarships to midwives because it is the midwives who manage mothers in rural areas. 

Hon. Nyakikongoro said that health workers are not enough and my heart went to scarcity of midwives in this country. I think the Uganda Government needs to step up the training of midwives in this country and particularly recognise that midwifery is a specialty. Right now, Uganda regards midwifery and general nursing at par but in developed countries, midwives are regarded as specialists. 

Therefore, I think that we should go back and revisit – although outsiders think that we are doing very well, internally, I feel we are not doing enough in reproductive health because you have heard that mothers are still dying; everyday, 15 women per hour die. That is a lot of women dying. What makes a country developed is how they manage maternal mortality rate. Medicine is all about the mother and the child. Therefore, it is very important that we revisit the issue instead of congratulating ourselves that we have been recognised. 

I do not know whether Uganda was compared to another country or it was compared with itself but if it was with another country, then we can say, “Congratulations.” However, if you look at it within Uganda, I think we are not yet doing very well in reproductive health. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have Prime Minister’s Question Time coming; so, let us try to summarise now.

3.03
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for his statement and for the award the country has earned.

Mr Speaker, “empowering” is a very powerful concept and to empower women means to capacitate them; to build their capabilities; to give them an opportunity for every talent that God gave them to be revealed. It also means progressive elimination of cultural practices that hold women back. It means universal access to services and rights. 

Now, one sector where I know Uganda has done extremely very well and you can see the award but we need to do more - the majority of Ugandans, particularly rural women, are trapped; they spend hours and hours carrying water on their heads. They become fetchers of water and I can tell you that a woman without water is a problem. This is a very serious matter; we are talking about empowerment of women. I can tell you, Mr Speaker, until and unless we have universal access to water – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable minister. The honourable minister is passionately emphasising that water for women is life and I would like to seek clarification since we are aware that actually water is life for everybody - if you look at who can survive without water longer, a woman can survive longer without water than a man. Does he intend to tell us that men can do without water? Do you still stand to be a man when you don’t have water? Clarify. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, the centrality of water to human survival – human survival, I think is universal. Just from creation – you know I could go scientific and we can also go religious. You are baptised by water and sometimes when they are taking a coffin to the grave they even spray the water just to show you how important water is. And hon. Anywar, before even delivery of a baby, water comes out first; this is just to show you its centrality. (Laughter) It is true and even I can go a step further; even a man’s sperms swim in water before fertilising an egg; that is scientific. This is scientific evidence, Mr Speaker. I am not just speculating and I can tell you – (Interruption) 

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, the context in which the honourable professor is using water is lamentable. Water, in essence, is H20 and what he calls “water” that comes before a child is born is not H2O – it is called liquor amnii in scientific terms. Even the sperms that he is talking about do not swim in water – they swim in viscous liquid called semen. Therefore, is the honourable professor in order to use language of water in the context that does not have scientific basis?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister only knows about water in that context. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Actually, I know more about water, Mr Speaker. I know the molecules of water – two of them hydrogen and one of them oxygen. I also know that there are other fluids. 

However, this is beside the point; the point I was advancing is that the empowerment of women – this is really the point and the central message. The empowerment of women involves the mind-change – where most of our men regard fetching water as a function of women and therefore they have made their women fetchers of water and collectors of wood. And for empowering these women, there must be universal access to water for every woman, rural or urban. (Applause) That is the central message. 

I also would like to highlight our priorities in investment. Mr Speaker, if you recognise that for any economic transformation, be it industrialisation or agricultural transformation or watering animals or fish or industry or hospitals, water becomes so basic an infrastructure that when it comes to our budgeting, that is not reflected. That is why empowerment of women must involve increased investment in the water sector for the women to be freed from being fetchers of water and collectors of wood. I want to submit that yes, we have done very well but this is an area where we need to do more. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is coming to 3.10 p.m. and this means that we are 10 minutes into Prime Minister’s Question Time. I do not know whether we should not halt this debate here since the ministerial statement has been elaborately discussed and then we go to Prime Minister’s Question Time because that is what the rules say. Can we now go straight to Prime Minister’s Question Time? 

Leader of the Opposition, can you make a rejoinder or combine the two when you are making your response during Prime Minister’s Question Time? We are running short of time. Would that be okay or you wanted to particularly speak on this issue? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, right from yesterday, you clearly stated that due to the load on the Order Paper, the Prime Minister would consider – (Interjections)- yes and it was from the Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the same Speaker who has said the same. So, please – (Laughter)- 

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.12
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the Rt Hon. Prime Minister inform the country who pays the so called crime preventers and from which vote?
 
3.13
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, crime preventers are not paid salaries but are patriotic volunteers and are part of the community and ensure that the community is safe and secure. This work is consistent with the policy of community policing or where the community ensures its own security by identifying some well-behaved young individuals and preparing them to ensure that they voluntarily secure their respective communities.

Let me take this opportunity, therefore, to ask my colleague to ensure that the people of Masaka and indeed, the whole country support the concept of community policing and support the volunteers who are crime preventers.
3.14
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister and all of us are aware that the recent upsurge of absence of rain has caused disaster across the country and more so in Karamoja where we have only one season. May I know from the Prime Minister what contingency plan he has for the people of Karamoja as the situation gets worse?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, through the limited resources in our Department of Disaster Preparedness, if there is such a threat in Karamoja, we shall be able to stand by the people of Karamoja. 

Nevertheless, the long term solution is to ensure that we utilise modern and scientific methods so that the people of Karamoja do not only depend on one rain season but are able to store the water, use irrigation and have sustainable crop and food production and security.  

3.15
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): I thank you. Mr Prime Minister, our formerly abducted and war victims – should I call them survivors or victims - those whose limbs were cut off, came here with a petition to Parliament and some resolutions were passed.

They were promised that after three months, these would be implemented but to date, there is nothing on the ground. Can you explain so that when we go back to our people, we have something to answer them? Who are the people who should implement? Which sector? I thank you.  

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the duty of Government is to serve all the people of Uganda and especially those in special need, the vulnerable and victims of conflict and war. 

Therefore, the overall government programme answers many of the needs of these war victims. But of course, there are some specialised problems, injuries, amputations and related issues that require specific management by special responsible departments. 

My colleagues and I will need to revisit the specific resolutions in order to be able to give you categorical and specific responses on the issues that were raised then.

3.17
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that CNOOC has basically closed its operations in Uganda and Tullow Oil and the rest are also not moving as we had anticipated and that, in fact, in the Albertine Graben, there is no serious work on-going in as far as the oil exploration is concerned.

Would you consider bringing to this House a comprehensive statement? If so, when do you intend to do so, so that this House is aware about what is going on in the oil industry?    

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Otada has raised a legitimate point and the minister responsible for energy will, a week from today, make a statement in the House on the situation raised by Ndugu Otada. [HONOURABLE MEMBERS: “It will be recess.”]

If there is recess, then the earliest convenient time will be utilised by the minister responsible for energy.

3.19
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question I would like to ask the Prime Minister is that the government is trying to create cities in this country and particularly in Mbarara District. They want to turn Mbarara Municipality into a city.

The Minister for Local Government recently annexed the sub-counties of Biharwe and Kakiika from Kashari and then Nyakayojo from Rwampara. But it looks like they could not get the required population and now, there is a move to take the entire Kashari County into Mbarara Municipality to create Mbarara City. 

May I know from the Prime Minister whether this is true that Government wants to annex the entire Kashari County to Mbarara Municipality in order to create a city given the fact that the furthest point is 48 kilometres from Mbarara Municipality? I thank you. 
  
DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that it is the intention of Government to develop modern cities. As to the exact boundaries in the case of Mbarara, I would need to consult with the Minister of Local Government in order to get the details.

3.20
MS DOROTHY MPIIMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buikwe): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister about what plans he has for the plight of the Public Service pensioners who are languishing without their money for the month of July.

The other day, we laid a senior pensioner to rest who succumbed to hypertension because he could not access the drugs that he was supposed to take. There was uproar among the pensioners because there is a kind of reform that is taking place and there is no explanation. Therefore, could we know what the plight of the pensioners will be?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the pensioners missing their pay is a very serious matter and the Minister of Finance will make a statement in this House on the matter tomorrow.

3.22
MR KENETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this financial year, Parliament appropriated money for Social Assistance Grant and Empowerment as part of the elderly programme to be rolled out beyond the 15 districts, which are benefiting today. To-date, not even one district has been rolled on to have this programme expanded. When do we expect this programme to be rolled out and in case it is not rolled out in time, what will happen to this money that we had appropriated for this project? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the intention of Government is to roll out SAGE programme as announced in the budget and as per funds approved by this august House.

3.25
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I wonder if you are aware that the hospital staff in Masaka District have not been paid for the last three months. The situation is actually desperate and they are considering going on strike over that matter. 

I wonder if you can explain to the House why this is occurring only in Masaka as the other districts are receiving their salary. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am informed by the Ministry of Finance that this matter had been raised earlier in the House and the plan is to come and give an explanation to the House on the matter tomorrow.

3.25
MR SIMON ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In 2014, I happened to attend a launch of the construction of an immigration border post from the Kenyan side and there was a call for Uganda to do the same. I am happy that the Minister of Internal Affairs in here. He made a pronouncement that Uganda is going to do the same. When are we going to have the construction of this immigration post?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I have taken advantage of the proximity of the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs and he has assured me that construction will start in the next financial year.

3.26  
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Rt hon. Prime Minister, Government has encouraged SACCOs across the nation. However, there is one problem. I am not sure whether you are aware that bank managers of the SACCOs defraud the SACCOs and there is no law that holds them accountable. As I speak right now, three SACCOs from my place; Kagango, Rushozi and Kyangyenyi have approached me. Board members are being taken to court because of the money that has been defrauded by the managers and they are the ones that are paying back. 

Therefore, when is Government coming to rescue board members who are paying the money that they never ate but it was eaten by the managers, who do not have any law that holds them accountable? What is Government doing about that? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Nyakikongoro is raising a legitimate point, which is of concern to Government. Government is coming with a tier four legislation that will ensure increased security of people’s funds in SACCO’s and other money depositing institutions.

3.27
MS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to get some guidance from the Rt hon. Prime Minister. In my district, we are facing a big problem of illegal land evictions despite the fact that we have a law in place. We are aware that there is also a land policy, which has a provision, which provides that residents can pay their ground rent at the sub-county. 

It is sad that this policy is not being implemented and yet, the people have been promised that many of the issues in the policy are going to be implemented to solve the problem.

I would like the Prime Minister to advise us on what we should advise the people because they keep on asking us and we do not know what to say; we are stuck. Can you guide us on what we should tell the people as far as the land policy and its implementation are concerned? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that some unscrupulous elements use their authority to disturb the wanainchi who are bibanja holders. This is a problem that requires multi-pronged answers. The political leaders should sensitise the population and let us use the law, which is in place and which actually protects the squatters. They have their rights but one of the problems is that they are unable to exert their legal and political rights because of inadequate sensitisation. Therefore, sensitisation in my view is the first weapon to use so that they can resist illegal evictions.

3.29
MR STANELY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To-date, my people have not got their identity cards or registration cards yet general elections are approaching. When are these people going to get their identity cards?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as colleagues know, distributions of identity cards is going on in the country at different times and the area affected, Nebbi, will soon be reached.

3.30
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am sure you are aware that people in Lamwo have been going through a lot of turmoil because of the Sudanese incursions. They have come and chased away some of my people from their homes and I really appreciate the Army that chased them back. 

However, we had a debate here in Parliament about the problems of the districts that border Sudan and there was a resolution that the borders should be properly demarcated. If this is not done, the Sudanese might think they are in Sudan while they are in Uganda.

Therefore, when will this border be demarcated so that my people can have food? What should I tell my people? Even if they plant - right now, they are weeding their gardens - but the Sudanese always come and attack and threaten them. My brother from Kilak has just told us the Sudanese are busy moving in and out of Kilak at will and causing a lot of mayhem. When can we have these borders demarcated so that our people can have food like the rest of Uganda?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am happy as my sister said, UPDF quickly repulsed the Sudanese and secured our people in Lamwo. It is also true that some of those people may be looking for either grass or water and may even come to Uganda thinking it is part of South Sudan. Nevertheless, the governments of South Sudan and Uganda are already engaged in discussions on how quickly to demarcate the border and end those disputes and cross-border incursions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery we have pupils from Flower Land Junior School from Buyende, represented by hon. Sulaiman Balyejusa, hon. John Bosco Mubito and hon. Veronica Kadogo. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have councillors and residents of Najja Sub-county in Buikwe represented by hon. Bayigga and hon. Dorothy Mpiima. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them.

We also have a group of youth from Nwoya District represented by hon. Richard Todwong and hon. Lilly Adong. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

3.33
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara):  Thank very much, Mr Speaker. All non-academic staff of public universities in this country have gone on strike. I went to Mbarara University to pick some of my documents for verification but I found the university closed. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to remind the Prime Minister that students are soon beginning their first semester. What plan does Government have to ensure that the impasse between the non-academic staff of public universities and Government is sorted out with immediate effect? Even if we try to hide our heads in sand, students must go back to school. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government is concerned about the on-going strike by the non-teaching staff of public universities. The Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Prime Minister have met the leadership of these staff. This afternoon, we have another follow up meeting with the leadership of the non-teaching staff. We are hoping that a logical conclusion will be reached and then, the universities will continue with their normal functioning.

In the meantime, it is true that a number of universities have postponed their opening by a week and in some cases, by two weeks in order to allow this matter to be amicably resolved.

3.36
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank very much, Mr Speaker. Three years ago, Parliament approved funds for the construction of Bukakata road, which has always been a promise. For the last one and a half years, I have been receiving information from the Ministry of Works and Transport that a contractor has been secured and it is like a song. Each time I try to find out from the Minister of Works and Transport, he tells me the same thing. We would like to know whether it is real that Bukakata road is going to be constructed. 

I also want to invite the Prime Minister to come and use that road and have a feel of what those people who use the road experience. Much as you have that type of car, I would like you to come and feel the bumps on the road so that we share the same experience.

DR RUGUNDA: I appreciate the invitation by my sister. The road is obviously going to be done as it has already been promised. At the moment, the contract for that road is in the Attorney General’s chambers to be cleared by the Solicitor General. I have just received this information from the Minister of Works and Transport. Recently, when the Minister of Works and Transport and I visited Masaka, we talked to the people at Kitovu Secondary School and reassured them that the road is on the way. Therefore, just hold on a little bit.

3.38
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As if my brother from Mbarara read part of my submission especially about the universities and I appreciate it. Even last semester, Kitgum Campus of Gulu University never sat examinations. Therefore, it is a serious matter.

However, my question to the Prime Minister is: Kitgum serves most of Northern Uganda, we do not have an airstrip to supplement our transport. We have an old airstrip in Orom which has been lying idle, leaving alone the one we had in Kitgum, which was unceremoniously closed. When shall we have that airstrip rehabilitated to help us ease transport and boost tourism? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, to answer hon. Anywar’s question; I have just been informed by the Minister of Works and Transport that Ministry of Works and Civil Aviation Authority have been begging the Kitgum authorities to hand over the local airstrip to them for expansion and management. Up to now, the authorities in Kitgum have been reluctant. Therefore, as soon as the airstrip is released to the Ministry of Works and Transport, they will expand and manage it well and you will have an airport.

3.40
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Mr Speaker, today, the dollar is trading between $3,500 to $3,750. Many of the tenants here in Kampala are paying rent in dollars. They are finding it very difficult to pay rent and they are being closed down.

One time, this House agreed on a policy to come in and persuade the owners of premises to charge in local currencies other than dollars like other countries. Traders are now getting problems because they have been locked out. Mr Prime Minister, which measures do you have to help such people?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the concern by the honourable member is much appreciated. It is true our people are facing rather uncertain times because of the foreign exchange fluctuations with regard to our shilling. 
The Ministry of Finance and the government are looking at various options to see how this problem faced by our people can be solved. We expect to find a solution to the proprietors’ insistence on dollars for rent payment. However, I would ask the Ministry of Finance to make a more authoritative statement on this matter. 

I think there are too many statements for the Ministry of Finance to make tomorrow – (Interjections) - if I could be protected from hon. Ssekikubo, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Finance will make a statement on the matter. Meanwhile, Government is trying to get a solution to stabilise the Uganda shilling. 

3.42
MS BEATRICE MPAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the last 10 years, the fishing community has been killed, harassed and robbed by the National Fisheries Tax Enforcement Team under the guise of capturing the illegal fishing gears. 

The question I would like to ask the Prime Minister is; what plans does the government have to stop these officials from harassing and killing our people?  

My community would also like to know; where does the government put the money they always contribute monthly when the fishing community does not have good services? 

DR RUGUNDA: The minister responsible for fisheries, hon. Tress Bucyanayandi, has assured me that at the moment, regular police is in place ready to ensure that the Wanainchi get proper and humane treatment.

3.44
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolator): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for over two years now, there has been immense accumulation of water weeds in Lake Kyoga. This is common particularly at the point crossing from Zengebe to Namasale. This has greatly affected fishing expeditions and transportation across the lake. The situation is very alarming. 

This is not the first time I am raising this matter. In fact, it is the third time. We have not got any response so I would like to raise it again. What realistic intervention does Government plan to undertake to avert the negative impact of the water weeds on Lake Kyoga? When could this intervention be undertaken?  

DR RUGUNDA: Uganda has substantial experience in dealing with water weeds. You know how we helped handle the situation on Lake Victoria. We have equipment donated to the Government of Uganda by our Egyptian friends. The plan is to use that equipment and the expertise that we already have to deal with the problem on Lake Kyoga. 

3.46
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two disasters occurred on Kiyindi fish landing site. I am delighted that the previous questions were in terms of fishing. 

The first was the handover of unfinished fish landing facility, which cost colossal sums of money the government got on loan. This half-finished facility has a debt of Shs 50 million left. I have written to you to this effect and nothing has actually been done. 

The second disaster is the fishing pressure that has been exerted on the same site by foreigners who have flooded that area. I have written to your ministers of agriculture who are now taking your attention while I am speaking on this issue. I have written to them to create a solution for that and they have not even given me the courtesy of writing back. What are going to be the solutions to these two problems? 

DR RUGUNDA: Government, through the Ministry of Agriculture has budgeted funds to sort out the remaining parts of the programme of the fishing centres that we are talking about.

On the additional problems that you have raised and the way the landing sites are being impacted on, again, the ministry responsible for fisheries has made arrangements to deal with those problems. 

On non-response to the letters you have written, government officials are urged to ensure they respond to letters from the “wanainchi” and definitely, from letters from Members of Parliament. 
3.48
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is now 10 years since we amended the Constitution and incorporated the regional tier system. The districts of Bunyoro region passed resolutions to that effect so that the Regional Tier Government can be started. I would like to find out from the Prime Minister when do you intend to operationalise the Regional Tier Government? 

DR RUGUNDA: The Bill to operationalise regional tiers is in the hands of this August House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the correct information? Wasn’t the Bill actually withdrawn? We need to cross-check that. 

3.50
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is about border meetings. 

Government used to encourage districts that are along the borders to have border meetings with their counterparts in either Sudan or Congo. These meetings facilitated by the Office of the Prime Minister solved many problems. What has caused these meetings from taking place?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Ndugu Awongo is raising an important point. Border meetings are crucial, necessary and they should be regular to sort out problems and plan for better cooperation. This is part of the policy of Government. If they have not been held, it means there may be some roadblocks that need to be cleared. However, Government will take up this matter without any doubt. We believe them and we think they are important and also to ensure regional harmony and security.

3.53
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the areas of Teso, Lango, Acholi and most of West Nile are being devastated by Hepatitis B. The information reaching the communities is not enough, including Members of Parliament. Vaccination is being done to the health workers and I am told about the launching of vaccination of ages 1-30 years of age.

What is going to happen? What is Government programme about this vaccination of Hepatitis B? How do you plan to make the information reach the wanainchi?  I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a very important subject. Ten per cent of the people of Uganda are affected by this problem of Hepatitis B. Fortunately now, under the routine immunisation of our children, Hepatitis B is included. This will, therefore, be a major preventive route. However as you may have heard His Excellency the President, only about two weeks ago, launched the broader vaccination against Hepatitis B and you may have seen in the media, we just launched a drug for our friends and compatriot who have this virus at a relatively affordable price. This drug is going to be manufactured by our own, Quality Chemicals.

Government is doing all that it can to deal with this problem through immunisation of the children, treatment of those who have the virus and also waiting for the vaccine costs to become more affordable, so that there can be more widespread use of the vaccine.

Finally, health workers and other people who are involved with the general public are already getting vaccines.

3.54
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, sometime back this House by a resolution of Parliament allowed the deployment of UPDF troops in South Sudan, in the name of peace.

Today, we always read in the newspapers about the peace progress, the IGAD, peace progress in Addis-Ababa and the resolution that there will be IGAD forces to replace the UPDF. May the House know the progress of the peace negotiations in South Sudan?

In addition to that, may you inform this country when our troops will be returning home? When we passed this resolution, you promised the House that you would avail us with an update. Can you give us the general update of the situation in South Sudan?

What we get from South Sudan is only an abuse by the Government of South Sudan by incursion; either in Lamwo District or in Moyo District, destabilizing our local population. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The situation of South Sudan has been a concern to all of us here for quite some time. Our troops have done excellent work and it is true that will be replaced by the regional troops.

The programme details can be given by the responsible Minister of Finance. However, the focus has been really to support the dialogue between the two main forces: the Government of Juba and also the opposition groups.

We think that they have now increased not only regional but also international pressure. Recently, as you read in the media, there was a meeting in Addis Ababa, where President Obama met with the regional leaders, including our President. As you also may have heard from the media, only three or days ago, there was a meeting here by President Museveni, Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn and President Uhuru, partly also on South Sudan.

Therefore, with the intensification of pressure for a peaceful solution through dialogue, we are hopeful that something concrete is going to emerge. Meanwhile, UPDF continues to do its work waiting for the regional forces to replace it and eventually we end up with peace, security and stability in South Sudan.

This security and stability in South Sudan will also protect our people from these regular incursions to Lamwo and other neighbouring districts to South Sudan.

3.57
MR STEPHENE MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the National Identification Security System is the biggest milestone we have achieved since independence and Government has spent a lot of money in this important exercise, with a national register derived out of this.

It is unfortunate that apart from the Electoral Commission, the banks, the people issuing driving permits, those doing the trading licenses, even salaries by Public Service, are not making any reference to the national register. Yet, even without getting the National IDs per individual, the national register should be available to these institutions in order to stop the fraudsters, to help in credit reference, to reduce ghosts in salaries so that this country can get out of anarchy.

When can this country get this implemented so that we get value for money, for this very important exercise and achievement we got?

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ndugu Biraahwa is right. This is a major milestone. Number two, as we had heard earlier, some of our country men and women have not received their cards yet, so it will take time for people to be able to use these cards in banks and other institutions.

However, when all the people have received the cards, then the institutions will begin utilising them and they will be popularised and publicised in interest of everybody to have these cards well institutionalised and utilised so that they can curb illegalities and fraud.

4.00
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Isingiro District has a problem of Nakivale Refugee Camp. There has been a land conflict between the refugees in the camp and the Ugandan citizen communities. The reason has been that the Refugee Camp boundaries are not known.

Every time, new refugees are brought into the district, they are just placed in people’s plantations and gardens and a petition was written to your office. For the last two years, we have been waiting for response from your office in vain. What I would like to hear from the Prime Minister is, when shall permanent boundaries be established for this camp so that our Ugandan nationals are at peace? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government decided to demarcate its pieces of land including refugee settlements. Nakivale and other camps will benefit from that programme. As to when it will start, we will be able to get details from the Minister responsible for Lands.

4.02
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know this issue has been raised before but for the purpose of emphasis, I would like the Prime Minister to convince me that Government has now put in place mechanisms to protect the people of West Nile, particularly Moyo.

Last year, Moyo was invaded by armed people, the Kukus from Sudan. Many people were killed, several injured and thousands displaced. You are aware that I personally went there and saw the disaster in the area and made a report to this House.

However, up to now, it appears that there is no mechanism on the ground to protect the lives and the properties of the people of West Nile. It has now even spread out in the Acholi sub region because the South Sudanese come with their animals and graze deep inside in Acholi about nine to ten kilometers inside Uganda. They graze their animals there with guns and they damage the crops of the people. Government has to do something. We cannot just keep quiet when our people are suffering. (Applause)

What is even more devastating - I do not know why the West Nilers are keeping quiet on this –(Laughter)- One of the Muslim  leaders who was actually – I do not know if we call it “abducted”  - is being detained in Nimule, not by the police but by the military. So, I would like to know, what is the government doing? Even the Muslim leader is being detained by the military in a foreign country; yet, you have not done anything about it. Definitely, something must be done.

We cannot continue to keep quiet when the budget of Uganda - We are budgeting for stabilisation of Sudan, billions of shillings and many Ugandans are going to Sudan to protect the lives of the people of South Sudanese and yet, our own people are being invaded and killed inside Uganda. 

To me, this is abuse of the highest order. (Applause) Government must come out and state its position on the matter. 
I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government position over the matter of protecting the lives of Ugandans is very well known. I am surprised that hon. Ogwal, would like us to come and repeat that position.

Secondly, Government at different levels including meeting between President Museveni, President Salva Kiir, ministers and security officials have been meeting in order to sort out this problem. One of the problems may be the security situation in South Sudan, which makes it more difficult for Sudanese authorities to take charge of their affairs. Therefore, Uganda has no choice but protect her people. On this question, there is no comprise. Government will continuously engage our people and leadership in South Sudan to ensure that the incursions into Uganda stop - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, our time is up. I will take the list and then, we proceed next week.



4.06
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula-Oguttu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, welcome back and thank you for answering the questions. You have been missing in action for a while. I hope you have brought for us good things from America.

I would like to thank the Prime Minister and Government for inviting President Uhuru Kenyatta to address this House. He made a good speech and we wish to thank him.

I would also like to ask the Prime Minister, when are we expecting East African Federal Government? At one time, this was fast-tracked. We do not know whether it went off the rail but we would like to be updated on what happened to East African Federal Government?

Prime Minister, the issue of crime preventers is worrying the Opposition very much. Many young people are being recruited and they are dressed in NRM uniform with President Museveni’s portrait. They undergo military training. We are worried that Government could be training militia who are going to kill us. Unless you assure us differently; we are also considering establishing our personal militias to protect us during the time of elections or when they want to kill us.

However, you must make a clear statement. The Minister of Defence, hon. Kiyonga, is looking at me. You have guns but we have the goodwill of the people. (Laughter) We shall see what will win. So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, could you, please make some clarification of this issue of crime preventers. They are young jobless people whom you are brainwashing. They talk the language of NRM.

Again Prime Minister, we would also like to know when Government is bringing all the legislation connected with electoral matters: the presidential, the parliamentary, the local government and Electoral Commission because time is running out. We know that this process is already on and in a very advanced stage.

In addition to that, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the issue of the economy is worrying us. Ugandans with money are dollarizing the shilling. They are keeping and transferring money from Uganda shillings into dollar accounts. They are also withdrawing money and buying dollars and keeping at home. This trend is continuing and those who are foreign business people are transferring all the money they have, which they do not need here and taking it away. This is causing a problem. The Ministry of Finance will help us but we need some assurance that our economy is not going to bleed to death.

More so, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in Bugiri there is a place called Sigulu Islands, which is a hard to reach area. Government promised to give this island a ferry. People of Sigulu Island of Namayingo would like to know, when are they going to have that ferry to Sigulu Island?

I was going to talk about the empowerment of women. I congratulate Uganda and the ministry that we got an award. We have had better achievements on the political front for women and in education. These were as a result of specific interventions. But on the issue of economy, there is no policy and no economic empowerment for women; any policy I know that this Government has brought to put in place especially for women to empower them. There are little things which could make a big difference. For instance, do we have women-owned companies, do they ever do business with Government, do they ever enjoy any affirmative action with Government? Other countries do that for women. Women of Uganda, do you do business with Government of Uganda? We talk about empowerment, what is it that Government is doing to economically empower the women of Uganda?

Lastly, on the issue of sanitary pads, I have done an experiment in my constituency with girls and sanitary pads. With the help of Rotary International, I distributed sanitary pads to a number of schools and the attendance by the girls improved almost by 95 per cent. We have been talking over and over in this House about girl child receiving sanitary pads so that they can stay at school. They get ashamed; when they do not have pads, they do not go to school. Government should seriously think about this issue because I have seen that in my constituency, those five schools where I distributed sanitary pads have improved; including the quality of education. Thank you, very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my friend the Leader of the Opposition has raised quite a number of issues. I will just briefly comment on them. On the East African Federation, Uganda has been ready and Uganda is closely talking with her regional neighbours so that we can move together toward the actualisation of the East African Federation.

It is also true as you very well know that Uganda played an important role in fast-tracking of the East African Federation process. We fully support actualisation of the East African Federation. We would like to move it as fast as possible and we believe the people of East Africa are ready for it because it is for the benefit of all our people in the region. In fact, President Kenyatta made some very positive remarks about the subject when he addressed Parliament.

On crime preventers, it is true that we should avoid the danger of raising private and personal crime preventers because those can cause problems. Let us all, as a country and as a people support the institution of crime preventers. Let us also ensure that crime preventers serve everybody and not a party or a section of the population.

If there are some errors that may have been made, let us address and correct them so that we are all on course but the issue of crime preventers is important for our country for securing our communities, people and property.

On election laws, now that we have passed the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015 - and I must salute Parliament for overwhelmingly passing the constitution amendments. (Applause) The responsible minister will be able to tell us details of that programme.

The uncertainty about the Uganda shilling is a legitimate point, which raises concern and uncertainty.  It is true people may be forced to have their savings, earnings, their rentals in foreign currencies. The solution is to restore the stability and credibility of the Uganda shilling and I know that Government and her institutions are doing whatever we can to ensure that that is done.

The issue of Sugulu Islands and ferry; Sigulu Island is part of Uganda and every effort will be made to improve communication. I believe that the ferry, which was promised, it is just a question of resources and it will be provided when they are available.

On the empowerment of women, I think if this Government has one of the great achievements, it has been the emancipation of women. There is no doubt about that! In this empowerment, you know, economic empowerment does not just come out of the blue. When you empower somebody with education, skills, you are liberating her to be able to access resources, jobs, income and improve her economic wellbeing.
Nevertheless, the point is well taken that we should continue to do whatever we can to support the cause of women, to ensure that they are playing their rightful role in society and they are economically powerful, sustaining themselves and society.

The final comment was on sanitary pads. Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I completely agree with you on the issue of sanitary pads. (Applause) Society has a responsibility to support these youngsters in schools to ensure that their encumbrances are reduced as much as possible.

I know the Ministry of Education has been for quite some time considering means and ways of sorting out this matter. I do not think that the minister has come up with a full-proof position on this.


However, Government will do whatever it can to cooperate with parents, schools and with all the people of Uganda to solve this problem of sanitary pads for our children in schools.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MR SSEKIKUBO: Procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us lay the papers, honourable. Let us deal with Item 4 then you raise the procedural issue.

4.19
MR ROBERT	MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay the report of the select committee inquiring into the takeover of land formerly belonging to public schools in Kampala Capital City Authority, plus the minutes - (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The paper to be laid is not a paper. Papers are laid under Rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure.

Rule 31 (4) “A paper laid on the Table shall be recorded as so laid in the first issue of the minutes thereafter and serially numbered by the Clerk who shall cause the same to be deposited into the Parliamentary Library. (2) As soon as the Clerk announces ‘Papers for Laying’, the paper shall be laid on the Table without question put.”

Mr Speaker, the so-called paper is a report of a select committee of this Parliament. Therefore, there is no way it can be treated as a paper because even Rule 31 (5) says, “A paper laid on the Table may be referred to the relevant committee.” Yet, this is a product of a select committee established and set up by this Parliament.

Mr Speaker, the matters involved are over the grabbing of public land within Kampala Capital City Authority. A committee was set up with clear terms of reference. We need to know the outcome of this investigation – (Applause) - but for us to just lay it at the Table like this, we disadvantage this country and this Parliament from taking a decisive and deliberate position on the same.

Mr Speaker, the others can be laid down as on the Order Paper but this particular one is suspect. This is a report of a select committee of this House properly constituted. It should be read and we get recommendations and we debate it to make our positions clear. I beg your indulgence that you allow this paper not to be laid but to be presented for debate and fully fledged position taken on the same. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, normally I am ahead of my game. I knew what you were going to say. (Laughter) This is not the first report of Parliament that is laid before the House and a day found for debating it. We have laid so many reports on the Floor of Parliament and scheduled them for debate later. The purpose of this is to make Parliament know that this report is now ready so that when we get a date of debating it, it is ready for debate.
 
Even the other documents that are on are going to be sent to the committee and they will come back to the House. We have used this procedure before to make Parliament know that this committee has finished its work instead of keeping it somewhere and people think it is not finished yet it is; that is the purpose. It is not that it is going to be shelved and not going to be debated, no. Appropriate time will be found for it to be debated. Let us proceed. Please lay the document at the Table.

4.23
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay a report of the select committee inquiring into the takeover of land formerly belonging to public schools in Kampala Capital City Authority together with the minutes, memorandum of understanding, lease agreements and master plans. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members that document stands as property of Parliament, members have access to it and at an appropriate time we shall find time to debate this report. 

PROPOSAL TO BORROW US$15,000,000 FROM THE OPEC FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (OFID) AND ANOTHER US$15,000,000 FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) PLUS US$11,000,000 FROM THE ABU DHABI FUND FOR DEVELOPMENT (ADFD) TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE 33 KV DISTRIBUTION PROJECT IN KAYUNGA, KAMULI AND KALUNGU SERVICE TERRITORIES

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table Government request to borrow $15,000,000 from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa plus $ 11,000,000 from the Abu Dhabi Fund for Development to finance the construction of the 33 KV Distribution Projects in Kayunga, Kamuli and Kalungu service territories.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO SDR 97.9 MILLION (US $135 MILLION EQUIVALENT) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) TO SUPPORT THE ENERGY FOR RURAL TRANSFORMATION PHASE 3 (ERT – 3) PROJECT

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay Government request to borrow up to $135 million from the International Development Association to support the Energy for Rural Transformation Phase 3 Project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UPTO US $100 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (AfDB) TO SUPPORT THE UGANDA RURAL ELECTRICITY ACCESS PROJECT (UREAP)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table the government request to borrow up to $100 million from the African Development Bank to support the Uganda Rural Electricity Access Project as was contained in the budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those three papers, items 4(II), (III) and (IV) stand referred to the Committee of National Economy to handle expeditiously and advise the House on how to proceed with the matter.

4.26
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (MS Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, for the purpose of record, I would like item IV to be entitled “Laying of papers and a report” because this will contradict what has been laid to us. But just to clean our records for future purposes, let us just capture it as “Laying of papers and a report.”

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER SECTION 7 (2)(a) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACT PROVIDING FOR CREATION OF NEW MUNICIPALITIES

4.26
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion under Section 7(2) (a) for the local – (Interruption)

MR BESISIRA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. The minister who is presenting a motion on the Floor of this House brought another motion on 18 July 2012 in relation to the creation of new districts. 

In December 2012, Members of Parliament from Kibaale petitioned this House why this motion was not being concluded because it had gone beyond mandatory 45 days. As if that was not bad enough, the report of the committee stayed with the committee until July 2015 when it was – (Interjection) - I am saying forced on this Parliament and when the report of the committee was read, the minister promised to come back and report in three weeks.

After three weeks, when the minister was asked by my colleague hon. Bernabas Tinkasiimire, he promised to report back in one week which was last week on Tuesday. However, to date he has not come back to tell us about the fate of that motion. 

Is it procedurally right for a minister to bring a motion to this House, have it stay for three years and continue to bringing other motions similar to that one? (Applause) 
Mr Speaker, in my culture, they say that when something is done once, it is an accident, twice a coincidence and thrice, a habit. Has it become a habit for this minister to take us for granted, to take the people of Kibaale that for us, as an area in this country - Bunyoro with almost one million people, we have asked for a district and you are not giving it to us. The other day you formed 43 counties, now you are bringing 11 municipalities - is that the fate of this country? (Applause) Are we moving procedurally well?

Mr Speaker, we are told of a moratorium, where is the law that that moratorium is depending on? Therefore, are we moving procedurally well that one motion stays for three years and another must move in an hour? I would like to be guided if we are moving very well. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when a matter of this nature is brought to the House, it becomes property of the House. The House can debate and take whatever decision is appropriate in its wisdom.

This matter was truly brought in 2012 and the process, as elaborated by the member, is clearly what has happened in this House. The last time that matter came from the committee, a report was presented and it recommended that the moratorium that had been issued by the Cabinet stopping the creation of districts should be reviewed. That was the recommendation from the committee. Now, the minister picked that item of reviewing it and told Parliament that he did not have the authority as minister to review it. So, he needed to go back to Cabinet, which had approved the initial motion so that the review issue could be handled by Cabinet then he comes back to the House in three weeks.

When three weeks elapsed and the Member for Buyaga County East raised the matter here, the minister said they were not yet ready on the matter. That is where we are. So, are we proceeding correctly? Honourable members, this House cannot debate in vain. If there is a way of solving a matter in a constructive way we usually adopt that way. If the minister has been requested to review a particular matter and he has requested that he should go back to the institution that presented it in the first place, that would be correct procedure so that we can come with finality on the issue that needs to be determined.

So, maybe the honourable minister could now help guide us how far the matter has gone, but we are proceeding correctly.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As far as Cabinet is concerned the Moratorium on Creation of New districts is still on and I have authority from Cabinet to present the motion on new municipalities because new municipalities and districts are different entities. That is why I am here. I am ready to proceed with a motion on creation of municipalities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When are you formally reporting on the issue of the districts to the House?

MR MWESIGE: I have said that Cabinet took a decision and said the moratorium on creation of new districts is still on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister made this request that instead of debating this motion, they had to go back to Cabinet and report back. Since we have heard from the minister that Cabinet has maintained its position, we will push this matter forward to tomorrow and debate the report of the committee. (Applause) Okay? 
No, please let us debate as a House because we have not debated this matter, honourable members, so let us push the motion for the creation of districts and put it tomorrow on the Order Paper for full debate and we take whatever decision - can I finish my communication, honourable member? Can I finish my communication with you sitting down? You see, the decorum of this House requires that you give respect to the Chair. You cannot go on shouting like that – well, we are all under pressure. (Laughter) So, my guidance on this matter is since we have now heard definitive response from the minister that the moratorium is still on, but our own committee had examined this matter and reported to the House, we will debate that report tomorrow and take whatever appropriate decision this House can take? 

MR BIGIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Just from your ruling we will be debating the motion on creation of new districts possibly tomorrow, which I appreciate -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, tomorrow I have so ordered so not “possibly” it is tomorrow.

MR BIGIRWA: Any time to come by your -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said tomorrow.
MR BIGIRWA: Okay, tomorrow. But wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to come with a clear reason as to why there is that moratorium because I need to debate it from a point of wisdom. Is it money or political? What is it that has put a moratorium? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reasons are in the report. 

MR BIGIRWA: For the moratorium?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, they are in the report of the committee, please.

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, in an organised way I believe procedurally we would first dispose of the report of the Local Government Committee because it also brings out the issues, which might affect the creation of the municipalities. (Applause) I recall one of the reasons why the moratorium was put up was because of the costs, which the administrative centres were going to incur.

When the honourable minister brings up the motion to create municipalities, which equally have the administrative costs, I fail to understand. Would it not be procedurally right for us first of all to dispose of the report of Local Government Committee - (Applause) - before handling the creation of the municipalities? I therefore, propose, Mr Speaker, that we first handle and dispose of the report of the Local Government before we embark on this motion. Thank you very much and I so move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a point well raised, but we do not have a motion on the Floor. Can we receive the motion and take an appropriate decision? The honourable minister has not yet moved the motion. That is the motion that is on the Order Paper that the minister is moving. Can we present the motion and take whatever decision we need to take on it and then if you would like to shelve it you do so, but we have not received that motion.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion under Section 7(2)(a) of the Local Government Act to provide for creation of new municipalities:

“WHEREAS section 7(2) of the Local Government Act empowers a district council, with the approval of Parliament, to create a municipality within its area of jurisdiction in accordance with paragraph 32 of the Third Schedule to the Act;

AND WHEREAS the Local Government Act empowers the district council, with the approval of Parliament, to alter the boundaries or create a new municipality it is considered necessary to create the municipalities listed hereunder for the effective administration and organised delivery of services to the people for proper planning and expansion of the areas to ensure orderly development;

AND HAVING taken into account the multiplier effect on the economy, the economic viability and the wishes of the people of those areas concerned;

I NOW move that the following new municipalities be created in Uganda as indicated below: Nansana Municipal Council in Wakiso District; Kira Municipality in Wakiso; Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality in Wakiso; Kisoro Municipality in Kisoro District; Mityana Municipality in Mityana District; Njeru Municipality in Buikwe District; Kitgum Municipality in Kitgum District; Ibanda Municipality in Ibanda District; Koboko Municipality in Koboko District; Mubende Municipality in Mubende District; Kumi Municipality in Kumi District; and Lugazi Municipality in Buikwe District. It is my prayer, Mr Speaker that the municipalities take effect from 1 July this year.”

Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, the motion is seconded by the Member for Kitgum, Member for Gulu, Member for Ndorwa, Member for Kisoro, Member for Terego, Member for Koboko, Member for Lamwo and the members for Wakiso, Fort Portal and all members standing. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The criterion for the creation of municipalities, which we have followed in making these proposals, is guided by the provisions of paragraph 32 in the Third Schedule to the Local Governments Act. I wish to confirm that the proposed municipalities have been able to meet the following requirements:
    • They all have the capacity to meet the cost of delivery of services as well as have suitable office accommodation;
    • All the town councils out of which the municipal councils will be formed have physical plans for land use;
    • They have reliable water sources;
    • They have a reasonable financial base to begin from because they all have local revenue - (Interjection) - Yes, they do; we have studied them. There is no town council which we are making a municipal council that does not have local revenue;
    • There is availability of social services such as health facilities and education institutions;
    • There is land in each proposed municipal council for effective planning and future expansion;
    • Each of them has got a minimum of 100,000 inhabitants; and
    • All the town councils together with the neighbouring areas, which we are elevating into municipal councils, have got the support and resolutions of the district councils where these town councils are located.

I beg to lay on the Table the district council resolutions containing the minutes of all the district councils from which these municipalities are being formed for the information of members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The composition of the municipalities has been demarcated by the planning units of the respective district councils and approved by the technical planning unit of the Ministry of Local Government. The composition is attached to the motion as annexure No.1. In the composition, each municipality clearly has divisions which will work as lower local governments within the municipalities that I have proposed. Mr Speaker, I beg to move that these – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like you to deal with the composition also so that what you are proposing is clear on the record. Deal with the composition of those municipalities.

MR MWESIGE: Should I read them out?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, please.

MR MWESIGE: Okay. The composition is as follows, Mr Speaker:
1. For Nansana Municipality, we will have Nansana Division together with Nabweru Division. Nabweru is being annexed to Nansana Town Council to form Nansana Municipality. Nabweru and Nansana will also be divisions. 

2. In Kira Municipality, we will have Kira Division, Namugongo Division and Bweyogerere Division.

3. Makindye-Ssabagabo is now a sub-county but an urban one, as you know, which is being formed into a municipality. It will constitute of Sseguku Division, Bunamwaya Division and Ndejje Division.

4. Kisoro Municipality, in addition to the nucleus of Kisoro Town Council, which is Central Division, will have Northern Division and Southern Division.

5. Mityana Municipality will consist of Central Division, Ttamu Division and Busimbi Division.

6. Njeru Municipal Council has been joined by Nyenga Sub-county, which is now Nyenda Division, and Wakisi Sub-county, which is now Wakisi Division.

7. Kitgum Municipality will have Pager Division, Central Division and Pandwong Division.

8. Ibanda Municipality will have Bufunda Division, Kagongo Division and Bisheshe Division.

9. Koboko Municipality will have North Division, South Division and West Division.

10. Mubende Municipality will consist of East Division, South Division and West Division.

11. Kumi Municipal Council will have South Division and North Division.

12. Lugazi Municipal Council - the town council has been joined by Kawolo and Najjembe sub-counties to form Kawolo Division and Najjembe Division together with Central Division.

All these sub-divisions, Mr Speaker, have been done by resolutions of the respective district councils. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion from the honourable minister. It is seconded by many of the members listed. I will propose this motion for your debate. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament moved under section 7(2) (a) of the Local Governments Act providing for the creation of new municipalities. That is the motion for your debate. If the honourable members are ready to debate, debate will be starting now and we will start with the Shadow Minister of Local Government.

4.49
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Betty Nambooze Bakireke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The development of urban centres, even though through the creation of new municipalities, has been featuring in our alternative ministerial policies for the last three years. Our argument has been, and still is, that we can even turn all the local governments, for example those in the greater Kampala metropolitan area, into municipalities. We have also proposed the creation of regional cities, which would ease the pressure on Kampala City and also cater for the challenge of unplanned urbanisation. (Applause) We, therefore, support this motion in principle. 

However, we resist the manner in which these particular municipalities are being created. (Applause) If I read the mind of my minister and the would-be recipients properly, it seems out there people are interested in creating municipalities as electoral areas to bring into this kafunda – if I can go by the President’s term - more MPs, and give our people more mayors, division chairpersons and councillors. Municipalities in this context will be an additional burden on the taxpayer and this would be immoral. 

We in the Opposition are thinking about municipalities which are big in size to cater for a big population and sizably developed town councils. We have never thought about a junction with ten shops to be declared a municipality, like it is going to happen in some cases. Our understanding of a municipality is elevating what we have known to be Kyadondo East to a municipal status with Nangabo Sub-county becoming a division; and the municipality of Mukono, for example, would be what was Mukono North. 

Allowing municipalities to take over their rural neighbourhoods would facilitate proper planning as town planners would first plan and develop the rural parts to allow migration of people from the old to the new towns and then redesign the old parts to fit into a new arrangement. What we are doing now - just declaring slums municipalities - creates a very big problem for city managers as they try to redevelop the already occupied slums without giving the people an alternative. 

The Opposition in Parliament, Mr Speaker, is of the view that we should be declaring municipalities for the benefit of the urban poor and not for rich men to go and take over land originally belonging to schools, markets, road reserves and poor men’s bibanja. Today, municipalities are created with names of people tagged to them as their MPs in what is referred to as gerrymandering. This is wrong and it borders on vote rigging. We, therefore, need a clear policy on how, when and where municipalities can be created.  

We are also of the view that priority should be given to the old traditional towns like Kapchorwa, Luweero, Rakai, Kamuli, Bugiri or even implementing Article 178 (4) (a) by creating Mengo Municipality because it commanded in the Constitution - (Applause) - Apac too; of course, it is an old town. Evidence is available to indicate that the Minister for Local Government wrote to selected town councils and directed them to move motions in favour of their elevation to municipalities with instructions that extended to details such as the number of divisions that should be in those municipalities. 

Mr Speaker, we demand for fairness. The whole of Busoga region, for example, has not benefited from this motion. (Applause) We are saying that if there is an opportunity to elevate town councils, all members of this House and all districts should be made aware of this opportunity and proposals should come in fairly. It would be dangerous for us to sit here and begin declaring areas municipalities without visiting them. We need to visit these areas, talk to the intended beneficiaries and consider their local revenue so that we can decide from an informed point of view. 

We should also create municipalities accompanied with resolutions for funding. The capacity of our local governments at the moment, according to the ministerial policy statements, stands as follows: three municipal councils in Uganda do not have town clerks; 66 districts do not have chief finance officers; six municipal councils do not have principal treasurers; 55 districts do not have district planners; nine municipal councils do not have senior planners; 56 districts and three municipalities do not have principal internal auditors. Why are we creating these local governments? Yes it is because we want to take services to the people but if we do not give them the technical staff, who are supposed to deliver services, what are we creating?   

Finally, we are of the view that we need to create municipalities and more towns to cater for our people who are migrating to towns for bigger opportunities, especially the youth, because we know that Kampala is over stretched. However, we want this to be done in an orderly manner. We do not want Parliament to be ambushed with motions. We do not want our minds to be in other places other than for the provision of services. We do not want to create municipalities to create MPs and mayors. We want to create municipalities to take services to our people and in doing that, we must be prepared.

Mr Speaker, I wish to end here by saying that if we are creating these municipalities to accommodate people who proposed the sole candidature motion, then we are doomed. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, debate starts now. Can we do two minutes each? Okay, three minutes for each Member and I will start with hon. Onyango Kakoba. Honourable members, please sit.

4.57
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

I would like to take this opportunity to support the motion that has been moved by the minister. As we are all aware, the way out for development is through urbanisation. We know that if we want to develop, we have to urbanise our areas and make sure we halt rural urban migration. We are all aware that these cities are overburdened and we think that if these areas are urbanized, it will help us in halting the creation of rural urban migration.

Mr Speaker, it has also been pointed out that when these rural areas are taken on while still virgin, they have the potential of developing. We all know what is happening in Kampala; Kampala is now very difficult to plan for because it was not planned for previously. So we believe that by taking on these rural areas and making them urban areas, we would be doing better planning for them.

If I am to speak for the case of Njeru Municipality, for instance; it consists not only of Njeru Town Council but Wakisi, Njeru and Nyenga. This is actually the whole of Buikwe North. This answers the fears that were raised by hon. Betty Nambooze that these areas or municipalities are created to accommodate new MPs.  This is not the case because for the case of Njeru, there is going to be no additional MP because it is the whole Buikwe North that has been turned into a municipality. The intention is to make sure that we plan for these areas.

Mr Speaker, these municipalities have also not just come. In the case of Njeru, this process has been ongoing for some time and there have been consultations and studies done. I am sure that it was out of these studies and consultations that the ministry has come out with these municipalities. I do appeal to this House to support the creation of these municipalities because it is the basis for urbanisation.

I was recently watching a documentary about a village in China. It was a rural area but it is now a city. The testimonies that were being given by the people there were that they have developed more than they used to be before and yet they initially had fears when this project came on board.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I do appeal to you to support these municipalities for the development of Uganda. I thank you very much.

5.00
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion – (Applause) - on the understanding that the justification raised by the minister is actually factual. 

I would like to speak about the planning aspect. The physical development plans for these areas, as far as the land use is concerned – I have been to very many areas and planning is actually very key in as far as granting of these municipalities is concerned. I have had the benefit of visiting very many municipalities that exist as of now and the function of planning has been negated and almost left to politicians. I will give an example of my district; you pass through a place and you see how a municipality is being run and you wonder what is actually taking place.

I would like to implore the Minister for Local Government that as we create these municipalities, the planning function should actually be taken very serious. Otherwise, you shall just be creating slums under the guise of creating municipalities and yet municipalities are supposed to have a different look from other settings we have.

I have also looked at the population census and Busoga was almost approaching five million. However, when I look at the municipalities being created by the minister, I do not know what we should tell the people of Busoga about how you rate them or what you think about them. If the argument is that these municipalities take services close to the people, I do not want to doubt that the people of Busoga, and I do not think that you also doubt it, honourable minister, also want these services. I do not think you have any doubt in your mind.

As we move on, now that I see a certificate of financial implications you are relying on, the next time you come up with such an idea, you need to read our minds. We do not want to be very selfish to oppose this but at least we are speaking our minds and in unison. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.03
MR SIMON ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Mr Speaker, I beg to proceed under rule 50 of our Rules of Procedure to move a motion without notice. I want to move an amendment to the motion that has just been moved by the minister, that the proposal that he has made be opened to include Kotido. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, strong reasons have been given and above all, what matters is the element of services to the people. I want to make reference to our Constitution; if you look at the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, No. XII is on balanced and equitable development. I want to go straight to paragraph (iii), which states, “The State shall take special measures in favour of the development of the least developed areas.” (Applause)

Mr Speaker, if we are fair, when we talk about balanced development, Karamoja is one region that all the members in this House, I am very happy, have been very passionate about. Now, Kotido falls under Karamoja, which has been indicated as the least developed. It is, therefore, very unfair for us to talk about services to the people and forget that there is a region that is supposed to be addressed under the principles of this Constitution. That is the spirit in which I am moving under rule 50, that this motion that the Minister has moved be amended to accommodate Kotido to be elevated to the status of a municipality, and others. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, if we are to move by the principles of the Bible – thine shall be done on earth as it in in heaven - then this world would be upside down. If in heaven every time people are supposed to continue singing and we are to do it on earth, that every time we must continue singing, then we would be having a different world. Therefore, if you want orthodox – 

Honourable minister, let us be fair here, one of the most loyal regions to our Government is Karamoja. (Applause) So we cannot be rewarded by every time ignoring a region that has been consistent. We have not only been consistent, because I know there are also others which are consistent, but we are talking about development here. How do we take services to the least developed places when we are intentionally skipping such places? 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Kotido be included on the list of municipalities so that – (Interjections) - and others which may be relevant to this motion. I beg to move. (Applause) 

5.06
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I have listened to the very strong argument by my brother from Karamoja. There is no doubt that Karamoja needs more affirmative action and indeed Government has done a lot to ensure support and affirmative action to Karamoja. However, as I did say, the creation of these municipalities followed a study and there were criteria which I outlined. It is not just about petitions. As I said, under the law, the Local Government Act, paragraph 32 of the third schedule, for a town council to qualify to be a municipal council it must, among other things, have a population of more than 100,000 inhabitants.

We have studied - (Interjection) - can I finish my sentence? We have studied all the town councils including Kotido, Koboko and others, and our findings on Kotido were that at the moment, even with expanded boundaries, the population of Kotido is 50,000. Therefore, Mr Speaker - (Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I feel very uncomfortable to raise a point of order against our Minister of Local Government, who is so dear to us; it is because I have to make a point.

The minister is saying that there was an exercise, which was done, and guidelines were given for creation of municipalities. He is talking of population tagged to those municipalities. To be fair to this country, as Ugandans we all belong to one country; we have nowhere else to go. The minister has presented to us a list of municipalities. He did not give us those guidelines to show that this municipality was granted because it had this population and so on; he did not. (Applause)

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I do not want to be tribal but I want to tell the minister, and that is why I am raising a point of order now, that there are traditional towns, which were created by the late Idi Amin in 1974 and Kotido was one of them, Apac is one of them, Kitgum is one of them and Kumi is one of them. These are the traditional towns created by the late Idi Amin in 1974. 

Is the minister in order, therefore, to play with our intellectual ability? He is well aware that the people of Apac, composed of the chairperson, the speaker and other dignitaries, came to your office personally and the municipalities that had qualified were 22 and on your list Apac was No. 11 and it had qualified for a status of a municipality. Is the minister therefore, in order to smuggle information which he has not properly scrutinised and deceive the people of Uganda? We want to be fair. We do not want to fight anybody but be fair to the areas that deserve municipality status.

Mr Speaker, as a Ugandan and a senior citizen, Uganda belongs to us whether I am in Kotido, Kisoro or wherever. Is the minister in order to be fragmenting Uganda with lies instead of telling us the truth and giving us facts to justify his presentation? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is easier to rule on the law and the procedure of the House than to rule on factual matters that are not within the knowledge of the Speaker. This happens to be one of them. I am not aware of when Idi Amin created what and the results of the minister’s study. The two of you know what you are talking about but I do not. I cannot rule on it. However, honourable minister, treat it as some information that could guide you on what you are saying. 

MR MWESIGE: Well, Mr Speaker, I have received the information and I had just said that the criteria are written in the law. I am talking about the criteria for creating a municipal council, which are enshrined in paragraph 32 of the third schedule to the Local Governments Act. 

Part of the criteria is a minimum of 100,000 people. The report on the study which I carried out is here; it is entitled, “Assessment of Town Councils for Elevation to Municipal Council Status”. The figures for Kotido are just 50,000. Of course, you have to select. I cannot change the figures on the Floor of the House. What I have presented are the municipal councils, which have more than 100,000 people in addition to other criteria. Therefore, I am afraid that I cannot accommodate the idea of Kotido or even Apac. (Interruption)

MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The Minister of Local Government clearly read out in this House the criteria in regards to the creation of municipalities. One of them was capacity to meet the cost of delivery of services, which I believe Kotido has. He also talked about the capacity of the existence of a physical development plan, a reliable water supply, a reasonable financial base and available social services such as health and education, which I believe Kotido has. Mr Speaker, when the minister presented these facts to us, he did not really emphasise on population. He only emphasised these other factors. Is the honourable minister, therefore, in order? 

In fact, when the minister presented the motion on the creation of counties to this Parliament, he clearly stated that those districts that have already got counties would not again be considered for municipalities. Isn’t the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige, taking Parliament for granted, otherwise it would not have been brought to Parliament; we have a voice?

Is the minister in order to come and assume that the proposed areas that members are raising their voices on, like Kotido and Kibaale, are raw? Is the Minister of Local Government in order to assume that the NRM Government in power cannot deliver these services even when Kotido is granted a municipal status? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was a very powerful speech, but it does not amount to a point of order. (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have carefully listened to the Minister of Local Government while he presented his motion. In his presentation, which I would rather call submission, the minister indicated there was a study carried out by his ministry. Unfortunately, he is the only one in this House who is privy to that study. None of us knows what is contained in that study but he is here seeking our leave to have these municipalities created.

It may be possible that there are other deserving cases, which actually fall within the criteria that are provided for under the Local Governments Act. However, this can only be possible if our relevant committee has had an opportunity to study this resolution, called in all stakeholders, and is in a position to advise this House that these proposed municipalities are viable and fall within the criteria provided for under the law. 

For us to go ahead, honourable colleagues, - I know some of our colleagues are beneficiaries of these - I implore you to listen to fairness. To ask us to take a decision without knowing what is contained in that study and without discussing this with other stakeholders would be very unfair and wrong. This House will not have any basis, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, to decide one way or the other; we have no basis. The only person who has the basis is the minister. 

Therefore, the procedural point I am rising on is whether it would not be procedurally correct to refer this motion to the committee. The committee will then study it together with the report the minister is talking about, interact with some other people and look at maybe other deserving cases and  bring a report for us take a decision?

I always trust the wisdom and judgment of the Speaker. I am sure he has read the mood in the House and he has carefully listened to my submission more importantly. (Laughter) Therefore, as a House, we require your procedural guidance, Mr Speaker. Let us have this matter referred to a committee, which will be given some time to bring a report here, because we have no knowledge of what the minister is talking about. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker does not operate on the mood of the House. (Laughter) If I was to move on the mood of the House, this House would have made many mistakes because I would have been forced by the mood of the House to take decisions ordinarily I would not have taken. That would amount to saying that the Speaker must act under pressure. If there is a Speaker who can never act under pressure, he is seated right here. Therefore, it is not the mood of the House that shapes what I say in this House, how I rule and how I guide the proceedings of this House. So, the honourable Member for Bugweri, please take note. If you are going to rely on the mood of the House to guide how the Speaker proceeds, it is not right. 

Honourable members, I had proposed this question for debate. There are issues that have arisen that require us to reflect over this matter before we proceed with it. This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock. (Applause)

(The House rose at 5.23 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 13 August 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)


