

Wednesday, 10 August 2016

Parliament met at 2.56 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

Administration of Oaths

The oaths were administered to:
 
Ms Egunyu Akiror 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Egunyu, I welcome you to the Tenth Parliament and wish you a successful tenure. During this tenure, we are expected to work and take this country to a middle income status. Therefore, I want to give you the instruments that will assist you to do that. I hand you a copy of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Rules of Procedure, which I invite you to study and use in the course of your work.

You will sit on this side of the House and that is the Government Chief Whip. On that side are the Members of the Opposition; they are all your colleagues. The Independents are seated there and they are all your colleagues and you will work with them. The no man’s land also has some Members. (Laughter) 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and I announce that today, we shall commence debate on the State of the Nation Address delivered at the end of May 2016. We are proposing that the debate takes place between today, tomorrow, and if we do not conclude, we will complete it on Tuesday next week. Each Member will be given three minutes to speak on any subject of his or her choice but based on the contents of the President’s Address on the State of the Nation.

Overtime, I have also received requests from the Prime Minister that in respect to question time, we ought to, as far as possible, give him advance notice of the issues to be discussed. It is not just a question of testing his mental capacity but I believe that when you ask the Prime Minister questions, you need answers. I would, therefore, want us to consider doing that. 

I also request the Committee on Rules and Privileges to look at that possibility and make a provision in the Rules of Procedure so that we can give notice and get proper answers.

I have also received information that some committees are proposing to leave today to go for retreats. I would like to remind all the chairpersons and Members that no one is allowed to leave the House to go for a retreat when we are in session except with the leave of the Speaker. Therefore, all those planning to go today will not go. If you want to go, you will go tomorrow after the session. 

Retreats are to be taken during Thursday night, Friday, Saturday, Sunday and Monday so that on Tuesday you are back in the House. Therefore, do not interfere with Parliament’s time. For those who had planned, I have told the Clerk not to give you any transport. No one will leave today. Therefore, stay here and do your work.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of King Solomon Junior School, Wakiso represented by hon. Seninde and hon. Sseggona. I also have, in the gallery, pupils and teachers of Soroti Primary School represented by hon. Edmund Ariko and hon. Osegge. Can you stand up? You are welcome. 

We also have, in the public gallery, a group of councillors and citizens from Butemba in Kyakwanzi District. Mr Andrew Mutebi, district councillor, is leading a team of citizens and chiefs; they are 19 altogether. They are here to observe the proceedings of this House and are represented by hon. Nankabirwa Ann Marie and hon. Pentagon Kamusiime. You are welcome. 

Honourable members, there were some Members who had some small issues: hon. Lubogo, hon. Asamo and hon. Pentagon. 

3.07
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You raised the issue about retreats. I am a Member of COSASE and I have just received communication from the Auditor-General inviting the accountability committees to a workshop on Tuesday and Wednesday next week. I think the same ruling that you have given should also reach the Office of the Auditor-General, so that we can have this on Friday and Saturday instead of Monday and Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: It is also wrong for the Auditor-General to just invite committees without the knowledge of the Speaker, thereby interfering with Parliament’s time. The committees will not go. Let him write to me and you will go on a weekend. That is what we agreed. (Applause)

3.07
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue I am raising is not just a small matter; I think it needs serious consideration.

Today, there has been a very widespread advertisement by the MTN Telecom Network, inviting people to start saving with MTN and also take loans from MTN.

Madam Speaker, MTN has got about nine million subscribers and they are inviting people to start saving with them and even take loans at an interest of nine per cent per month, which translates to 108 per cent per annum.

The community has been crying about the high interest rates of banks. Now MTN is coming in, bearing in mind that most of these subscribers are actually semi-illiterate. If out of the nine million people, four million borrowed Shs 10,000 each from MTN, in one month MTN would make Shs 3.6 billion in profit.

I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Minister of ICT as to whether MTN has become a financial institution. Has it become a moneylender? Has their license been amended to allow them to take savings from the public and even extend loans? This is a very serious issue because even the banking industry is at the point of collapse. 

3.11
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national interest. There is an announcement about mandatory inspection of vehicles running on radios. However, this announcement is very limited. It states that they are going to start mandatory inspection of vehicles in September.

Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister of Internal Affairs who is in charge of IoV (Inspectorate of Vehicles) to inform this House about the time frame and how this is going to be organised. Are we going to have the PSVs and the PMOs going there together because we will be wasting Ugandans’ time? Remember that some of our people do not listen to radios like people with hearing impairments. We need more information to know the purpose of this programme. 

I would also like the minister to come with a detailed report to give to us so that we are able to inform our people about this mandatory inspection of vehicles so that we are not caught up in a trap of lining-up. Sometimes we have regional IoV offices. Are we going to do it regionally or are we all going to line up in Naguru? Can we also know the cost implications because the announcement does not tell us whether we are paying anything? Madam Speaker, I rest my case. Thank you.

3.12
MR INNOCENT PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Madam Speaker, I am rising on a matter of national importance. On 12 July, I presented here the cry of my people who are about to lose land to the so-called investors in connivance with our district land board of Kyankwazi, and a few other collaborating politicians. I promised the House that I would bring information in support of my people’s ownership of that land.

Madam Speaker, these are people who have been on that land for a long time; they have made their own developments, they have their families there and they have even showed interest in acquiring leases on the land. Some of them have gone to the extent of paying premiums and others have receipts indicating that they have made applications. 

However, to our disappointment, the district land board of Kyankwazi ignored their plea and decided to give out their land. As I talk, I am told that some district officials, with the help of police and without any prior notice, are telling my people to go away. This occurred this evening.

Incidentally, five of the chairpersons of that area are here; the area councillor is here; the chief is here, the bataka are here with me - I have not been informed. Because they try to make sure that they take their munyago as early as possible; my people are surely suffering. 

Madam Speaker, I am making a humble request that you direct the Minister of Lands  Housing and Urban Development to visit this area to establish whether there are no people as various reports have been alleging. This is because even the developments that they have on ground surely testify to that. I request to lay this evidence of documents on the Table. 

The culprit here is the district land board and other collaborating politicians, whom I am sure the investigating team will find in their report. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Come and lay the document. 

MR KAMUSIIME: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank God for this opportunity of speaking from this centre Table. (Laughter) I beg to lay the evidence of the ownership of that land by my people on the Table of Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR KAMUSIIME: The document is entitled, “Land complaint: Suspected fraud on land in Lwengo and Kirimbi parishes, Bananywa sub-county, Kyankwanzi District – Block 824 Folio 3 plot 19. ” I have put my contact as the area Member of Parliament. I beg to lay. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable Prime Minister, hon. Pentagon has come to me on several occasions over this issue. Apparently, it involves 6,000 citizens in two parishes. It is, therefore, important that we establish whether there are people there or not, as well as the ownership of that land. I would like to order the minister in charge of lands to take up that issue.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make something clear to the House, because if we do not come up to speak the truth, this House will be given false information. This land does not have 6,000 people. I am the woman Member of Parliament for Kyankwanzi District –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, for the Hansard -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether they are 6,000 people but I have been informed that there are 6,000 people there. I have not been there and that is why I am sending the minister responsible for lands to go and establish what is there. (Applause)

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Persis Namuganza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also feel honoured as this is my first time to speak on this Floor of Parliament since I swore in as the Minister of State in charge of Lands.

Madam Speaker, as the matter has been brought on the Floor of Parliament, as a minister, I am going to investigate. I will work with the area Members of Parliament and other leaders. However, I would like to make an additional statement on this. 

Since I swore in as a Minister in charge of Lands, I have been requesting honourable colleagues to work with us as land has become a hot cake and everywhere, there are rampant land disputes. You are the ones to inform us about what is happening in your areas. If we fail to handle the raised issues, then you can bring them on the Floor of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, you are going to start seeing very many Members of Parliament coming here with their people on land issues. This is serious. I have moved to some districts –(Interjections)- Can I please finish my statement?

THE SPEAKER: That is her maiden speech.

MS NAMUGANZA: Let me make my statement and then I will listen to what you are saying.

THE SPEAKER: Order! 

MS NAMUGANZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your protection. There are very many honourable colleagues here who have approached our offices and we have started our movements. Recently, I was approached by hon. Makumbi and hon. Judith Nabakooba. There are issues of land in Mityana, like I have said - and next week, we are going to Mityana with the whole team to carry out land sensitisation. We are moving as a ministry and we are even carrying out land registration. We are checking on instances where our registrars in those areas have delayed to issue out titles and give proper information.

As I conclude, what I am requesting is that, honourable colleagues agree with me that land has become a contentious issue. Work with us and when we fail, raise it at another level. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to thank the minister for her undertaking. Please sort out the issue.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, the report of the honourable member on the issue of land is that this evening, there are people who are going to be evicted. The point you have given is to address the long-term. What about the problem of today? Can Parliament order that the police should prevent whoever is going to evict people from there until this issue is disposed of?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if there is any action to be taken, it should wait for the outcome of the minister’s activities. Therefore, let the minister go there first. No one should do anything. Let her get the facts and give us the report.

3.22
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. In my constituency and Kitgum District as a whole, we are experiencing a lot of insecurity. We have unknown people with guns who are moving around and killing people.

Madam Speaker, on 10th June in a place called Lulujo at around 7.30 p.m., the home of a one Atim was attacked and Shs 1.5 million robbed from her. On 27 June, there was another robbery in Alar Shs 1 million was taken away. On 26 July, one Christine Omoya, wife to Canon Omoya, was attacked and gunned down and her husband is still in hospital. The unknown gunmen have not been found. We have had several of them, including attacks at –(Interruption)

MR OJARA: Thank you, hon. Anywar, for giving me way. Madam Speaker, what my colleague is trying to raise is quite important in the sense that it has policy implications. I can categorise the policy implications into three: one, you recall that in the past we recruited what we called crime preventers. At the moment, these crime preventers are redundant and some of them have guns -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ojara, I do not know whether she said that the crime preventers are the ones who are killing people. She is reporting about murders.

MR OJARA: I am giving information in terms of the policy implications -

THE SPEAKER: You are accusing some people. Hon. Anywar, please conclude.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Insecurity is rampant. I have been talking to the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and the District Police Commander (DPC) about this insecurity and they are also very concerned. Five suspects have been arrested and guns recovered. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer to this Parliament is that the concerned ministry increases on the number of personnel. You will not believe that in the whole of Kitgum District, the police personnel who are supposed to do the job of policing are less than 30. We pray that this number is increased. 

Regarding the welfare of these officers in Uganda, I think it is only in Kitgum where police officers are sleeping in asbestos houses with stones holding the tops because the wind can blow them out. We do not have fuel and vehicles to run around. These are the prayers they have already - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I pray that Parliament urges the ministry to come to our aid because people are being killed. By 8.00 p.m. people are in their houses because of insecurity in the area. The boda boda riders are being killed and their motorcycles robbed. This is very rampant and if possible, the minister should go to Kitgum to assess the situation so that he can increase on the personnel and the vehicles. Whenever one calls for assistance, one is told that there is no fuel in the police vehicles. We hope to have a peaceful mind when we sleep in our houses. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.27
MR OLANYA GILBERT (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I rise on a matter of national importance on the rampant killings by the UPDF soldiers.

Madam Speaker, Article 208(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, as amended, provides that, “The Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces shall be nonpartisan, national in character, patriotic, professional, disciplined, productive and subordinate to the civilian authority….” However, there is total deviation from the provisions of the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, in my capacity as the Shadow Minister for Defence and Security, I am greatly concerned about the current irresponsible killings by the UPDF soldiers of civilians in the army barracks. The conduct of UPDF soldiers is despicable and very far away from that of a professionalised army. 

Madam Speaker, on 21 April 2016, a UPDF soldier, Lance Corporal Moses Katoko, attached to Mburamizi 307 Brigade in Kanungu District shot eight people dead and handed over himself to the police. On 16 June 2016, seven people were shot dead inside Makindye Military Barracks by Sgt Obua Isaac and most of the dead were wives of the soldiers.

Again on 27 June 2016, a UPDF officer, Private Stephen Ajuna attached to Gaddafi barracks in Jinja who was alleged to have had misunderstandings with his wife, stormed a bar where a friend of his wife worked but instead ended up shooting four people who were inside the bar. Eventually, he shot himself and died instantly. 

Madam Speaker, what is more frustrating is that once such  crimes are committed, the soldiers kill themselves and usually,  no one is held accountable for such actions yet lives have been lost and justice is not granted to the families that have lost their dear ones.

Madam Speaker, the army representatives that are seated in this august House have never made any statement whatsoever regarding the rising indiscipline in the army and which efforts have been undertaken to hold the errant soldiers for their indiscipline.

 Madam Speaker, my prayer is that Government should bring a statement to this House explaining what actions have been undertaken to discipline the errant soldiers.

Secondly, Government should investigate why our soldiers are behaving in this manner.

Finally, Government should compensate the persons that lost their loved ones accordingly. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

3.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Gilbert Olanya for having raised this important point and I would like to sincerely pass on apologies and condolences to the bereaved families of the people who have lost their lives in such circumstances. No life is worth perishing in that manner.

Secondly, hon. Gilbert Olanya, in his statement, blamed the UPDF Members of Parliament for having failed to bring a statement here about the indiscipline of some of the UPDF who are behaving in that manner. Having served in defence as a minister of state, I am very much aware of the procedures in UPDF regarding command and control. 

I also know that indiscipline is reported to the appropriate authority within the structure of UPDF. The fact that the UPDF officers are here does not mean that they are obliged to bring cases of indisciplined soldiers here instead of taking them to the Army Council. Given the opportunity, the Minister of Defence is the one who is supposed to give a statement here not the Members of Parliament representing the UPDF.

I would like to take it upon myself that –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, a Member of Parliament is a Member of Parliament. Whether one is a civilian, a soldier, a youth, a woman or a person from the angle of people with disabilities, once you are here, you have a constituency. Something is happening in the backyard, who is the best person to inform us? I thought it would be the Member of Parliament of the constituency. Therefore, is the minister in order to mislead this House that the Members of Parliament representing the UPDF have no rights to represent issues of the UPDF here?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member. I do not know how many thefts have taken place in Obongi which you represent and whether you have come here to inform the House who stole a chicken and who stole the goat, among others? If you want answers, ask the Minister of Defence. He is the one answerable for the UPDF in this House.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling and guidance. As I conclude, I make an undertaking to tell hon. Mwesige, who is the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, to come here and brief the House on the steps that the UPDF has taken in handling this situation where some UPDF officers go berserk. By the way, they go berserk even outside Uganda and cause havoc. However, the Minister of Defence has to come here and tell us what arrangement they have put in place to curb these happenings. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Prime Minister, I do not know whether anyone is going to speak on the issue of MTN and the other issue raised by hon. Kenneth Lubogo. Minister of Information, ICT and Communications? The banking services and the inspection of vehicles - Are you ready today or will you come tomorrow? 

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, the inspection of vehicles is under the Ministry of Works and Transport but the actual inspection is done by some technically trained police officers. I have consulted my senior Minister of Works and Transport and we have agreed that, since it will involve two ministries, by Tuesday we shall make a very comprehensive statement on that matter in order to advise not only Parliament but the entire country on that process, the costs involved and where it is going to be done so that the country is informed.

Madam Speaker, if you do not mind, I would like to also comment on the insecurity of Kitgum and the inadequacy of the police. We agree generally that there is inadequate deployment in very many of our areas, including Kitgum. We also accept that 40,000 policemen are inadequate to police the entire country effectively. We will get in touch with the DPC, RDC and Members of Parliament in that area on the specific issues and either personally or in our representative capacity, we will visit that area to make sure -

However, there are areas of insecurity –(Interjections)– Let me finish this and I will allow you –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, on the issue of inadequate number of police officers and mainly in Kitgum, Moyo and other places, why don’t you deploy the police officers we see in Kampala beating people and following Besigye around? They are so many here. Why don’t you send these people to beat thieves and murderers in Kitgum instead of beating people here in Kampala? (Laughter) Thank you.

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, we need these policemen here in Kampala because there are people who are causing problems here. (Laughter) The more we cooperate, the less insecurity we will have in Kampala – (Interruption)

CAPT. LAKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the minister for giving way. The issue of insecurity and in particular, the unrest in Kitgum, should be embraced by all Ugandans. I am talking from experience. 

Two weeks ago, I arrested a one Oloya Franco who was circumventing in the names of Onencan Patrick and pretending to be a porter at a construction site. This is a robber who was on the wanted list in Kitgum. After carrying out the arrest, I informed Kitgum and they sent a vehicle from Gulu Police Station to come and pick him and take him back to Kitgum. It was found out that this boy was one of those who were involved in the attack at Opit Local Defence Unit. 

I would like to go ahead and advise Members who are new in this House that you may have construction work going on at your different sites. Make sure that you check the identification of these workers to make sure that they are the right people doing the construction. Most of these people disguise themselves. They rob from other parts of the country and come and hide within Kampala. That is the information I wanted to give you, honourable minister. Thank you.

MR OBIGA: To conclude this small submission, I am glad that Members have noted the inadequacies regarding the services of the police, particularly their welfare. Hon. Beatrice Anywar mentioned them and I do not want repeat them. I hope that from now on, in the next five years when we come for support so that we can improve the services of the police, which we need so much, you will always be supportive. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the issue of MTN -

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. MTN Uganda has a licence through UCC to provide mobile phone services and internet. It has no licence to provide banking services. However, Bank of Uganda has given MTN and Bank of Africa the permission to do what they are doing. They are offering a product called “Mokash” where any client can get the ability to save and borrow through Bank of Africa.

Therefore, Bank of Africa and MTN, through that strategic partnership, have sought permission from Bank of Uganda, which is the institution that licences and allows anybody to offer services of that nature to the people of Uganda and they have got that permission – (Interruption)

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Bahati for giving way. The clarification I seek from you is that for a long time, MTN has been lending airtime to its customers and they deduct 10 per cent out of the borrowed airtime amount. I would like to know whether the profit they are getting out of the airtime sales on loans are declared as incomes and whether the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is taxing that revenue. Thank you.

MR KATOTO: I would also like to get some clarification from the minister. MTN also allows someone to withdraw money from his or her account on Mobile Money directly to their account and there are some charges attached to this. In addition, in most cases, when you load data on MTN, sometimes it disappears. 

Honourable minister, do you want Ugandans to lose or to save? Is it one-way like a crocodile where what it takes inside, you cannot get out? Can we get to know what MTN is all about? (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Bank of Uganda is governed by the Financial Institutions Act and because of weaknesses in some of our laws, Mobile Money came into place. 

As we talk now, it is not those that are operating mobile money that get more profits but the mobile phone providers and because of the weakness in our laws, we have put into place mobile money to the extent that MTN has made a lot of income out of this business that it now wants to start lending money at an interest.

Madam Speaker, we have had this debate on the Floor about MTN and other companies. I would like to reveal that our people who sell their airtime receive peanuts from what they sell; it is only the companies that take most of the profit.

You coming here and assure this Parliament that Bank of Africa and MTN have been granted permission from Bank of Uganda without the authority of Parliament to begin lending money means that we are now going out of our laws on how banks and financial institutions should operate and what their minimum balance should be. To leave MTN and other companies use this opportunity to cheat Ugandans by creating business - Where is the safety of those going to borrow money? What is the collateral when you are going to borrow money from MTN? Did this company come for that particular business or to give us communication services? May you clarify on these matters that I have raised, and if you feel that you are not ready, please, ask for time.

3.49
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the honourable minister for his attempt in trying to give an answer.

I think that this matter needs to be given the seriousness it deserves. The other day, the President was talking about past haemorrhage – running out of money and shooting the people and so on and so forth. We are talking about lending people money at nine per cent per month and when you do not pay in that month, it is another nine per cent for the following month and this means one is borrowing money at 108 per cent per annum.

We should not take this lightly because I know people are going to borrow in small sums of Shs 10,000 or Shs 20,000. I have already demonstrated to you that if four million people borrowed Shs 10,000 each, they would pay Shs3.6 billion as profit to MTN. 

The minister has told us that Bank of Uganda has granted them permission. Have they given guidelines and lending terms among others? Can you just watch when people are being fleeced like this? Ugandans are bleeding and we should rise and defend our people – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I thank you, hon. Lubogo. Hon. Katuntu took MTN to court challenging the law they were using for mobile money. It is unfortunate hon. Katuntu is not here but I only recall reading the ruling on that matter in the newspapers where hon. Katuntu and team received some money because MTN lost the case. 

The newspaper reported that hon. Katuntu was challenged for being an MP and yet, Parliament had not made laws to regulate mobile money. Therefore, we do not have a law under which these mobile money companies operate. I was even surprised when the minister said that Bank of Uganda had given them the go ahead because I do not know under which law this was.

I was further perturbed last week that MTN is one of the companies asking for the Government bailout. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude hon. Lubogo.

MR TWINAMASIKO: Madam Speaker, I am very disappointed by the unseriousness of our central bank.  On record, the Bank of Uganda is mandated to create money and going 30 years back, it has created only Shs 5 trillion. The commercial banks have created over Shs 70 trillion and these mobile telephone companies have been able to create over Shs 40 trillion.

Some of these companies that were seeking the bailout is because of the crumbling economy caused by the takeover by the commercial banks and telecom companies of the mandate of the central bank, which is to create money. 

Bank of Uganda is just watching and worsening the situation by now allowing MTN to give out loans at nine per cent per month. This is total unseriousness and surely as Parliament, we need to look into this matter to save our country. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lubogo, please, conclude. 

MR LUBOGO: I thank you very much for the information. To the minister, let us be patriotic and Ugandans with a feel for our people. We cannot just continue watching these things happen - they even affect to regulate or try to guide these banks on how they are lending money. We are now looking at these ones coming to lend money at nine per cent.

Madam Speaker, I would propose that these deposits or credit and saving of MTN should be suspended and the Government needs to come up with clear positions and guidelines on which the transactions are going to be handled with. But I would propose that suspension be imposed such that it does not carry on until we are convinced that our people are actually protected. I thank you very much.

MR BAHATI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me make two points and if you allow, there is one issue that has to be answered by the ICT minister in regard to buying airtime or data and it is lost as it is a technical issue.  

I have noted your concerns especially to do with interest rates. I am a little bit suspicious. Secondly, the legal framework under which it is operating. We shall come to you with answers on these two issues if there are any gaps. 

We are actually working out a legal framework to strengthen the existing laws so that we can embrace this inevitable revolution of ICT. So we should also look at the enabling environment that ICT is creating to have financial inclusion which for a long time we have been looking for. Increase in our domestic savings is something that we need to embrace rather that resist immediately but we should do it cautiously and in the right way. Let us not just send it away because after all, you are not going to avoid this ICT revolution. 

On the issue of the gaps raised and interest rates, we are going to come back to you tomorrow.

Finally, on the issue of taxation, the profits that MTN makes through charges and other sales are taxed under Corporation Tax and they pay tax. They are actually one of the biggest tax payers in the country.

A Member asked if there was some revenue that we were losing and not tapping into in the mobile companies; we suspect we are losing and that is why we are purchasing an intelligence machine to know how much these mobile companies are making and we hope that that will be concluded within the next three months so that we are sure about it.

Madam Speaker, this ICT revolution to enable financial inclusion, and increase our domestic savings for the country is inevitable and the Tenth Parliament should embrace it. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The ICT minister would like to come and speak on his sector issues. 

3.56
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, ICT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you very much Madam Speaker,. I think this is my maiden speech since the beginning of this Parliament and so, I deserve all the protection. Thank you.

Members are raising concern on consumer protection, to those who consume services of telecommunication companies. These are offering services currently in three areas:

Voice; that is your call and my call. You are charged for the calls and receiving.
There is data, personally I put on what they call MBs and in a minute it goes. I also want to know whether I am cheated or I am reckless with my phone applications. 
Then there is also the aspect of financial services, which came with the revolution of the digital world. The regulators we had in this area are mainly two:

We have Uganda Communications Commission which regulates the bit of the licensing of communication services. I pledge to bring a comprehensive paper on the regulatory framework of telecoms. I will also discuss the challenges that we need to develop as a country such that we are able to regulate these telecoms efficiently because technology keeps on changing. Then you also have Bank of Uganda, which regulates emerging financial service mechanisms as a result of ICT.

Initially, Bank of Uganda did not have a framework of regulating mobile money but I believe that as result of technology, they must come up with one. When technology advances the regulatory agencies must also advance to cope up with the changing times. The issue of MTN “Mokash” which we launched yesterday, I was privileged to be at the launch. There is something that you need to understand. It is not MTN; the money is from a bank called Commercial Bank of Africa.

MTN has provided an innovation similar to mobile money for you to borrow and save money using the applications but linked to your savings or your loan facility with Commercial Bank of Africa.

Members are concerned, am I safe with that process of getting the loan or of saving? That is where the Bank of Uganda and UCC must give us the assurances, on which we shall brief you because I cannot deceive you that I know everything now. I am also learning. Thank you very much.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he will bring a statement and we discuss it. We are going to question time. I wanted to remind the House that yesterday, we amended the Rules of Procedure, Rule 149 relating to the composition of standing committees. There are Members who are still floating and unallocated. So I want to ask the chief whips to mop up all the Members who are floating and make sure that they are given committees and I have asked honourable Aja Baryayanga to help me coordinate the independents. 

So, please, if you can do that by tomorrow so that from Friday, the committees sit when they are fully constituted. I want to appeal to you. Thank you so much. 

Prime Minister’s Question Time, 40 minutes we start now and end at 4.35. Please, go straight to the point; do not meander.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I have looked at our Rules of Procedure concerning Prime Minister’s Question Time Rule 34(1) it reads: 
“There shall be time designated as Prime Minister’s Time, commencing at 3.00 p.m every Wednesday.” Then when you go to sub-section (4) “The Prime Minister’s Time shall not exceed forty five minutes.” If I look at the clock, it is already 4.00 p.m., the rules say we commence at 3.00 p.m. and if we are to go to 45 minutes, definitely, we are out of time. 

THE SPEAKER: We had to administer oaths before we started. 

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

4.01
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the Prime Minister to help the people of Kanungu understand the issue of our road.

We thought that by now, we would be using it, but as I talk, I do not even see a broken hoe to show that maybe there is anything going on.

On 10 May 2015, the President promised us that by September of that same year, the construction of the road would start. We waited, it did not start; 2016 in January the President again said that they had already signed the contract for that road.

This is now august. Mr Prime Minister; the one I know should be concerned about the people of Kanungu, when are you going to start this road? I want you to assure us and commit yourself, and specify the time when this road works is going to start so that this time when we do not see it, then we believe that we really belong to Congo and not Uganda.

4.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the matter raised by hon. Karungi is known to honourable members here. It is true this road has been discussed extensively in the media and indeed, it has delayed.

The main problem, first of all, the money for the road is from the African Development Bank but there have been problems in the procurements, and matters are now being addressed by the African Development Bank together with UNRA and Ministry of Works and Transport to finalise the procurement issues.

There were problems with the first company, which was supposed to take the road and then, there were also challenges with the additional companies. However, the Ministry of Works and Transport, through the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development and also African Development Bank are finalising those procurement delays and we will resolve them.

4.05 
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, Uganda Revenue Authority came out clearly and said that the revenue they collected in the Financial Year 2005/2016 fell short by 404.59 billion. That was in the last financial year.

Recently, you have heard many issues about domestic arrears that came and Government has failed to sort out and  because of that we have had many issues about the bail out coming out of Uganda, which is a threat to the economy now.

Madam Speaker, my question to the Prime Minister is: How did Ministries, Departments and Agencies manage to implement Government programmes and projects to ensure effective service delivery as was planned for the Financial Year 2015/2016 given such a huge revenue shortfall?

Secondly, taking into consideration all these economic problems coming up now, what strategy has he put in place to make sure that URA will now meet their target this financial year?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the implementation of Government programmes, promises, pledges and manifesto is articulated through and guided by the Budget, and by the sources available. So, the implementation of Government programmes will go on and will be done in accordance with the Budget as announced by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. If there is any need to make minor adjustments, Parliament will of course get involved.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I appeal to you not to start with preambles because you waste a lot of time; just go straight to the point. For example: “When will the Kanungu road be done?” This will allow more Members to ask questions.

4.08
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, last time, the Member for Nyabushozi, Col Fred Mwesigye raised the issue of resistance to ticks by our animals. The minister by then came with a report, which was sent away by Members of Parliament. Up to now, no action has been taken; it has not been returned here for discussion and neither has it been seen anywhere else.

I would like to ask the Prime Minister when he is bringing a motion to regulate pesticides and acaricides as we look towards having this country progress to a middle income status in 2020.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that there has been a problem with management, distribution and use of acaricides. Actually, the country has lost many animals as a result of quality and other related issues. It is true that Government is trying to regularise that problem. If the minister responsible for livestock has not come up here, definitely, she will do so in order to appraise Parliament on the state of affairs and the definite measures being taken by Government to ensure that the acaricides are of good quality and effective and that farmers are benefiting from the same. 

4.10
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora North County, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 1 August 2016, it was reported by the New Vision that a senior education officer in Moroto had said that about 10,000 children had dropped out of school and that the drop-out rate in the region is at about 60-70 per cent.

Similarly, on 7 August 2016 at 9.00 p.m. the NBS television showed footage of a video showing Nyakanengo Primary School without classrooms and children were studying under trees. The same situation is in Nyisango Primary School and also Bughendero Primary School in Kasese District.

My question to you, is; What strategies are you putting in place as Government to curb the high rate of school drop-outs and also to ensure that the children who are studying under trees, during this rainy season – in those primary schools that I mentioned – are helped?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is my hope that hon. Nzoghu is doing everything possible to mobilise the communities to ensure that the children are not studying under trees and under the rain. And that he is working with Government to ensure that they have some cover. Nevertheless, Government at the centre and at the local level will do whatever is possible to increase classrooms, and create some where they may not be so that all the children of Uganda can study in a conducive environment.

4.13
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is that; It is long since this Parliament got to know about the ferry of Sigulu Islands. Almost seven years ago, it was mentioned that Sigulu has a ferry. So, when will the people of Sigulu Islands get their ferry to avoid the rampant deaths?

DR RUGUNDA: Well, the problems of Sigulu Islands are well known; we were discussing them with the honourable Member over the weekend. And as I told the people in Namayingo, Government will fulfil all its promises, including the ferry to Sigulu Islands. But of course, it will be dependent on resource mobilisation and availability.

4.14
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, at around midday, a group of protesters calling themselves “Police Protesters” attacked the gate of Parliament. That gate was closed as a result and we could not use it for close to one hour. The same protesters today went to Makindye Court and attacked it and the magistrate, together with lawyers: Asuman Basalirwa, Opiyo, Kiwanuka and hon. Ssewanyana and hon. Kasibante who were in court could not leave. They were protected by the Police until people went to rescue them.

My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is that; Who are these people? Who is protecting them? What does it mean when Parliament is attacked and thereafter, we see them attacking court? Where do they get these powers from?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am glad to know that some colleagues in Parliament, who were under either hiding or captivity, have been rescued. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the key point is to let Uganda be ruled by the rule of law. Let us follow the law wherever we may be and then, Uganda will be at peace. People will be able to do their work without any disturbance and the country will make progress. This is for “wanainchi” and leaders of whatever category.

4.17
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government promised to give all LC I chairpersons bicycles to motivate them, and also facilitate them in doing their work. 

It is also true that some districts received these bicycles while others, including Kiryadongo, have not yet received them. There are now rumours that elections are around the corner and these LC Is are very worried because they are not sure of tomorrow. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the LC I chairperson of Kiryadongo and I believe chairpersons of other districts, which did not receive the bicycles, would like to know when they will receive them. I thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, in appreciation of the good work being done by LCs, Government took a decision to get them bicycles and also provided the money. 

Unfortunately, only 53 districts received the bicycles while the rest was swindled by some criminals and a number of them have been prosecuted. Therefore, Government is doing two things; one, ensure prosecution of the culprits and two, mobilising more resources so that those who did not get the bicycles can get them. 

4.19
MR GUTOMOI ABACANON (FDC, Erute North County, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is on the closure of x-ray sections in health facilities. A number of Government hospitals and health facilities were ordered by the Uganda Atomic Energy Council to close their x-ray sections facilities due to non-compliance to radiation safety standards and expired licenses. This made it inaccessible to the poor patients, adversely affecting effective diagnosis and treatments. 

On 27 June 2016, the Uganda Atomic Energy Council published a list of only 229 facilities authorised to possess and use radiation sources, as of 22 June 2016.
 
My question to the Prime Minister is, what is the status of compliance of Government hospitals and health facilities to attaining radiation licenses? The second one is on decongesting the Uganda Cancer Institute, Mulago in decentralised cancer institute services -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, that is enough.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I know that there have been some problems in the provision of radiological services and the Ministry of Health has been making arrangements for both procurement and maintenance of safe equipment. 

On the question of the Uganda Cancer Institute, it is true that Government has already taken a decision to decentralise cancer treatment. The four regions of Uganda will have additional facilities to be able to treat cancer patients and decongest the Uganda Cancer Institute at Mulago Hospital, which is now full due to the increased incidents of cancer cases. 

4.21
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is about Masaka Road which is now referred to as a “massacre” road. There are very many people who have lost their lives and are still dying on that road. Masaka Road also has well known black spots but nothing much has been done on that road, leave alone the Eucharistic Celebration that the Catholic Church had on Saturday along the road. 

My question to the Prime Minister is, why doesn’t Government put humps on the black spot areas and also indicate those areas with- (Member timed out.) 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the country is concerned about the accidents, especially on Masaka Road. However, this has also been taken advantage of by some negative people on social media, who have attributed accidents elsewhere to Masaka Road. 

There have also been problems of road furniture being misused and stolen. Even humps are not always a source of safety as some of the accidents are caused by humps. The Ministry of Works and Transport, the Uganda Police Force and other Government departments are working together to see how best the epidemic of accidents can be cut down. 

The final message is that we, the drivers, and the people who use vehicles should ensure that we follow the law. We should not over speed and avoid driving drunk. That will reduce accidents. 

4.24
MR JACK ODUR (NRM, Kibanda South County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is about the Bunyoro regional tire. The people of Bunyoro have been in existence for a very long time and are waiting for the regional tire to be operationalised. May I get to know from you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when the regional tire for Bunyoro is coming on board?  I thank you.  

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that Parliament of Uganda, in the constitutional amendment, quite a number of years ago or more, agreed on regional tire. This was a voluntary form of regional governments for districts that were willing and ready to work together to enjoy it.

Therefore, the people of Bunyoro, if they so wish, that provision is still there. Nevertheless, many people developed cold feet after the constitutional amendment was passed. Since they developed cold feet, there may be need to have a warming process first before Bunyoro can consider enjoying the regional tire. 

4.26
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula South County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for the last 10 years, the Government of Uganda has had a policy of setting up at least one secondary Government school per sub-county. I have a constituency of four sub-counties with only one Government secondary school. Kindly, give me an answer that I can take to the people of Bugabula South. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is very well known by all colleagues that, that policy of having a Government aided secondary school in every sub-county is a firm policy of Government. We know that there are still some subcounties that do not have Government aided secondary schools.

However, it is a priority policy of Government to get it actualised. So, “Ndugu” Kibalya, you can tell the people of Bugabula that, that is the firm position of Government.

4.27
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chwa West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have only one question to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We have been experiencing a continuous process of the implementation of the PRDP II and in that process, a lot of items were purchased: hand hoes, pangas and also iron sheets.

Last year in November, we had individuals who are not authorised by the directive of the Prime Minster to distribute these iron sheets. What do you say about that? 

We may take, for example, one individual taking over ten thousand iron sheets, in Kitgum District. What do you have to say about that? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the items referred to are meant for the benefit of the ordinary “Wananchi” who are in need of these items. If anybody has misused or misdirected them or abused them, they should be handled in accordance with the laws of the land.

4.28
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very happy because this is my first time to open my mouth in Parliament. (Laughter) We have a lot of gold in Busitema, Kyanyonja and Ndaiga. There are foreign companies extracting this gold. 

Gold is an expensive mineral. Does the Government have a plan to set up a refining facility so that we export this final product? We have a lot of land in Busia and a lot of gold and idle man power. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: My sister, a policy for extraction of gold – gold has been hitting the headlines. Actually, we have a Mining Act that gives the direction and the policy on how all minerals should be handled. Of course, the laws of the land or the roles of mining cannot handle everything and that is where, if there are question marks, the ministry responsible for mines will be able to handle or courts of law will be able to handle. Nevertheless, we are encouraging minerals to be processed locally so that when they are exported, we have added value and we can get the best out of what we export, including gold from Busia and other places.

4.31
MS JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka North County, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I represent a constituency where 99 per cent of my voters are farmers. The NRM Government is running a programme known as “Operation Wealth Creation”, where some farmers are selected and given seeds by NAADS.

I have been receiving calls endlessly for the last two weeks because the rains have started, but my farmers are complaining that last time they were given seeds at a time when the rains were almost getting over. I would like to know when they should expect to receive the seeds.	And if the hope is there that they are going to get the seeds, is there a way, through your office as the Prime Minister of Uganda, where Members of Parliament can be given something like three tons per Member to go and distribute directly to the farmers? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Operation Wealth Creation makes some seeds available but not all seeds and it does so at the right time. Therefore, you in political leadership and all of us should work closely with NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation to ensure that inputs that are available for the farmers indeed, reach them on time. On our part as Government, we will do whatever is possible but you, as the representative of the people, should also do your part. That cooperation will make Operation Wealth Creation more successful.

4.33
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, should civilians be tried in a military court martial?

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a well-known position that if you use military hardware, then you are liable to being handled by military courts.

4.33
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The districts of Buko, Amudat, and Moroto border the Republic of Kenya, Kabong borders the Republic of South Sudan. These districts have challenges with immigration and migration for that matter. This is complicated by insecurity problems in those areas.

In the Financial Year 2012/13, the Minister of Internal Affairs – the late Nyakairima Aronda had promised that Government would finalise the construction and operationalisation of the migration post, the border post in those areas. May I know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister when Government is going to finalise and operationalise the border post to facilitate the movement of goods and persons along the common border?

DR RUGUNDA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have porous borders but the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Government are endeavouring to have more crossing points better equipped so that entrance and exit from Uganda can be better regulated and our security improved. So, it is Government policy to expand the immigration points and also to better equip them.

4.35
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is about the Chinese machines in the villages down there. The district from where you come has been circulated all over by machines from the Chinese, in the small trading centres. We are fighting poverty in this country but again these people are bringing these machines to all the trading centres making our people gamble the whole day. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, how much revenue do we get from these people and how much havoc do they cause to our people?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, there has been public concern about gambling and betting machines. However, I think that at a local level in our constituencies, we should be able to work with parents to advise young people.

In addition, one of the most important weapons that we must use against crime is giving counsel and advice. It is right that we should advise our youngsters to behave and act appropriately.

With regard to the laws, there are laws that should be regulating betting. We should use them; if they are not adequate we can review and amend them to make them stricter and more effective.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have enacted the gaming and gambling laws as we were closing the last Parliament, it was assented to but no one is implementing it. It was meant to address that issue. (Applause)

 DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am glad that you have brought that to my attention, that Parliament has done its part; we on the Government side are going to do our part.

4.38
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Members of Parliament know that load shedding has cropped up again throughout the country. There was even load shedding in Parliament yesterday where we never thought it would happen.

Could this be a problem in generation or in distribution and secondly, if it is a problem in distribution, how far have you gone in as far as implementing the recommendation of Parliament agreed upon by the Executive in 2014 during the Ninth Parliament that Umeme should go?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that there has been problems of power supply in Kampala and in a number of centres outside Kampala. Part of this is connected to the winds and rains that we are witnessing, but it is also true that the distribution network is poor and, therefore, easily collapses whenever they are challenged. 

We, therefore, need to spend more resources to ensure that we strengthen our distribution network and I know Government has embarked on a number of projects to ensure that the distribution network is adequate and also ready to receive more power from Isimba, Karuma and other areas.

4.41
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, allow me to draw your attention to the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy number XXVII as contained in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. That among others states that the state shall promote development of sustainable water for the current and future generation.

The ground water potentials along lakes Kyoga and Kwania are highly saline and this affects the water quality. It leads to high operation and maintenance cost of the water facilities available.

The current Government policy is that operation and maintenance of these facilities are a preserve of the users. However, looking at the cost, can Government enhance its support to the affected communities so that we can have more of the water facilities functional and in a way, we will be promoting sustainable supply of safe water to our communities.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I agree with the honourable member that safe water supply for all Ugandans is essential and a policy and it must be done.

If there are areas that are particularly hit or have special problems with safe water supply, then Government has the responsibility to stand by the people and ensure that the problems are solved. Therefore, we would be interested to follow up this matter with the ministry responsible for water to see how best Government can support the people in the area.

4. 43
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, of what use is the power lines in areas without transformers? In my constituency, I have Kisinga, Mabira and Kitanaba with power lines but without transformers.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I must congratulate hon. Walyomu because he is almost getting power. (Laughter)

This is so because as you very well know, there are some constituencies where people are crying for power lines and have not even smelt or seen them. 

Therefore, the honourable is already in an advanced position. What is remaining is just a transformer. I, therefore, think the Ministry of Energy and the responsible actors should be able to take quicker advantage of the fact that you already have power lines and assist you with getting a transformer so that the citizens can get the benefit of power. You are very close.

4.45
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Three weeks ago, I put a question to him regarding the non-payment of pension to the pensioners that has lasted for over four months. Two days after, I received a letter that was written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and copied to me for a response but up to date, I do not have the response.

Can I hear from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development why they have refused to follow instructions of the Prime Minister?  Now that the Minister for Public Service is also here, possibly, we would be able to get a response to that.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I agree with hon. Okupa that letters should be responded to and I am going to make sure that we get a response of that letter from the responsible Government department.

4.47
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to address the House. It is my first time to speak in this House. (Applause) 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, yesterday I received a Hepatitis B vaccine at Shs 15,000 here in Parliament. But when you go to other health centres it is in between Shs 35,000 and Shs 45,000. What is Government planning to do to rescue our people, especially those in the villages who cannot afford this money now that Hepatitis B is becoming a problem? Thank you, very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue of Hepatitis B comes up in this House almost every other week and it indeed shows you the seriousness of the problem. The payment that is being made and/or sometimes extorted from people shows the shortage. The prices are still on the higher side hence the supplier has not been sufficient.

Government’s aim is to ensure that the supply is extensive so that there is no extortion and the wananchi are protected from Hepatitis B.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have used 47 minutes of the Prime Minister’s Question Time. We have recorded the names of the Members who have asked questions today; you will not be considered next week. I have received requests from many Members. We are going to compile that list so that those who have not spoken today will be the ones to contribute next Wednesday.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CELEBRATIONS TO MARK THE INTERNATIONAL YOUTH DAY

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Ms Florence Nakiwala Kiyingi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am proud to be associated with this august House. 

Madam Speaker, I request that I go through the statement and then through your office we can get a chance for the Members of Parliament to debate later because the statement is too long.

Madam Speaker, you will recall that every year on the 12th August we join the rest of the world to celebrate the International Youth Day, in conformity with the UN General Assembly Resolution A/RES/54/120 of the 54th UN Session adopted on the 17 December 1999.

The International Youth Day provides an opportunity to all state parties to evaluate various programmes, policies and strategic interventions aimed at empowering young people. On this day we take stalk of the steps taken to implement the world programme of action for youth, the African Youth Charter and the Commonwealth Plan of Action for Youth Empowerment.

The significance of the day

Madam Speaker, allow me to point out that this year’s International Youth Day comes at a time when the UN General Assembly set the roadmap to the implementation of the Agenda 2030.

The UN member states, in adopting the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with 169 targets of the 2030 Agenda, put the youth at the centre to end poverty, fight inequality and injustice, tackle climate change and to leave no one behind in 15 years. 

The SDGs officially came into force on the 1 January 2016, having been adopted by the UN General Assembly under the same resolution A/RES/70/1.

Honourable members, this day is celebrated in recognition of the importance of youth to the socio-economic and political development of our country. 

The NRM Government has been implementing economic reforms mainly at macro and sectoral levels aimed at achieving economic growth of at least 6.5 per cent per year, and placing emphasis on the private sector as the driver of economic growth and creation of jobs. 

However, the challenges of youth employment creation, productivity improvement and climate remain formidable. In recognition of the above challenges, Government has increased funding to youth livelihood programmes with 8,213 youth groups and a total of 105,674 youth that have benefitted. This has provided employment opportunities and incomes to the young people and their families. 

Secondly, the Government, through the ministry has initiated the green jobs and fair labour programme with six pillars to be implemented over time.

The programme aims at, among other things, the promotion of workplace through skilling and skilling for graduates and non-graduates, the promotion of resource efficiency, recycling, eco-tourism and social safeguards at the work places, enhancement of the productivity of workers and enterprises and the promotion of external decent and green employment abroad. 

The programme focuses on promotion of green technologies in the informal sector commonly known as Jua kali businesses, building alliance for quality apprenticeship in green jobs, the establishment of industrial business shelters that are the common user facilities with workplace training facility that is a centre of excellence for the decent work.

It also focuses on the establishment of a revolving credit fund to facilitate this and all green external employment, strengthening social safeguards and green employment intensive works for the youth and the women, and the establishment of a grant to support local governments and KCCA in green jobs creation and productivity enhancement.

Madam Speaker, this programme will also adopt the Songhai Model that uses the enterprises connectivity that utilises both forward and backward linkages of primary productions in other words crops, livestock, fish, etcetera. It will concentrate on small-medium enterprise development that is value addition and marketing services, in other words retailing.

The Songhai system deploys a new paradigm that harnesses our environmental capital of our planet to produce more and better quality food for a growing population, while protecting and enhancing the environment. 

The theme for this year is: “The Road to 2030: Eradicating Poverty and Achieving Sustainable Production and Consumption.” 

As reiterated, the theme was adopted from the UN Inter-Alia to set pace for focussing on the Sustainable Development Goals. 

The theme provides the opportunity for state parties to re-examine the role young people play in eradicating poverty and achieving sustainable development through sustainable production and consumption.

Madam Speaker, you may appreciate that the theme is premised on the Government’s effort toward poverty eradication, green jobs creation, livelihood productivity improvement and environmental sustainability programmes.

Here, Madam Speaker, the ministry is cognisant of the fact that we have to improve communication at this point in time. There is a blackout between the regulators and the beneficiaries of this programme. 

As I speak, mails have been circulated in the pigeon boxes of the honourable members clearly highlighting the specific areas of interest of the particular constituencies, and putting across the groups that have benefitted in the first year 2015 in that particular constituency, the address, amount and contact, and also highlighting to them how much money that we do have beginning now until the end of this financial year for that particular constituency. 

I request, through you, Madam Speaker, that we get recommendations from the area Members of Parliament for a minimum of 50 groups from their localities. Together, we can monitor. (Applause) I pledge personal commitment to ensure that the 50 groups per constituency are followed by none other than me and we can be able to deliver; together, we can make the youth grow from strength to strength. 

I am also looking at morality and changing the mind-set of the youth. They should be ready to face the truth. I am going to tell them the truth about the moral decay, recklessness and failure to adapt to change in environments and workplaces. 

We are also introducing the cooperatives. The first of its kind is going to be launched on Friday on the International Youth Day. I request that at regional level, the area Members of Parliament will be ex-officio Members on the governing bodies of these cooperatives. 

That intervention will enable me to market the products from the Youth Livelihood Programme, which is also becoming a problem, honourable members.

The national venue

The venue for this year’s national celebrations is St. Charles Lwanga College Sports Ground in Koboko and the function will take place on 12 August 2016 starting at 9.00 a.m.

The preparations

To prepare for the event to commemorate this important day, the national organising committee has been constituted and is chaired by me. Koboko has also constituted a district organising committee. I have been privileged to attend several of the committee meetings.

Madam Speaker, the programme is expected to begin at 8.00 a.m., with a series of activities, including a march-past by the brass bands, a soccer match and exhibition of the products from the youth and local investors as well as the official opening of the cooperatives. His Excellency, the President is expected to preside over the occasion.

In this regard, all actors in various sectors, including Members of Parliament, district political leaders, the media and the private sector have been invited to attend the celebrations.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform and request Members of Parliament to note that the International Youth Day will be celebrated on Friday, 12 August 2016 in Koboko District.

In addition, note that the theme for the International Youth Day, 2016 is: “The Road to 2030: Eradicating Poverty and Achieving Sustainable Production and Consumption.”

I also request Members of Parliament to grace and attend the celebrations. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I do submit. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for that information.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, the procedural matter that I am raising is that, as I followed the statement that the honourable minister was reading, there was information and commitments that she made on the Floor that do not appear in this statement. I thought that those are very important, especially the commitment that Members are supposed to give names of 50 groups per constituency as well as about the cooperatives. My concern is whether we are proceeding rightly, when she reads from another document that is not here, yet she is talking about very important issues? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.00
MS BETY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that the honourable minister is committed to helping our youth. However, I have not heard anything about the minimum wage for everybody in the country, more especially the youth. This is because the youth are the most exploited. The young girls are employed but exploited by the employers.

I would also like to ask something about the programme “skilling the youth”. When we skill our youth, especially the builders, you find that sometimes these companies that employ them do not actually pay them. The worst affected group is the casual labourers. What can we do about this because this is what is bringing a lot of problems in the communities? When we try to employ the youth and we do not pay them, they resort to drinking and stealing. Even gambling is there because we are not very committed to the youth. Let us be more committed.

When we talk about external employment green job opportunities, it is better that we go back to the drawing board and see how best we can help our youth, especially the girls and young women, if we are to send them out. We have that problem. We should never be proud of sending our youth to get better employment outside; it is a shame. If we don’t improve on that, we are not going to help our youth yet the population of Uganda is a very young one. We have more youth than the adults. Therefore, we need to plan better for the youth. Thank you.

5.03
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the minister for the statement. When you look at the theme for this year’s celebrations – “The Road to 2030: Eradicating Poverty and Achieving Sustainable Production and Consumption” - it will not help unless we try our level best, as leaders and as the ministry in charge of the youth, to work on all factors that pull our youth from villages to urban centres or to cities.

Madam Speaker, the reason I am saying this is because we have seen youth at very productive ages moving away from rural areas and coming to the city for boda boda business and other activities. We have to empower them right from the grassroots where they come from and ensure that – because we have very many good programmes but when you really go to the ground, you do not find these programmes benefiting the youth.

Madam Speaker, as the minister informed us about the new measures she has put in place, communication has been lacking. As leaders, we are told about various programmes but we are not involved. If the minister is committed – the minister has already said that in our pigeon holes, we have communication about how many youth groups have benefitted in a particular constituency -(Member timed out.)

5.06
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her presentation and especially, now that she has decided to involve Members of Parliament because things have been going on but we were not aware. We would just hear about police running after the youth because they have embezzled the youth livelihood money but how they got it, would not be in our know.

Madam Speaker, I have one concern. As we celebrate the youth day, we should think on how we are going to save our youth from dying due to drinking Waragi packed in sachets. Some of them may not be able to celebrate because we have a lot of manufactured Waragi in sachets, which everybody can afford. I can cite a few examples. 

Two weeks ago, some two youth in my constituency died of Waragi. Last week, another youth was riding a bodaboda motorcycle with a sachet of Waragi on his mouth and he crashed into a school girl and he also died. One of the youth in my village recently attacked his wife because she had hidden the beans that he wanted to sell and he ended up beating her almost to death. 

Therefore, if we do not put up a law prohibiting the production or distilling and packaging of Waragi in the sachets, which can be afforded by everybody, we are going to lose our youth.

Therefore, honourable minister, we are going to celebrate but we are continuing to lose our youth. The Minister for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should come up with a law to prohibit people from producing Waragi, packed in sachets, which is killing our –(Interruption)

MR OYET: Thank you very much, hon. Mutonyi for giving way. The concern you are raising is very serious. However, my worry is that as Members of Parliament to come up with a very strong law stopping Waragi production may not be very easy because I have information - we have two Members of Parliament seated in this House who are manufacturing Waragi. (Laugher) If permitted, I would go further by mentioning names. Thank you for giving me the Floor.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, hon. Oyet. I am very concerned about the Waragi packed in sachets because that can be afforded by everybody. If they go back to bottling, it might save us like we did with the cigarette law where they do not sell the cigarette sticks but the packets in -(Interruption)

MR MAKMOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Mutonyi for giving way. The issue of alcohol in sachets, I think cannot be over emphasized. However, just as part of the best practices that I have seen, we need to relate alcoholism with mental health. I always speak from what I know.
 
In Canada, we have a centre for mental health and addiction that deals with counseling in these areas. Many of our youths have now gone to the stage of mental health and that of disability. This issue should be dealt concurrently with regulations to stop selling Waragi in sachets and all other related things. Thank you. That is the information I wanted to give.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I rest my case.

5.12
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to start by thanking the honourable minister for giving us this wonderful statement. I pray that we follow it with implementation.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the minister for some few clarifications. 

One, the minister has talked about promotion of external, decent and green employment abroad, green job creation and green employment, intensive work for the youth and women. 

Honourable minister, I would like to request you to explain more on what you mean by this external decent, green employment abroad. The experience we have as a country is that these jobs abroad, especially for our youth and the young girls have turned out to be something else, not for the benefit of the young people.

Two, you have mentioned very well that this time round you will involve Members of Parliament from the constituencies. I hope and pray that it will also include the women Members of Parliament, because in the Ninth Parliament, some programmes came but the women Members of Parliament were left behind. I would like to get clarification on that.

Three, the most important issue concerning the youth is sensitisation. The newspapers are reporting that we have 8,213 youth groups but when you follow it up, you find that some of the youth are not the ones benefiting from this programme. Some of the beneficiaries are the technical people and others are politicians. It is good that you have mentioned that you will work with the local governments. I urge you to take it seriously to work with the local governments, so that these programmes are monitored and the final beneficiaries become the youth and not other people. 

I would like to add that, you need to streamline –(Member timed out.)

5.14
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for presenting the statement. Honourable minister, I would like to add my voice to the voices of my colleagues in requesting you to highlight on how you are going to make these jobs abroad decent because indeed we know that our girls have been taken out and some of them have been thrown over balconies of high-rise buildings and have died and some have faced untold abuses. Therefore, how are you going to make sure that these jobs are decent? How are you going to curb on indecent employment?

We would also like you to shed more light on strengthening social safeguards and green employment, intensive work for youth and women. If you can shed more light on the strategies. The I would like -(Interruption) 

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Jovah for giving way. In regard to jobs, I have been meeting many of our young people who have been taken abroad, especially in Dubai and United Arab Emirates. I have noticed that they are charged a lot of money when leaving the country. When they reach there, they are given a job for a month or two and after, the companies that took them will claim that they have lost a contract. The young people are then put on much lower paying jobs. You find that someone who earned initially $1,000 ends up getting only $200. It is a very big problem. There are many young people languishing in the United Arabs Emirates.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, hon. Tayebwa. We know some of them are even denied meals in addition to not being paid at all. Therefore, honourable minister, if you can help us and -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You had only two minutes and you gave them away. (Laughter)

5.17
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Youth and Children Affairs for her comprehensive statement. This is one of the best statements that have been made so far about the youth. I hope it will be implemented and we shall follow you.

Madam Speaker, the youth are the majority of our population - over 78 per cent. They are very strong, energetic and they are exploring opportunities to better their lives. As a result, when they are not properly guided, they can be misled. I am happy that our Government has programmes for the youth like the Youth Livelihood Programme, the green jobs you are introducing and the co-operatives. However, what is very important is training. As we talk of skilling Uganda by having technical schools in each constituency, we need to bear in mind that there are some districts that do not have these technical schools. When you give the youth money without proper training and entrepreneurship skills, this money will go to waste.

I really would like to emphasise training for those who have never gone to school and even for those who have. Let us pray the green jobs you have advertised will support our youth. However, we need to be careful and control them; otherwise, they might think there are better things outside there while actually the best employment could be within.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for accepting the request of the Koboko leadership to take the youth programme to Koboko District. (Member timed out.)

5.19
MS DOROTHY AZAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to extend my gratitude to our Minister of State for Youth and Children Affairs for her presentation. 

The Minister said that she sent some letters indicating the number of groups that have been given money in our constituencies. However, in this national statement she gave, it would have been much better if she indicated how much money was dispatched to these youth groups and how much was recovered from the projects. This would be important because I understand the recovery rate is still very low and yet we are adding them more money. It is going to be a challenge, as you give us those letters, to follow up the money that has already been dispatched and the people in default because we do not know the methods your ministry is using to dispatch this money.

Secondly, honourable minister, we still have a challenge with the number of youths in this country. The total number of beneficiaries for the last five years since we started the Youth Livelihood Support Programme is still minimal. We need to increase on the number. 

Thirdly, I would like you to clarify on the number you have given to these Members of Parliament. You understand that the youth fall under the docket of the Women Members of Parliament. Whenever we are there, we suffer with their demands for netballs, footballs and other requirements. Now, I do not know whether you are trying to implement equality with the constituency Members, who have just two sub-counties, unlike a Woman Member of Parliament who has over –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MS AZAIRWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask this question on behalf of the Women Members of Parliament, since we have wide coverage and the youth fall under our docket. I would like to request that you allow us to extend the number of projects to some youth. If a person who has two sub-counties is given a slot of 50, and a person with 30 sub-counties is also given the same number of slots, is that fair? I thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, the previous speaker kept saying that the youth fall under the docket of the Women Members of Parliament. Maybe the minister should clarify on that. I thought the youth fall under the ambit of every Member of Parliament. If not, this is likely to cause problems to Women Members of Parliament. Thank you.

5.23
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for presenting a clear report. However, the range of the challenges our youth are going through is wide. In most cases, people demonise the youth, but we must understand the demands and hope which come with youth. 

My plea at this stage is that we focus on improving the quality of the youth in this country. Sometimes we talk about exporting labour, but these are “D” jobs that the youth go to do - deadly, dirty and dangerous jobs. That is why you always hear about our youth being molested in Abu Dhabi and other countries. It is because those are the only jobs available in those places. 

This means that if we do not improve on the quality of our service and working environment, outside there things might be hard for our youth. That is why I would like us to be very careful about where we send our people. Wherever they are going, are they safe? Are we bothered about them? Do we follow them up? (Member timed out.)

5.24
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I would like to thank you for the statement, which is full of commitment and a lot of zeal; it is good for us to start at a high gear.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to agree with many Members of Parliament, including the one who has just concluded his submission, who emphasised that we should focus more on the creation of jobs within the country. I know we need to consider green jobs abroad and have our young people fly outside there for work; it is good for their exposure. However, the most important thing for us, in the long run, is to create jobs for our young people here so that they are able to take on Uganda from where we will stop. So, it is good for us to focus on creating jobs within the country.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I want to make a comment on the Youth Livelihood Programme. The minister stipulated other programmes here, which are very good, and I would want all of us as Members of Parliament to support her so that they work out. However, on the Youth Livelihood Programme, the Government has been putting in a lot of money but it has got many challenges. 

I know that some MPs have mentioned the challenges, but in particular there is the issue of young people complaining that accounting officers connive with Community Development Officers (CDOs) to actually cerate groups in the name of youth groups and they end up getting these projects or they are –(Member timed out.)

5.27
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I join honourable colleagues in welcoming the statement from the minister and congratulating her upon assuming office in that docket. As the people of West Nile, we are grateful to be hosting this year’s International Youth Day and as the chairperson of the West Nile Parliamentary Group, we do welcome this year’s celebrations.

Honourable minister, you have taken up a docket that is going to demand a lot from you and from the Government. This is because the challenges that we face as a country affect the youth directly and, therefore, whatever measures this country is going to try will need to be prescribed correctly.

You have outlined what you will be doing and saying to the people of West Nile and the youth of this country. I would like to invite you to be very observant as you travel to the region right from Pakwach to Koboko. The venue is well situated to enable you scan and have a feel of what the youth are like all over West Nile. You will find youth seated by the roadside eating mairungi, drunk and malnourished. You will see those that have dropped out of school. This calls for the categorising of measures to address the needs of these youth.

It is very important that we use this occasion not to just make political statements but to come out with clear resolutions that will take this country and the youth of this country to a modern Uganda that we want to have by 2020. We can only have this if the measures that we are talking are meticulously implemented on ground. (Interruption) 

MS WATONGOLA: I thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and I also thank my colleague for giving way.

Honourable members of this august House, I would like to inform you, my colleagues,  not to follow the date that is written on this document. You may confuse our people from West Nile into thinking that the date will be 12 August 2015 whereas it is supposed to be 2016. I wish to beg the technical people to respect our new minister. She is a new minister, yes, but respect her. How could you give her a document that has a date of last year? I thank you. 

5.31
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have a few issues that I would like the minister to respond to. 

The minister has asked us to help her in getting 50 youth groups in our constituencies. She also said she is going to make sure she follows up on these groups personally. However, I still wonder how many groups these will be. Can the minister realistically and personally follow up on all these groups and in a serious way? This is serious because we are talking about following up where you discuss with these groups to see how you can help them perform well. 

Secondly, although not in this paper, the minister has also mentioned something about the launch of cooperatives. On this, I am speaking as the Shadow Minister for Cooperatives. We know how cooperatives have been doing in our country and how they have gone down although there are some few that were struggling on. 

As we go out to launch cooperatives for the young people, I ask myself, how much discussion has gone into this, and around what are these cooperatives going to be formed, in particular the one that will be launched on this day? It is going to be a cooperative, around what? Is it agriculture or specific skills that they have? -(Interjection)- Somebody is even saying that they will be formed around boda bodas. In order to ensure these cooperative groups do not die again, there is need to have a good discussion before we revamp them. I thank you.

5.33
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to give my comments in response to the statement of the minister. I would like to first and foremost thank the minister for the good beginning and we hope that it is a good beginning for the youth as well.

The question that I would like to raise is in regard to what is stated on page 3, bullet No.5. She mentions that the Youth Livelihood Programme has 8,213 youth groups and a total of 105,674 youth have benefited. Madam Speaker, it is true that we have this figure but the question is: how much of this support has impacted the lives of the youth? We have so many groups but when you go on the ground, the youth are no different from the day before they received the money.

I think that the most important thing that the ministry should focus on is an attitude campaign. We need to engage these youth in a serious attitude campaign to change their mind-sets. You may give out a lot of money but if their minds are not prepared to absorb, we will actually be wasting Government resources. I am not saying that we should not give them money, but the most important thing that we should focus on is to engage, mobilise and make them skills oriented. This should be the focus of the ministry.

Looking at a figure of 105,674 out of a total of over 34 million people in this country, and well aware of the percentage of the youth population in this country, which is at 77 per cent, this is actually even less than one per cent of the total number of the youth. What plans do you have to expand and cover the remaining 76 per cent of the population of the youth that we have today? I would have loved to see that covered in this statement. In other countries, when such celebrations are being held –(Member timed out.)

5.35
MR HENRY MAKUMBI (NRM, Mityana South Constituency, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister in the new office. 

My concern about this statement by the minister is on an issue that is not well addressed in this report- working experience. We have these youth that are leaving university and training colleges but whenever they try to apply for jobs in the labour market, there is a condition that one must have certain experience in that field. Assuming this was also the condition for Members of Parliament - that one must have some working experience to come to Parliament - many of us would be out because we had never been to Parliament before. So, why should we lock out most of these educated youth from institutions on grounds of not having working experience?

Centenary Bank, for example, gives room to young graduates to directly join the bank without working experience and I have not seen many of them being expelled for inefficiency. I think it is high time, Madam Minister, that we worked out a policy that really removes that element of working experience, which locks out many of our trained graduates. I think this should also be included in this statement. 

MR SSEMULI: I would like to thank my honourable colleague for giving way. I would like to thank the honourable minister too for that presentation.

Madam Speaker, I would like to emphasise the issue of value addition amongst the youth. I was once the chairperson of the Committee on Science and Technology and I am happy that in her report, she mentioned something about the jua kalis. These are people involved in welding and carpentry work like those in Katwe. What I request her to do is to make sure that they continue monitoring those people because they are playing a major role in our economy. 

As we move forward, targeting a middle-income status by 2020, I believe that if this issue is taken into consideration, we shall reach there. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.39
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli North County, Bugiri): I want to thank the minister for giving us a seemingly pulsating programme for the youth, although I find two challenges. One challenge relates to the labour laws, which have not yet been harmonised to create protection for the youth in the various domestic and international labour markets.

Secondly, there is the issue of corruption at the district level. Madam Minister, as you are aware, during the execution of the Youth Fund phase, a majority of the resources never trickled down to the youth as had been programmed by the Government. You are also aware that it was maybe a deliberate move by the ministry that you do not transfer community development officers - they have settled once and for all at the district and subcounty levels. 

For your information, these people are the true conduits of the corruption we have at the district level. So, if we are dreaming of getting to a middle-income status by 2020, you need to reshuffle all your personnel at the district and subcounty levels. Thank you very much.

5.42
MR MICHAEL TUSIIME (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I shall add my voice to those of my fellow colleagues in thanking the minister for presenting such a good report. 

I shall draw attention to item No. 5 in her report, in reference to the Youth Livelihood Programme. I must say that one of my honourable colleagues raised an issue in relation to connivance by the accounting officers for purposes of depleting these funds that are sent to the districts for the benefit of the youths. More so, it has been evident that conditions attached to the access of these funds have also been extremely stringent. 

I will give an example, and this is where I need clarification on whether they have relaxed the conditions. You need to be a group of 10 youth originating from the same village to be able to form a group that is recognised for purposes of accessing these funds. It is also evident that in some village settings where we come from, you may not gather 10 or 15 people under the same age bracket that have similar intentions for purposes of utilising these funds.

Secondly, I also realised that the sensitisation or the awareness attached to the access or the conditions of these funds is actually lacking. I would wish to know if there is a deliberate policy by the minister, first of all, to step up awareness; and two, if these conditions that have been extremely difficult for the youth groups before have been relaxed, so that the people who have signed up actually do benefit from them. Otherwise, I thank you for this submission.

5.44
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on item 5(4). Thank you very much, honourable minister, for your report; it was spot-on. My concern is on the promotion of external business and green employment abroad.

Madam Speaker, we have seen companies export labour to other countries. The criterion for the selection is based on beautiful, young, vigilant and energetic youth. However, at the end of the day, you realise that when such youth are taken abroad, instead of doing what they are supposed do - they usually promise them jobs such as shopkeepers, drivers, supermarket attendant ammong others. However, these youth are used as sex workers and some as maids. I would like to suggest that in future, let there be a clear policy streamlining what these youth go to do abroad. (Member timed out.)

5.44
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to emphasise the matter before us - the youth. When talking about the youth, including issues like the celebrations we are about to undertake, we talk about the elite youth. However, the youth these days, who are actually the majority of the population are the young families; they are producing children and they have a lot of responsibilities, but they are unable to meet these responsibilities.

Madam Speaker, when allocating funds, we usually talk about increasing the money to lend to the youth. I would like this Parliament to go on record and probably say that we should stop allocating trillions of shillings to roads and instead focus on issues of the youth. This is because we are talking about the livelihood and the existence of the population of this country.

Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Order, order, please! Allow the honourable member to speak.

MR OSEKU: The people who are going to Koboko for these celebrations are going to be mainly school children while most of the youth will not be facilitated to attend the function. The community development officers that we are talking about are just pocketing the money while telling the youth that there are no funds. Later on, they will account for this money claiming that they sent the youth to participate. This needs to –(Interjection)– Just allow me maximise my time. 

This equally applies to the Ministry of Education and Sports, because to them, when it comes to sports they are talking about sports for the youth in school –(Interruption)

MS SARAH NAJJUMA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member has said that the CDOs pocket the money, but I would like to remind him that the CDOs are not the accounting officers; the accounting officers are the CAOs. Thank you. 

MR OSEKU: I am sure that Members are not satisfied with the information. Madam Speaker, the other issue is about the green employment. I want us to be careful – (Member timed out.)

5.49
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the minister. I am going to speak about equality. Article 36 of the Constitution talks about minorities having a right to decision-making and participation, and also national planning programmes. I wish to request the minister not to put us at the same level with other communities because we have just come to this House. (Laughter) They should give us some special consideration. 

The minority groups are not only the Ik but there are others across the country. Some Members of this House represent some of the minority groups like the Batwa, Basongora, Benet, Tepeth, among others. Therefore, honourable minister, when designing your programmes, please make sure you remember the minority groups in your kingdom. Thank you. (Laughter)

5.50
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara West County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I thank you for your statement; it is a good beginning. The statement does not have pages but there is No.5, where you have a paragraph beginning with “Secondly, Government, through my ministry, initiated green jobs fair labour programme. This programme has six pillars to be implemented over the nine period…” What is the “nine period”? Is it nine weeks, months, years or bisanja?

Secondly, thank you for establishing a grant for local governments for green jobs creation. However, explain to me how much money it is, when it will start and what these green jobs are compared to those others that are non-green. Kindly give us a little more information on the grant to local governments for job creation for the youth.

There is a programme which you call “Youth Cooperative Programme” in which Members of Parliament are ex officio members on the boards of the cooperatives. We need some policy guidance; what is this board and what are its roles? I hope you can put in our pigeonholes information on each of these programmes that you are starting. 

Lastly, honourable minister, on a day like this one, - I think hon. Oyet had stated this - the nation receives a status report on the youth in Uganda. However, you can see you only talked of 105,000 youth out of 24 million youth. If you are assisting 100,000, you still have a long way to go. (Member timed out.)

5.52
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague from the other side, hon. Nakiwala, for the statement. I am the Shadow Minister for Gender. Most of the issues have been raised but I would like to emphasise that as we celebrate this day, let it not just be a celebration, like others have said, but let us act.

I want more emphasis to be put on the issue of unemployment. We are all aware that this is what we are struggling with. I am happy that in your statement, you made it very clear that we need to work on skilling our youth. I want to give you a survey that was done by the Inter-University Council for East Africa in 2014. It was reported that more than six in 10 university graduates in East Africa are half-baked. They sought the views of the employers in the five East African countries on the employability of graduates from the East African universities. It was reported that the worst record was in Uganda, with 63 per cent; Tanzania with 61 per cent and the rest followed. This means, as a country, we still have a lot to do.

I also would like to highlight and underscore the importance of having technical schools at the constituency level. We have the Commonwealth Youth Centre at Labora in Gulu, which is supposed to benefit youth from the northern region. However, if you went there now, honourable minister, you would see a shadow of its former self; it is dead. I think that as we celebrate this day, we need to put more emphasis on things that will give skills to our young people so that they get quality education and above all the skills to do their work.

On the issue of the Youth Livelihood Programme, I am happy that you are making a commitment to add groups. However, I think you should go beyond adding more groups. What lessons have we learnt from the previous projects – the youth groups that have implemented the Youth Livelihood Programme? What lessons have we learnt and which ones are we carrying forward? What are the bad things that we do not want to continue with? This means carrying out a transparent audit for future use. 

I thought I needed to share this with you and I wish all of us happy celebrations. I also think we should be more organised next time because when I looked for this report on the website, it is only when I saw the name of hon. Janet Mukwaya that I realised that it was -(Member timed out.)

5.55
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need to highlight one important issue about the Youth Livelihood Fund in this country. A number of youth received money through this programme. In my district, the groups that received money were arrested for failure to pay their debts in the banks. These arrests are taking place all over the country, and I have gathered information from many districts that the youth have been arrested for failure to pay back this money. 

Madam Speaker, I have tried to find out why the youth are failing to pay off their debts. What is happening at the district level is that the youth are supposed to sign for close to Shs 10 million but due to their vulnerability, they are only given about Shs 4,000,000 or Shs 5,000,000. The rest of this money is then swindled at the district headquarters. 

I was about to write to the Inspector General of Government (IGG) to investigate my district and other districts and determine how district officials end up getting the youth into problems. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I do not know what you can do to help the youth that are ending up in custody. As I speak, about 10 youth in my district are in Kabasanda Prison. I interviewed them and they told me that they did not swindle the money but instead the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) and the community development- (Interruption.)

MR KISA: Thank you so much, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the Members that the failure of the youth to get money cuts across the country. 

In Luuka District, the money was not distributed from the district headquarters but from Iganga District. By the time they called some few youth groups to Iganga District, they had already distributed the money and most of them got less than Shs 4,000,000. By the time they reached their respective areas in Luuka District, the money was over. Thank you so much. 

MS MUGENI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give the honourable member is that in many of these districts, some of the district officials hide behind names of these youth groups to get money, which they later spend. When the auditors go to the districts to find out who exactly spent the money, the youth are falsely accused, arrested and thereafter taken into police custody.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I beg the minister to urgently institute an investigation into what is going on in the countryside so that innocent youth are not arrested while workers at the district level walk away with millions of shillings. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suffered the same embarrassment. Last year, I was in my subcounty and as I read out the amount of money that each youth group had received, the young people started shouting and disagreed with me. I told them that what I read out was what the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Gender had given me. I took interest in the matter because they normally do not shout at me. When I asked them, they told me they had been given less money than what I had read out. It is a serious matter, honourable minister. 

6.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Ms Florence Nakiwala): I thank the honourable members for their concerns and I will try to summarise. 

First of all, I will highlight a few facts about the Youth Livelihood Programme. This programme was launched in December 2014 and so, we can pretty much say that 2015 was the first complete year of operation. When the youth are given money, they are given a timeframe of three years within which to pay it back. It is, therefore, absurd at this moment to realise that there are people being imprisoned for non-payment. To me, it is not yet the time to do the final enforcement in recovery of these funds according to the Act. This definitely calls for investigation so that we know who exactly is being jailed or should be jailed. 

On the contrary, there are issues that were discovered concerning people who obtained money under false pretence. There were those who were above age and probably submitted false identification. There were also those that are probably out of the country and they got money and simply abandoned the areas they had indicated on the contract forms. Therefore, after the first round of monitoring, a lot of irregularities were discovered. This called for the initial enforcement to find out the legality of the groups that got the money and whether they are really working and improving their livelihood. 

However, I also wish to point out the fact that the CAOs’ involvement at all levels of the district is a constitutional right. Anything regarding disbursements and accountabilities of money from the district - (Interruption) 

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I can now see that DP has excellent cadres that they donated to the NRM, which is very generous of them. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. When you talk about monitoring, how did you arrive at 105,674 youth beneficiaries? How did they benefit? Did they benefit by money being disbursed to them or were you able to follow up and make sure that this money that was disbursed to them made an economic and social impact? I think that is what we are hoping for. Has it really made an impact or are you just going by figures? 

You have already heard - I hope you have taken note - that there are some bureaucrats who actually record the names of these groups and yet those groups are non-existent; they are actually “air groups”. Therefore, in the interest of assisting the youth, it is important that the monitoring mechanism must be strengthened and we need regular reports on how the youth are benefiting from this money. Thank you.

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you very much. The first concern was about some of the statements I made and yet they were missing in the report. Madam Speaker, I rightly realised when I got here that some of the information that I had given the Assistant Commissioner for Youth was missing in the report. I am taking this seriously because of the errors mentioned and the missing programmes, which I really wanted to put across to Parliament. 

They were captured, but like hon. Jacob Oulanyah told us the other time during swearing-in, the actions and words that were not needed in the oath would be omitted.  

Secondly, a point was raised about then minimum wage – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you talked about money, which was not in your report; you talked about the cooperatives and they are also missing from your report. Now tell the House about the money and the cooperatives, please. These are not in the statement but you mentioned them in passing.

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you very much. I would like to tell Parliament that I have circulated a detailed report, constituency by constituency, according to what is in the archives of the ministry to date. I also would like to draw your attention to what the reports exactly have so that we can compare notes on a one-on-one basis. The report contains the money that was passed on to a particular constituency, the details of the people who received that money - the contacts, location, names - and all the relevant details of the particular person and the group. 

The third component of the report is the money that is available, starting with this quarter. This is the money that is available to be given out to that particular constituency. According to my calculations, I wanted a total number of 500,000 groups at the end of two years, which is why I arrived at beginning with 50 groups per constituency. I also told them that this money –(Interruption)

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. The Youth Livelihood Programme has an implementation framework - the guidelines that we follow nationally. For the first time ever, I have heard about something very new, which the committee has not received and discussed. This is how the money is going to be distributed and how the constituency MPs are going to be involved in identifying groups, but it is not anywhere in the implementation framework.

I would also like to warn Parliament that we would be burning our fingers if Members of Parliament get involved in identifying youth groups to benefit. This is because at the constituency level, there will be so many requests for this money; what criteria will you use to choose some and leave out others? You also know that Parliament is an oversight organ. It is conflict of interest; how do you get involved in identifying the groups you are going to oversee or monitor? That is the clarification I would like to seek. Also, as a committee that oversees this sector, we do not have this information at all.

MS NAKIWALA: Madam Speaker, let me clarify –

THE SPEAKER: Please, first take the three questions before you respond.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is no need to worry because it is almost the same thing. The clarification I seek is whether the disbursement of funds is going to be by constituency or district? 

What we know is that the money goes through the district and the district structure is responsible for identifying the beneficiaries and also disbursing the funds and following up on the accountability and the projects. Are we shifting to constituencies? If so, as the honourable chairperson of the committee has said, we would not like to get involved. Therefore, shed light and give us that clarification. Thank you.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek is in regard to the involvement of the youth structure. I have actually got complaints from some of the chairpersons who do not seem to know what is happening with the Youth Livelihood Programme. They would want to continue and help with the monitoring, but they have been left out. If the chairperson of the gender committee is raising this issue, it is because of some of these hiccups. Thank you.

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is like an egg and a hen and what really came first. I have found out that communication is very narrow. There are so many people who do not know what is going on, including some honourable Members of Parliament, and they are being tasked on the ground to talk about the programme. 

In my suggestions, therefore, I gave my proposal that I would like them to do the recommendations because as we talk, we have even failed to realise the volumes that we want. The programme is just into a year or so out of the five years but you find that only a fifth - 20 per cent - of the programme has been executed. I, therefore, thought that with their blessing and guidance, they can be able to recommend and verify that these people really received the money. However, they are free to object and say that they will not get involved. 

They could even recommend to the district because the statute and the procedure are very clear. It does not take away the fact that it is the CAO, the CDO, the youth officer and YLP programme manager at the district to formally process the papers and to get the money and roll it onto the accounts of the youth. However, I think it is very important at this point in time to involve the regulators so that they know in detail what is going on with money that is being executed for the youth at the right time before it gets out of –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the new minister for the youth has come with innovations which are well-intentioned, including wishing the Members of Parliament to get involved. 

I just would like to suggest that she perhaps makes a write-up and meets with the committee responsible for the sector and work out how Members of Parliament can be involved without us burning our fingers as the honourable chairperson remarked. I, therefore, would like to suggest that the honourable minister interacts with the committee to work out those well intentioned modalities of how Members of Parliament can be involved and the other innovations, which she is proposing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have found safety in telling the youth that it is the CAO who does these things. (Laughter)

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you very much. Hon. Latif Ssebaggala mentioned that this is the first year of operation, and we are expecting a re-evaluation exercise starting with September and we have proposed amendments. We are calling upon the National Youth Council to start on the process, together with the ministry and the relevant authorities handling this, to bridge the gap in the procedure that was set forth.

There are several complaints that have been brought on board; for example, the males do not want to mix with the females and probably they find it very hard to get the right number of a minimum of three women per group. It is also probably hard to ensure that all those people stay together until the end of the programme. We are, therefore, trying to edit that.

There was a concern about waragi. We have tasked the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to look into the licences that are being issued to the distillers of this particular alcohol. However, there is a programme called, “Drug Abuse and Alcoholic Prohibition” that is underway and I think that it will soon be tabled for discussion by the honourable Members of Parliament.

The labour laws under the green jobs – I request, Madam Speaker, that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, particularly the one responsible for that docket, comes and presents a detailed paper to Parliament clearly highlighting and explaining to the Members the full details of the green jobs and the labour market that highly affects my youth docket. 

The Women Members of Parliament were also concerned, though it was cleared, that the youth fall under all Members. They will certainly be taken into account.

Members were also concerned about the youth not benefiting directly. Investigations are underway and we are also preparing to write to the IGG to ensure that the first lot of 2015 is investigated and a report highlighting all the members that claim to have benefited be provided. We will then get certification from the investigating authority.

The Koboko area Member of Parliament talked about skilling. She is right because the kind of education that we have right now is more about prestige than addressing technical skills. The youth simply boast of certificates or degrees in a certain field but then take it lightly when it comes to certificates in technical work. That is the reason that we are emphasising skilling, to the extent that we are dedicating the theme of this year’s celebrations in that direction.

About the recovery rate being low as raised by the Member from Kamwenge, as I mentioned earlier, this is the first year; it will not be until the three-year period has elapsed that we shall be able to assess fully. However, we have fully recovered funds in about 15 to 20 districts, as included in the report, such as Sheema. I thank the people in those regions and we encourage others to follow suit.

Those that are having problems are majorly those that are in agriculture and those that invested in businesses that are affected by seasons, weather and other calamities. We are, therefore, trying to redesign a programme that can take into account those particular businesses and the differences in regions. The northern region could be different from the western or southern region. We, therefore, need to go deeper and analyse who gets money for what instead of regularising the programme.

About the minimum wage, that will be under the labour docket. However, I am concerned about the radio presenters, for example, who get very low pay; the housemaids; the people who work in hotels who get close to Shs 2,000 a day yet they cross the streets left, right and centre; the musicians - people who backup the pop stars. I am compiling a survey on behalf of the ministry and I pray that this issue of the minimum wage is taken into account.

About the quality of the youth, the honourable member is right and they are all our responsibility. As a minister, I believe that it starts from home. I am advocating for the young couples; the girls should respect the males so that we can reinstall the dignity of the male and the husbands in the homes so that eventually we can have products that emulate that. The impression of the home is highly seen through respect for the husband and the father.

We also have a concern for CAOs and CDOs, still under the investigation docket. The technical people will be involved at this stage to look at the loopholes that were probably underscored when we were looking at the setting up of the programme a year ago.

Members also suggested that I do a follow up. I am mandated to do my due diligence to follow up on programmes that affect the youth in Uganda. I am naturally accredited to going deeper, widening and spreading my influence in all issues that concern me. (Laughter)

Hon. Makumbi talked about working experience and he is right. This also concerns the private sector. We shall advocate for that and we will talk to the authorities so that they loosen up where possible. However, where experience is required, our hands might be tied.

About value addition, this is another area that we need to follow up. Members also talked about the conditions of accessing the grant being lengthy and probably not very transparent. I do not know whether I should go through these conditions again, Madam Speaker, but I had highlighted them in the different papers that I sent the honourable members. 

However, it is a group of 10 people comprising of a minimum of three women, who must come from the same village. It is the group guarantorship that they looked at in the first place because they make a contract to return the money. They thought that instead of a security deposit, we could have group guarantorship. However, with the blessing of Parliament, we could think of loosening the conditions further but not compromising on the fact that this money should be refunded unless it is a grant.

Hon. Nabakooba talked about the labour laws. I will take it upon myself together with the Government Chief Whip to inform the minister responsible for the docket to come and present a detailed paper on green jobs.

Some of the youth, yes, shun these functions because they do not see a particular benefit to them, especially those that are not youth leaders. We are trying to encourage them and tell them that through getting together, we can exchange ideas and probably make the youth work a little better.

They are always talking about the low pay of the youth members especially the National Youth Council. They say that they are paid little salary to execute their work and that they are few and the district youth leaders barely get a grant of say Shs 500,000 per quarter for the entire district. Whenever you meet them, they complain about the low pay, not being facilitated and hence failure to do their work. These are all issues that we need to look into when it comes to the next budget next financial year.

Article 36 told us to increase monitoring. I know there are marginalized cultural groups in society. However, this money was based on the number of youth per district. Unless that changes, we are stuck with the number of youth per region and not marginalized groups. That is why Arua, Wakiso and Kampala score highly in terms of numbers and in their share in the Youth Livelihood Programme.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, hon. Kivumbi talked about the money being misappropriated by the CAOs. We are taking action. Thank you so much for listening. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We wish all the youth happy celebrations in Koboko.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.24
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Uganda Human Rights Commission 18th Annual Report, 2015.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is committed to the standing Committee on Human Rights for perusal and report back.

THE OPPOSITION RESPONSE TO THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 31 MAY 2016

MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Considering the importance of the State of the Nation Address and the maximum concentration that we would like to give to it, and seeing that it is approaching 7 o’clock, would it not be procedurally right to defer this statement to tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was hoping that if we receive the response today, the debate could ensue tomorrow. Just listen.

6.26
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am presenting the Opposition response to the State of the Nation Address on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition, who is not here, and on behalf of my colleagues. I will maintain the reference to her where she made it. 

Madam Speaker, and honourable members, allow me convey –(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The country is going digital but I see papers being circulated. I remember in the Ninth Parliament, we passed a resolution that Members of Parliament be given iPads so that we can internalise the reports and all the statements that are being given to Members. When are Members going to be given iPads so that we avoid wastage of resources and papers flying all over? It also helps us conceptualise issues that are being presented. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the iPads are within the country and I trust that in the next few days, Members will receive them. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: “Madam Speaker and honourable members, allow me convey my heartfelt congratulations to you, Madam Speaker, and all of you, my colleagues, honourable Members of Parliament, for having successfully made it to the Tenth Parliament. I also congratulate those who have been elected or appointed to various important offices in this Parliament. At this moment in our nation’s history, I cannot emphasise the great responsibility that we have to make our country a better place for us, our children and grandchildren.

Honourable members, I bring with me warm greetings from the people of Kasese, who once again gave me the opportunity to serve my country as their Woman representative in this Tenth Parliament. I would like to thank the leadership of my party, the Forum for Democratic Change, for having placed their trust in me to lead the Opposition in Parliament. 

In a special way, I would like to thank the Forum for Democratic Change President and former army commander, Maj. Gen. Gregory Mugisha Muntu. I cannot underscore the significance of my appointment as the first woman Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. For that honour, I am profoundly humbled, and I am deeply conscious of my personal responsibility to be a shining star for all the little girls and young women across this great country that aspire to get to the top leadership of our country.

Before I go further, let me use this opportunity to pay tribute to the many families who have lost their loved ones who have been in the public service of our country. I will particularly single out our military families who have lost their loved ones at the frontlines in Somalia, South Sudan and other missions abroad where our military are making a contribution to save lives and contribute to regional peace and security. In their honour, Madam Speaker and honourable members, may I invite you to rise up and observe a moment of silence.” 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: “Madam Speaker and honourable members, I bring you greetings from our presidential flag bearer, Col (Rtd) Kizza Besigye. I am sure many of you and the majority citizens across this country know that had it not been for the fraud that was committed prior to and on February 18 2016, probably Dr Besigye would have been delivering the State of the Nation Address for this year, 2016. (Applause) His continued incarceration on trumped-up charges and restriction of his freedoms and rights epitomises everything wrong with the direction democracy in our country has taken.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, on 31 May 2016, President Museveni delivered his annual State of the Nation Address. This was his 21st State of the Nation Address since the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution. To put this in perspective, a Ugandan child who was born at the time of the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution and is 21 years old and about to complete university has never listened to any other Ugandan deliver a State of the Nation Address as President.  The tragedy of this situation is that the quality of Mr Museveni’s address can only be judged against his own record as his longevity in power has denied our children, including some in this House, any other point of reference. 

This very important tradition of an annual State of the Nation Address is commanded by Article 101(1) of the 1995 Constitution which states, “The President shall, at the beginning of each session of Parliament, deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation.” In my understanding, to qualify as a State of the Nation Address, that address should not only be delivered at the beginning of the session of Parliament but it should address a number of important elements, which I outline below: 

1. 	The state of our democracy;
2. 	The health of our economy; 
3. 	The state of service delivery; 
4. 	The state of our national defence and security; and 
5. 	Our nation’s standing in regional and global politics and diplomacy.

Because Parliament appropriates financial and other resources for the running of Government, the State of the Nation Address represents an account of what was accomplished by Government during the previous year. It is not an inaugural speech of a leader or a catalogue of his achievements since the 1986 military takeover of the state. Through the State of Nation Address, the President inspires an entire nation by acknowledging unavoidable potholes, but more so by articulating new policies and big ideas necessary to create prosperity for the majority of citizens. The State of the Nation Address is an opportunity for the President to share with Ugandans his vision of the future and rally everybody around that vision. 

The 2016 State of the Nation Address by the President has many of these elements scattered in its 28 pages. For purposes of ensuring clarity, my responses are organised according to the aforementioned elements.

The State of Democracy

Madam Speaker, let me state here, for avoidance of doubt, that democracy is not some grand idea delivered to us by self-styled freedom fighters, or something that is just written in a political party manifesto, or something that exists just because some person called the President has said it exists. Democracy entails the following:
 
Sovereignty of the people;
A government based on the consent of the governed;
Majority rule where the rights and voices of the minority are respected;
Guarantee and protection of fundamental human rights;
The rule of law including equality before the law;
Constitutional limits on the Government;
Justice, freedom and representation;
Regular, free and fair elections.

Even in its narrowest sense, the NRM Ten-Point Programme stated that for democracy to be meaningful and not a mockery, it must contain three elements: parliamentary democracy; popular democracy; and a decent level of living for every Ugandan. The idea of popular democracy is rooted in the concept of regular, free and fair elections. Under our Constitution, an election that does not meet the three-way test standard does not qualify as an election. 

I found the President’s reduction of democracy to having different groups represented in Parliament not only astounding, but also a profound misunderstanding of the concept. In addition, it should be frightening to all of us for a country to have a president understand the meaning of democracy in that narrow sense.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the state of our democracy is in peril. After many years of progress, we saw a systematic and orchestrated coup against the people of Uganda. For five years, we, Members of Parliament, failed to pass electoral reforms to create a system that ensures a free and fair election. Both we and the Government ignored a majority of Ugandans who adopted the Citizens Compact on Free and Fair Elections, which was presented to the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, who then, like now, is the Deputy Speaker of this House. We have seen the Electoral Commission conducting business as if it were a department of the ruling party and we have seen security forces deployed to harass citizens and contain expression of popular discontent.

Madam Speaker, the February 2016 debacle that passed for an election is the clearest indictment of the state on our democracy. The over 90 parliamentary election petitions, the over 25 elections that have been nullified by the courts, and the others yet to come, are a clear indictment of our electoral system. Both the President and legislators can opt to hide their heads in the sand as the proverbial ostrich and pretend that our democracy is on course but the diagnosis reads differently. 

The stolen 1980 elections triggered a resistance war that consumed the lives of over half a million Ugandans and a ruined economy. This resistance has…” –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure require that when you make a statement, it must be backed by facts. I am hearing and reading on page 7 the issue of stolen elections in 1980. Can it be clarified, for the sake of the records and also the young ones who were probably not even born by 1980? (Laughter) Can you, please, provide actual evidence of the stolen election of 1980? Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I would also like you to clarify on what you called “the debacle that passed for an election” and yet you are here because of that election. (Applause) I hope you can clarify on that. You clarify.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, let me start with –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, precedence has been set that when a statement or response is being presented to this Parliament, we first listen in silence until it is completed and clarifications can come later. Like this has been put forward, wouldn’t we want to proceed and first complete and then he can make the clarifications later?

THE SPEAKER: Let him note and start with them. When you finish, start with the two we have asked you. (Applause)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: “Madam Speaker and honourable members, the resistance has metamorphosed into a defiance campaign where citizens are rising up to defend the Constitution as commanded by Article 3 of our Constitution.

Madam Speaker, our democracy today is in the intensive care unit. Rather than join the President in his state of denial, I implore this august House to refocus its attention on building the pillars of our democracy that I have outlined above. I particularly call upon you, Members, to demand that this Parliament does not complete its first year of service without focusing on the range of political and electoral reforms, including those proposed by the citizens in the Citizens Compact on Free and Fair Elections.

As you are aware, the term of the majority members of the Electoral Commission is expiring in November this year. I implore this House to ensure that it does not consider any proposals for appointment of new commissioners until Government has brought a Bill to this House and we have enacted an appropriate law that guarantees the independence of the Electoral Commission. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, durable democracies are built on a foundation of strong institutions, not strong men and women. Our country is facing a major challenge whereby state institutions have been brought to their knees. The capture of the Uganda Police Force by militia and criminal gangs, that are putting honourable men and women of the Uganda Police Force in disrepute, epitomises this decay. 

As we speak, I am aware that Makerere University – the symbol of academic excellence in our education system - and other public universities – are on their knees. Strikes at Makerere University and its fight for academic excellence can all be mentioned in one sentence.

The President’s response to systemic institutional failure is to ask the UPDF to take over these institutions. With all due respect, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I believe that deploying the officers and men of the UPDF to run a health centre III, as we have seen happen in the case of Nakawuka, only highlights the crisis of institutional failure that we are confronted with. The UPDF will not execute wars, quell demonstrations, handle disasters, command creation of wealth, run health centres and maybe go and teach at Makerere. (Laughter)

However, when you look at it in a broader perspective, it constitutes the deepening of militarisation of our lives, or what some commentators have described as a military coup that has been creeping in this country. As you are aware, in any military coup, the military captures and takes over the running of all state institutions and facilities, including civilian institutions.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is the state of our democracy. This House is empowered by Article 79 of our Constitution to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of our country. Article 79(3) says, “Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote the democratic governance of Uganda.” 

Protecting the Constitution is the oath that we took that made us full Members of Parliament. I believe that this House, instead of protecting the Constitution, has always willingly accepted to be conscripted in the game of shifting the goalposts of our constitutional guarantees. The removal of term limits from the Constitution in 2005 - one of the fundamental building blocks designed to ensure orderly transfer of power - constituted a failure in our responsibility to protect the Constitution. Imagine the honour we will receive if we, the Tenth Parliament, are the Parliament that restores the presidential term limits in our Constitution.

Today, sponsored loud voices on the removal of age limits are already sounding across this country. Some of us, the protectors of the Constitution, are involved, hiding behind voters as we perpetuate the unending coup against the Constitution. When that time comes, Madam Speaker and Members, you will not say that I did not alert you.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I cannot leave this point without informing you that FDC’s former presidential candidate, Col (Rtd) Kizza Besigye, has won himself space in the Guinness Book of Records as the most imprisoned political opponent. His supporters and other Ugandans are about to also make a record as the most battered citizens. Police brutality and terror can only breed more terror. We want to thank this Parliament for having condemned this brutality. (Applause)

We are relieved that some elements of the police militia that have been passing for senior police officers have been subjected to disciplinary procedures. We hope the Minister of Internal Affairs together with the Inspector General of Police, General Kale Kayihura – the real architects of this brutality – will also face sanctions over these crimes against innocent Ugandans.  (Applause)  

Seeking to blame and demonise Col (Rtd) Besigye – a victim of this brutality – is the highest level of hypocrisy by the President. Remember, this Besigye is not only a former personal doctor of Mr Museveni, but he is also a Luwero bush war hero, a former minister and an NRM political commissar. It is not possible that he was a good man while serving the NRM and Mr Museveni and he is now a devil because he is pointing out its mistakes. What about Rt. Hon. Amama Mbabazi? He also used to disparage Besigye when he was seated where the Prime Minister, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, is seated today. You have a duty to sanitize politics because tomorrow you may find yourself on our side like Amama Mbabazi did.

The State of the Nation’s Economy  

Madam Speaker, let me start by acknowledging the progress with regard to efforts to grow our economy since President Museveni came to power in 1986. The numerous economic reforms have helped our country achieve sustained GDP growth over a period of two decades, until a slowdown set in sometime around 2010. Since then and throughout 2014/2015, the economy continues to suffer from tremendous stress. A proper diagnosis of the health of our economy will highlight the following ailments:

More than two decades of jobless growth. As you are aware, the 2016 Uganda Country Economic Memorandum published by the World Bank and the Government of Uganda presents compelling evidence of a slowdown in GDP growth, which has remained below the seven per cent average since 2010. 

The President correctly called our country a supermarket. The only characterisation he missed is that it is a big supermarket run with a kiosk mentality. Believe me, honourable members, if you have a manager running your supermarket for thirty years and it still looks like a kiosk, then you need to realise that you should have changed that manager much earlier.

The structure of our economy is changing but it is not transforming. Currently, the services and industry sectors contribute more to our nation’s wealth. The contribution of agriculture to GDP has declined considerably over the past years. While Government continues to celebrate this as an achievement, they rarely point to the fact that over 68 per cent of our labour force is still locked up in the agricultural sector. No chest-thumping can change the fact that in spite of the constant sloganeering- entandikwa, modernization of agriculture, bona bagagawale, prosperity for all, operation wealth creation and now hakuna muchezo something - the majority of our people remain trapped in subsistence and low output agriculture. 

Rather than only focusing on the capitalisation of Uganda Development Bank (UDB) to provide low interest loans to agriculture, we implore Government to in addition, establish a national bank for agricultural transformation as the epicentre for agricultural finance delivery. We intend to table a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “Land and Agricultural Bank Bill”, so as to establish the Uganda Land and Agricultural Development Bank to facilitate land acquisition, agricultural entrepreneurship, food security and industrialisation. 

Development of agricultural insurance regulations needs to be undertaken to address the heavy losses arising from inclement weather and streamline the operation of agricultural insurance products of banks, insurance companies and farmers. This would be in line with the National Development Programme II (NDP II) strategic objective of developing and implementing a national policy on insurance for key sectors of the economy such as agriculture.

We are a generation that is stealing from our young people. All evidence shows that our generation is growing younger, diverse and with fewer opportunities. I do not know what words I can use to explain to the President and his leadership in order for them to understand that human development is much more than the production of goods and services, or the building of roads, dams and bridges, or the mere rise or fall in national incomes. By failing to invest in our children and young people by giving them a quality and holistic education, and letting our roads and dams and bridges be built by Chinese, Japanese and European engineers, we are stealing from our people.

Madam Speaker, on employment, the over 83 per cent unemployed persons deserve more than rhetoric job creation over the years. Programmes like Skilling Uganda must be actualised and supported. The size of Uganda’s young and potential working population is an incredible demographic window of opportunity.  However, most of the policies pursued by the incumbent regime are designed to harness youth into patronage networks as tools for regime sustenance rather than supporting them to become active citizens, contributing to the transformation process of the country.  

An imprisonment trap was set for the poor youth through the provision of loans under the Youth Livelihood Programme.  I am happy I am delivering this address after this matter has been addressed. The unemployed youth were required to have formal associations, business plans, bank accounts and in some instances proof of credit worthiness. 

To some, funds were advanced without any form of training and mentorship. As a consequence, unemployed youth across the country are being imprisoned - that point has been made here today - for failure to repay the loans, particularly in the districts of Tororo, Pader, Bukomansimbi, Bushenyi, Lwengo and you have heard of Butambala. Surely, how can the high unemployment rates among the youth in Uganda be reduced through imprisonment?

We must pursue policies that seek to promote a uniform approach to youth and women development by all agencies of the state, the civil society and the private sector, and support interventions aimed at creating new, decent and well-paying jobs.

We are sinking deeper in debt and mortgaging the future of our children.  Madam Speaker, as of 31 March 2016, Uganda’s total public debt stock (domestic and external) was Shs 27.4 trillion, which is $8.1 billion, compared to Shs 21.5 trillion ($7.3 billion) by end of March 2015, indicating a 27 per cent increase over the past one year. Out of this, the total external debt that is both disbursed and outstanding was Shs 17 trillion while domestic debt was Shs 10.4 trillion.

Currently, 62 per cent of the public debt portfolio is denominated in foreign currency while 38 per cent is shilling denominated. Hence part of the increase in public debt has been due to the huge depreciation of the shilling that hit the country over the past one year, and Government’s external borrowing for investment in huge infrastructure projects mainly in the transport, energy and oil sectors. The increase in public debt repayment commitments leads to reduction of shareable revenue.

It is worrying that most of the infrastructural projects that require counterpart funding are highly underfunded. As a consequence, there will be penalties in form of interests due to non-disbursement of funds and delayed implementation, resulting into increased costs arising from inflation tendencies and exchange volatilities.

Land grabbing by the state and those with powerful political connections is putting our people at risk and undermining rural productivity.  I am also happy that as I deliver this response to the State of the Nation Address, you have heard about the cries from Kyankwazi. Politicians and state functionaries have sponsored or consented to all forms of land grabbing or encroachment on major ecosystems ranging from forest reserves to wetlands, community land and land belonging to public schools, hospitals and local administrations.  

Communities across the country are distressed as they fight to ward off regime motivated enclosures of public and community land. The mantra that such land grabs are necessary for private investments only highlights the regime’s profound misunderstanding of how to transform a country with its peoples, but it is also consistent with the regime’s ideology of grabbing everything that constitutes public property. 

We propose a reorganisation of the land sector agencies to establish a public lands and assets trust, whose immediate task will be to develop criteria for accessing public land.

Madam Speaker, management of oil revenues is not only a matter of economics but also politics. No wonder President Museveni claimed personal ownership of Uganda’s oil. On the prospect of oil revenue, excess earnings or boom are expected. This raises the temptation to spend more on infrastructural development, reduce taxes and increase salaries, among others, other than saving, hence a deficit bias. President Museveni emphasised that the anticipated oil revenues would easily fund roads, railway, electricity, irrigation, education, health as well as innovations. 

Madam Speaker, as Uganda prepares to start oil production that is anticipated to generate a revenue boom, there is need to set a fiscal rule enshrined within a law. This would ensure that the fiscal rule is not subject to frequent revisions that undermine fiscal credibility with investors and businesses. 

The fiscal rule will set a multiyear numerical constraint on Government finances, hence governing oil revenue expenditure as well as conduct of the institutions and oversight bodies that will be responsible for implementing the rule. This would be in line with the revenue management principles, that is, managing revenue volatility, avoiding dependency and saving for future generations as articulated in the National Oil and Gas Policy as well as the Oil and Gas Revenue Management Policy.

An allocation formula of petroleum revenues from the petroleum fund to petroleum revenue investment reserves needs to be set up so as to ensure precision of how much is available for appropriation to the national budget; that is, infrastructure and development projects as articulated in section 59(3) of the Public Finance Management Act (2015).

As the country awaits the development of a petroleum revenue investment policy as required in section 63 of the Public Finance Management Act (2015), there is need to set long-term targets for the investment reserves. It is imperative to note that macroeconomic stability is a must target for it to drive the economy.

We also would like to see more deliberate actions to promote transparency in the decision-making processes in the oil and gas subsector. Recruitment of the top leadership for the oil sector agencies and the issuance of production licences should have been subjected to open public hearing processes. We also wish to encourage Government to pursue the processes of becoming a member of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) as it committed itself under the 2008 National Oil and Gas Policy.

The Private Sector is Hurting

The proposal to develop industrial parks, complete with requisite utilities, will be supported.  However, land in these designated areas needs to be competed for by investors. This would curb the growing trend where land allocated to investors is not developed or has been transferred to another investor without the approval of Government. Section 40 of the Land Act needs to be amended to provide for a maximum lease period of 49 years instead of 99 years so as to reduce incidences of idle and absent landlords.

Madam Speaker, annual private sector credit growth declined during Financial Year 2015/2016 from 20.2 per cent in June 2015 to 8.7 per cent in March 2016. This was on account of the weakening demand for credit due to rising interest rates. The quality of loan assets also declined over the same period, with the ratio of non-performing loans to total loans increasing from 3.8 per cent in June 2015 to 7 per cent in March 2016. 

Premised on the above, the media in July was awash with prospects of bailing out a number of indebted companies that had failed to repay their loans. Although bailouts have been used worldwide to redeem indebted companies, it is crucial to emphasize that they should only be considered for businesses that have widespread linkages and are not victims of poor governance. Besides, there are a multitude of small and medium enterprises that are also indebted and selective consideration of companies to bail out would not be fair.  A bailout criterion is a must.

The call on Government agencies to procure locally made products is a welcome move.  It is our prayer that this call does not become a repeat of the 1986 pronouncement that all agencies, including State House, would purchase furniture from Bwaise in Kampala. The pictures beaming from State House and other Government departments however show furniture and other items manufactured in Asian and European countries. However, the Ugandan quality in furniture and other products has greatly improved and we, therefore, support any effort to buy Ugandan, build Uganda.  

There should, however, be deliberate mechanisms to bolster quality and quantity as well as monitor compliance to standards.  One such mechanism is a strict adherence to the provisions of the Public Finance and Procurement Regulations to allow for prompt payments to suppliers and avoid domestic arrears, as well as strengthening the agencies responsible for enforcing standards. These payments cannot be left to pronouncements in the Budget Speech and State of the Nation Address.  

The above notwithstanding, the President’s directive to Government to negotiate with banks not to attach assets of individual persons or companies that owe them money simply because they supplied and have not been paid by the same Government is untenable.  Not all the debts owed to banks by these targeted individuals or companies are as a result of unpaid supplies to Government departments.  However, we agree that companies in debt as a result of trade instabilities in South Sudan should be verified and helped out to secure their due payments through bilateral negotiations with the Government of South Sudan.  
  
Corruption and patronage has become a cancer. No matter how many political declarations President Museveni has made, he does not seem to see that corruption and patronage are standing in our way of progress. I do not think he gets it. 

Like we stated in our campaign manifesto, those who steal public funds and public assets are stealing from Ugandan tax payers who have to endure survival in a hostile economic environment and a distorted taxation regime. They are stealing the future of our children and yet the corrupt are enjoying their honeymoon under Mr Museveni’s leadership. His political rhetoric has been a constant feature of his addresses for the last two decades. Why does he think Ugandans should believe him this time around? Does this House believe him?

The President has made lamentations about the problems facing the country as part of his policy responses. You all recall how he appointed a commission of inquiry into the work of UNRA. The commission found that over Shs 4 trillion, which should have built over 5000kms of roads, was swindled. You recall the famous over Shs 24 billion meant for Mukono-Katosi Road that disappeared in thin air. The level of theft of public funds has reached frightening levels that Mr Museveni needs to take political responsibility for the failures of his government to tackle this cancer. 

We believe that there is need to take decisive, bold and immediate actions to make corruption, embezzlement of public funds and stealing of public assets a risky business. Besides the usual political rhetoric and declarations, the State of the Nation address did not articulate any new measures to decisively deal with the haemorrhage of corruption.

The leadership of the Opposition in Parliament will work to achieve the following:

    1. Introduce a motion demanding Government to rationalise the mandates of anti-corruption agencies, remove overlaps and improve efficiency in their operations.

    2. Build more active partnerships with anti-corruption civil society organisations including citizens’ anti-corruption movements such as the Black Monday Movement.

    3. Introduce a motion to demand that any public official against whom an official inquiry regarding abuse of public funds and use of public office has been instituted is required to resign from office until the completion of such inquiry.

At a general level, the GDP growth from Shs 6 trillion in 1986 to Shs 74 trillion in 2014 sounds impressive. However, the President’s address only deals with half-truths. It does not explain that we are more indebted today than we were in 1986; that we have even surpassed the 2006 level of indebtedness when we had to plead for debt forgiveness under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative. At over $8 billion dollars in debt, every Ugandan, including children, is indebted to the tune of close to Shs 100,000,000. Worse still, the President’s address does not acknowledge that approximately 43 per cent of Uganda’s 34.6 million people are hanging on the cliff of poverty.

I applaud the President for outlining a range of measures to deal with the current economic slowdown. We particularly share the President’s passion for accelerated and sustained investment on transport and energy infrastructure. However, these measures do not go far enough. Programmes that put money into the pockets of Ugandans must accompany these measures. At this moment, what is needed are more measures that are specific, time bound and comprehensive to have a significant transformative effect on the economy and the lives of our people. 

I propose the following measures and policies to tackle the current economic malaise:

i) 	Reduction in the Cost of Government 

The Government - particularly the political leadership and local government bureaucracy - has become too big and inefficient. Why have we, as Parliament, become blind to the fact that the size of this House and the Executive bureaucracy is expanding on the backs of our citizens and taxpayers?

ii) 	Accelerate the Implementation of the Skilling Uganda Programme 

As most of you are aware, Government applied for a loan from the World Bank, which was approved by the World Bank Board of Directors around June 2015. The loan’s approval request spent almost 12 months in this House. Even when the loan was finally approved, the process of establishing the necessary implementation modalities is proceeding at a very slow pace. Any delays in the implementation of this programme does not only demonstrate the levels of inefficiency we have become accustomed to under the current Government, but also denies our young people the opportunities to prepare themselves for the job market.

iii) 	Affordable Agriculture Financing 

I applaud the President for continuously reminding himself and his government that one of the major bottlenecks to agricultural transformation is agricultural financing. He has said this since he launched the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture in August 2008. Since then, his actions have often been in the form of slogans: entandikwa, bonna bagagawale, prosperity for all and now operation wealth creation. 

When sloganeering becomes a substitute for public policy, then you know a country is headed for stagnation at best or disaster at worst. This House must demand from the President an appropriate plan with clear milestones and time bound targets on establishing and delivering an affordable financing plan for agriculture.

iv) 	An Infrastructure Transformation Plan for Kampala 

We believe that Kampala remains our high intensity economic zone. A laser focus to transform the city infrastructure to reduce traffic congestion, facilitate easy mobility of labour, goods and services, reduce flooding and sanitation related ailments could unlock more economic potential for our capital city. This House should demand to see a plan for Kampala and allocate adequate funding for such a plan.     

The State of Service Delivery

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the primary responsibility of Government is to ensure that the citizens access the minimum quality of public services that enhance their dignity, expand opportunities and improve their standards of living. Accountable governments and responsible leaders often focus on continuously improving the quality of public services especially in education, health, water and sanitation. It is regrettable that the President paid very little attention to appraise the nation on the state of service delivery in the country and yet, our people are suffering because of a public service delivery system that has broken down.   

Indeed, it is inconceivable that one man and one party can run a Government for 30 years and you do not find any service delivery system that works. In spite of 30 years of investment in education, health, water and sanitation by both Government and development partners, you hardly find systems that work. I hope that one day, Mr Museveni will realise that running a country is not about building a school here, a health centre there or a road somewhere, but rather building institutions and systems that endure. 

The ad hoc manner in which this Government transacts business, epitomised in Mr Museveni’s firing of health services staff at Nakawuka Health Centre III in Wakiso District, only demonstrates the depth of the breakdown of our service delivery system. Our people are not looking for fire fighting actions but rather bold actions that constitute a rebooting and resetting of the way Government functions.

Indeed, it is painful talking about the health sector of this country.  We call upon Government to step up efforts toward revitalising the health sector. The attempts to forcefully spinoff the filth in these health facilities during the last electoral process exposed them the more, starting with Abim Hospital. These facilities must return to the past glory of the 1960s and 1980s, when they were healing rather than the death committal chambers they have become today.  

A number of health facilities in the country are in a deplorable state. They are largely characterised by understaffing, delayed salary payments, inadequate accommodation and inadequate equipment. As a consequence, the doctor to patient ratio stands at 1 to 1298 against the recommended 1 to 439 by the World Health Organisation. Staffing at local government level is at 49 per cent. It is interesting to note that despite these appalling statistics, our Government bureaucrats have negotiated with countries as far off as the Caribbean to export the few medical personnel, in the name of a better pay.

For national referral hospitals, the hospital to population ratio is 1 to 30,000,000 whereas the standard should be 1 to 10,000,000. At the level of Health Centre IV, the ratio is 1 to 187,500 whereas the desired ratio should be 1 to 100,000. For Health Centres III, the ratio is 1 to 84,507 whereas the optimum should be 1 to 20,000.

There is an increase in quack medical personnel who extort from the public and make wrong prescriptions. It is unbelievable that 60 per cent of medical personnel lack basic tools of work such as uniforms. 

Many of the Government health facilities operate with non-standardised x-ray units. As a result they were ordered by the Uganda Atomic Energy Council to close their x-ray facilities due to noncompliance to radiation safety standards and expired licences. This has made accessibility to x-ray services hard for poor patients, adversely hampering effective diagnosis and treatment. 

On 27 June 2016, the Atomic Energy Council published a list of only 229 facilities - as the shadow minister ably articulated earlier - authorised to possess and use radiation sources as of 22 June 2016. A majority of the facilities were privately owned. Out of the 14 regional referral hospitals, only five were authorised to operate x-ray services including Fort Portal, Jinja, Kabale, Lira and Mubende. None of the national referral hospitals is licensed to handle radiation sources.

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, let me go to education. The introduction of Universal Primary Education (UPE), Universal Secondary Education (USE), the policy of a technical school in every sub-county, and the numerous university support programmes was and remains a step in the positive direction. These interventions would boost our regional and global competitiveness if only our government interested itself in issues of quality, allocated commensurate resources and ensured inspection. 
 
The introduction and implementation of UPE is billed as the signature policy accomplishment of the NRM. We cannot be oblivious of the fact that only 25 per cent of our children complete primary education; an estimated 18,594,745 children are unaccounted for between primary one and primary seven since UPE was introduced in 1997 up to the cohort of 2009, which sat for PLE in 2015. This is a real tragedy for our country and this is the state of the nation. It is, therefore, unbelievable that Mr Museveni talked about education in passing without articulating any measures to reverse this situation. I have provided statistics that honourable members can look at.

Indeed, the low levels of completion especially at primary level, technical skills training, school infrastructure development and staff welfare especially in the hard-to-reach areas should be systematically addressed.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, how many of us in this House would willingly allow to be treated in the health facilities in our constituencies? How many of us can be proud of the institutions that have been built in the last 30 years?  Can our children go to the same UPE schools that our voters use? If the answer is no, then Parliament must commit to ensuring that the challenges raised above are addressed mainly through appropriation measures.

The State of Our National Defence, Security and Peace

A nation’s defence and security is dependent not only on the strength of its security forces but also on the prosperity and patriotism of its people. While the strength of our security forces is one of the pillars of our national defence and security, prosperity and patriotism are the foundation on which these pillars must stand. However, more importantly, sustainable peace is built on a foundation of justice, equality and equal opportunity.

Without a doubt, Mr Museveni’s government has contributed to establishing peace and stability in the country and for this, the President should be applauded. More so, the men and women who serve in our security forces should be congratulated and we should remain eternally grateful for the sacrifices they make together with their families. 

Let me, therefore, emphasise that the absence of war or insecurity should never be equated to sustainable peace and stability. Our task today and in the future is to strengthen the foundation for sustainable peace and shared prosperity. These cannot be achieved by putting more armed men on the streets of our cities. It can only be achieved when those who are charged with the honour of public service respect the dignity of our people and when Government pursues policies that deepen the sense of justice, equal opportunity and shared prosperity.

The reliance on military hardware to secure an electoral victory, the recent scenario where Kololo Ceremonial Grounds were instantly turned into a military garrison, and the police occupation of FDC headquarters are all symptoms of an uneasy peace and demonstrate the cracks in our national defence and security architecture. A government that loses the will of the people cannot, on a sustainable basis, defend a country against foreign aggression. That is the state of our nation today.

Our Nation’s standing in Regional and Global Politics and Diplomacy 

To the credit of the Government and the President in particular, our country has continued to project and offer leadership regionally and internationally. Our presidency of the United Nations General Assembly concluded with the adoption of the global Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Our leadership in ensuring regional peace and security is fairly well recognised.

However, this House must become more assertive in demanding for accountability and compliance with the law regarding the deployment of our military on foreign missions. Increasingly, our armed forces are deployed on these missions without appropriate parliamentary approval. We want to encourage the President that the constitutional requirement for deployment of our armed forces is not to curtail missions that promote the national interests of Uganda but rather to create the checks and balances that are essential for the validity and success of these missions.

Priority Legislation Agenda

In his address, the President outlined the priority legislative agenda of his Government. We particularly want to emphasise the need for prioritisation of legislation that addresses three important areas:

i) 	Let me emphasize once again that noise coming from the battlefields of Kyankwanzi about the removal of age limits from the Constitution should be resisted by this House as part of our duty to protect the foundations of our democracy.

ii) 	Let us prioritise the enactment of legislation that creates and expands economic opportunities for our people, given the stress that our economy is in. 

Without attempting to exhaust the list, let me point out the following key economic pieces of legislation that should be fast-tracked:

a) 	Agriculture Extension Bill
b) 	Fisheries (Amendment) Bill
c) 	National Coffee Bill
d) 	Uganda Construction Industry Commission (UCICO) Bill
e) 	The Engineers Registration (Amendment) Bill
f) 	Climate Change Bill
g) 	The Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill
h) 	Consumer Protection Bill

In each of these pieces of legislation, what we would want to see are measures to promote and support economic activities by the private sector and individuals, as well as measures to promote local content in the various industries, including the oil and gas subsector.

iii) Thirdly, we need to prioritise legislation that will boost the quality of the education system and skills training programmes. We will, therefore, unreservedly support the following legislative proposals as pointed out by the President:

a)	Amendment of the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act;
b)	National Curriculum Development Centre (Amendment) Bill;
c)	Uganda National Examinations Board (Amendment) Bill

I have laboured to present these legislative priorities in clear categories because as Parliament, we should begin to demand from Government a more organised legislative agenda addressing priority sectors in a comprehensive manner. There is no reason why Government should not develop a package of legislation for a particular sector so that Parliament can handle these laws in a more systematic and coordinated manner.

Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, our country is at a critical junction. The President talked of a country that is moving towards achieving middle-income status in about three years’ time. He seems to be reading from a script that is different from the ones many Ugandan households and business people are reading from. The private sector is hurting and the economic pain is beginning to spread across the various segments of our society, from individual households to the business community. The only place that is shielded from the current stressful economic realities is State House where we collectively pay the shopping bills.

Our democracy is either at a standstill or is simply in retreat. We cannot afford to have contested elections every five years and abuse our security forces to sort out the mess. As politicians, we have a responsibility to fix the cracks in our electoral system and restore confidence in our citizens and Ugandan voters. We are, therefore, calling for a credible national dialogue process that will bring all Ugandans on the same table where we can talk about these issues in a sober, constructive and honest manner. This dialogue goes beyond us who periodically compete for political power. We should see our business people, religious leaders, youth, women and the civil society being part of this dialogue about the future of our country.   

Finally, the wellbeing and prosperity of Ugandans must come ahead of our political beliefs and affiliations. It is in this spirit that we hope for continued engagement with the Government for the betterment of the lives of Ugandans.  

For God and my country. 
Kiiza Winifred (MP), Leader of the Opposition”

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Leader of the Opposition. In addition to what I asked you earlier, I am taking exception to page 26, the sentence that reads, “It would be a shame if Government and the Tenth Parliament conspired to block early political and electoral reforms as the Ninth Parliament did.” 

Can anyone substantiate that? Did the Ninth Parliament actually block early political reforms? I think I am on record at every State of the Nation Address demanding for these reforms - that is five times. I did not see the Leader of the Opposition bring any motion to present any Bill on electoral reforms in this country. If you cannot substantiate, I would demand that we expunge it, but I will leave that to the Members. I am not happy that this kind of thing has been said by the Leader of the Opposition who was also in this House in the Ninth Parliament. 

Anyway, honourable members, thank you for the statement. Honourable members, we have listened to the statement by the Leader of the Opposition. The debate will commence tomorrow. A number of Members have registered. I have 29 names. Let me just give you the first five names so that if they are not here, then we shall move to the others:  Hon. Odur Angelo Mark, hon. Khainza Justine, hon. Abbot George Ouma, hon. Baseke Fred and hon. Kafuzi Jackson. Those are the first five. We are not starting today; we are starting tomorrow but I am just giving you notice that we shall proceed in that order. If they are not here, I will move to the others.

MR AOGON: On page 22, the second last paragraph, the Leader of the Opposition was saying that there is one doctor to 30 million people, I think it may have been one health centre or hospital to that figure. Please, clarify on that figure. 

THE SPEAKER: I also noticed that, because if it is one doctor per 30 million patients then we only have two referral hospitals or one and a half.

House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Tomorrow the only business we shall have is the State of the Nation Address. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.26 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 11 August 2016.)

