


Thursday, 25 August 2022

Parliament met at 2.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. As most of you already know, we have lost one of our gallant sons; a person who has left an indelible mark on the stability of this country. A person who has been our colleague here – interacting with us every day – and a historical who ushered in the revolution. He started the revolution, together with our President and 27 other colleagues that would end up liberating our beloved country. 

It is a very sad moment for this House because whenever we lose one of us, from either side, a dark cloud hovers over the whole institution.

We are in touch with the Government, as the leadership of the House. At an appropriate time, we shall be guided. 

I urge the Leader of Government Business to liaise with the Leader of the Opposition so that a motion is prepared to pay tribute to our departed colleague. With that, colleagues, I request that we stand and observe a minute of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I forgot to relay my condolences to the family, His Excellency the President, the UPDF fraternity and all of you, colleagues, for the loss of our colleague, Gen. Elly Tumwine. 

Members, in a bid to enhance efficiency and effectiveness of the House, remember last Thursday I told the Government Chief Whip to coordinate with the Leader of Government Business and harmonise a schedule for ministers’ attendance of this House. 

I am impressed this week - I do not know about today. Maybe they think that we have not yet started but for the rest of the week the Frontbench has been full. I saw most of you, colleagues, interacting with the ministers. It also helps us, as presiding officers because it reduces on the matters of national importance. When you interact at the canteen and in the corridors, you could raise an issue and the minister is able to intervene. That rapport is more important than the directives coming from presiding officers.

If you have watched closely, I have not issued any directive. I just request a minister or say, “You are required” because we are colleagues. I would not want to be directing anyone here. That oneness of the House - we being colleagues - helps us move things much better than directives from the presiding officer.

Therefore, today, I expect the Government Chief Whip to lay on the Table the schedule for attendance of ministers to the business of the House. We shall also ensure that this business of a minister finishing their item and they run away - I thought the Frontbench would be here to support each other. I was a Member of the Cabinet. In the Cabinet, after presenting your item, you wait for other items. This business of finishing presenting your item and running away should stop. 

Gen. Jim, as a senior, you taught colleagues - we always sit here. Yesterday, we were here with Hon. Rusoke until 8.00 p.m., which was very impressive.

Colleagues, the Parliamentary Commission has secured for you kits to take part in the 11th edition of the Rotary Cancer Run on Sunday, 4 September 2022. It will start and end at the Kololo Ceremonial Grounds. Please, pick the kits at the desk set up in the foyer. Ensure that you get your kit, but also support this cancer run. 

In the 10th Parliament, Shs 1,000,000 was deducted from our accounts, but later on, we found that it was inappropriate. Therefore, Members, I encourage you to give more than Shs 1,000,000 and challenge the 10th Parliament. (Laughter) You can voluntarily give more than Shs 1,000,000. You do not need to come back and tell us how much you gave.  We are not saying that we are going to deduct any of your money. What I am saying is, during the cancer run, please, go and volunteer. You do not need to come back and tell us how much you gave. 

The proceeds of the Rotary Cancer Run have done a great job in helping us fight cancer in this country. I will, later on, vary the Order Paper to allow the minister to do that.

The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives was required to present a statement to this House, an update, on adulterated gin, which we came to know as City 5 gin as well as the death of consumers in Arua City and the neighbouring districts.  Honourable minister, this will be done after item No.3 on the Order Paper. I hope you have an update for this House. 

I would also like to vary the Order Paper to allow the chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to bring the two reports on the Parish Development Model. Whereas we had allowed him to present one report, which was to do with the performance and implementation of the Parish Development Model, he came to me and I found out that he also had a report on diversion – a Member called it, “The diversion of the Shs 17 million for the Parish Development Model.” 

He has said that he can do it in 30 minutes. Once the two reports are presented then we shall have a debate – together with the one on fighting hunger and famine in the country. I will give that one hour so that colleagues can bring views about the situation in the whole country.

I request Gen. Jim Muhwezi to give us an update on our departed colleague, in case he has any update for the House. 

2.26
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Gen. Jim Muhwezi): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, like you rightly pointed out, early this morning, between five and six o’clock, we lost Hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine at Nairobi Hospital, where he has been for a couple of weeks, undergoing treatment.

Arrangements to repatriate his remains back to the country are underway. In addition, as you said, Rt Hon. Speaker, we shall be coming up with arrangements to lay him to rest.

We shall work, as you have guided, with the Leader of the Opposition to prepare a motion to pay tribute to the late Hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

2.27
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There was a call from Parliament to standardise the sending off of colleagues and other senior public officers and Government was supposed to come up with either a policy or a law to know who, for example, is brought to Parliament; and who benefits from official or state burial.

There was a time in the last Parliament when we had problems. A former colleague from eastern Uganda died and he was not brought to Parliament and our colleagues from that area were very upset.

Maybe this will be the occasion for Government to give us those standards to know who qualifies for what in death, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ssemujju raises a very important issue. Government Chief Whip, coordinate with the Prime Minister; I know this cannot be that quick because wide consultations are involved.

In addition, the Attorney-General maybe would need to guide whether we would gazette it. However, please coordinate and in three months’ time, give guidelines to this House so that we know that it is not just conditional. 

However, colleagues, if you have someone whom you feel has made a very important contribution to the country, you can always reach out to the Presiding Officers and then we are able to work out with the two sides. As Presiding Officers, we can determine to allow a motion - not the body but at least a motion - like how we did for Hajj Kibirige (BMK) when Hon. Nsereko moved a motion.

2.30
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for thanking the front bench. In the same spirit, I am giving you another credit, honourable members. 

However, as you communicated, we raise a number of issues as matters of national importance; you give directives, and others come under procedural issues. For example, I have raised a number of issues on education and they are pertinent; I do not want to repeat them because they are on record. 

My prayer is that as they continue being present, they should also bring those responses as they promised. For example, the ones I raised. It is now over three weeks but nothing has happened and yet we are heading for doom. I do not want to say what I raised on the Floor because Members were there. 

However, the issues I raised about education; the three ministers by now should have responded because we are heading for problems. That is my prayer, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR SSEWUNGU: But in the same spirit, I also convey my condolences to the UPDF. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chief Whip, kindly comb through the Hansard, get these issues so that they are formally communicated to the ministers to enable them respond. That will be the easiest way to do it. After every session, issues are extracted, and then communicated to the ministers for action in line with the timelines that are usually given.

2.32
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I am contributing to the fight against cancer in the country.

Mr Speaker, we must appreciate Government’s efforts in fighting this disease. I am also aware that as leaders of the country, we have been lobbying and actually requesting Government and the Ministry of Health to ensure that we have regional centres developed. 

I want to present this before Parliament; we had a series and a line of people who have failed to return to Mulago Hospital for review, and it was worse during the time of COVID-19 where public transport was banned. So, many of our patients could not make it. 

How I pray, Mr Speaker, that the Minister of Health gives us a brief update about the extent to which Government has reached in terms of developing regional centres for cancer. 
Otherwise, we are in support but our plea is that it should be at will. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Health please bring that update in two weeks’ time. You see, when you contribute you are even recognised. You see the badge on Gen. Jim’s jacket; you cannot just go anywhere and buy it; that is for a major donor who has contributed over $10,000 to Rotary International.

Therefore, when you see that - Gen. Katumba Wamala, I am struggling to reach that level but I am soon reaching. I remember the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was at that level. Therefore, you too can do it. However, there are several recognitions. 

2.33
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Isingoma, whenever you are seated this side you are peaceful; now that you are that side -

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join the rest of the country in mourning the tragic loss of a very distinguished son of our country that served his nation with his all. My deepest condolences to the UPDF community and the President, who is its Commander-in-Chief.

Mr Speaker, you have talked about two concepts: the first one is effectiveness and the second one is efficiency. “Effectiveness” means doing the right thing and “efficiency” means doing the right thing right. 

I am happy about the turnout of the Cabinet. However, this is Parliament. Constitutionally, your word is final and nobody in this House, including the front bench, have capacity and capability to question it. 

Yesterday, we were struggling with a situation where on May 12th, in that seat, you presided over and directed the Minister of Finance - I remember that day, the Prime Minister was in the House and so was the Minister of Finance. All you said was, “Can you give a Government commitment?” I am happy that both the Minister of Finance and the Prime Minister made the same commitment.

However, if the front bench took your word seriously, we would have saved time for this nation because all we needed was an extract of the Hansard; the Speaker directing the Hansard Department to extract the minute and then a letter, as directed by the Speaker, is written by the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development to fund the nursery operators. 

Mr Speaker, the communication that I want to make is that, we need to ensure that we save time for Government and the time for our presiding officer. So, the moment the Speaker directs, it is a constitutional mandate for the Members of the Cabinet to act because the more we continue talking, the less people remember what we talk. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. Honourable Minister of Works and Transport, on the 13th of July, the Woman Representative for Hoima City, Hon. Nyakato, tabled a re-petition to do with the compensation of project-affected persons on the Hoima–Kaiso–Tonya Road, which was constructed long time ago, before I even came to Parliament. I now have grey hair but those people are not yet compensated. 

You promised to respond and act within two weeks’ but you have not done so. Therefore, on Wednesday next week, I need you to come on the Floor and respond to that petition. 

2.38
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also join you, on behalf of the people of Sebei subregion, to condole with the family and this nation for the loss of our honourable colleague, Gen. Elly Tumwine.

The matter of national importance that I want to raise is the continuous killings of young men who are boda boda riders in Bukwo District. Bukwo being a border district, most of the business is done between Kenya and Uganda. However, we have lost so many young men who are killed by their customers or people who tend to be ridden on the Kenyan side. 

As we speak now, we have a body of a young man called Elly that is supposed to be buried tomorrow. Last month, we lost another young man called Brian Kiiza and there is another one called Oscar Kipto, who disappeared, and to date we have never found the body. 

These customers hire boda boda riders from the Ugandan side, cross to Kenya - and there is a forest somewhere where they kill the boys from and take their motorbikes.

My prayer is to the Minister of Security, together with the Minister of Internal Affairs, to take this up because it is really escalating and becoming very dangerous. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Security, do you have something to say?

2.40
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for the information. We received the same information and investigations are going on. We are going to make sure that that stops forthwith. 

The culprits will be followed up and whether they are in Uganda or Kenya, they will be brought to book. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

2.41
MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to join the rest in condoling with you the passing of a very courageous gentleman, an exceedingly professional soldier, Gen. Tumwine. May his soul rest in peace. 

The matter of national importance I stand to raise concerns the washing away of a very key bridge on River Enyau. River Enyau is a key source of National Water and Sewerage Corporation on the supply of clean water in Arua City. But also the bridge, which has been washed away, plays a key role in trade. The people of that city are fed mainly from Vurra, which is the food basket of Arua District. 

Food is transported through that road to Arua City but because of the floods, traders and residents cannot access Arua City. 

My prayers are as follows:

    1. The Ministry of Works and Transport should temporarily restore that bridge so that people can be able to access Arua City. 

    2. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development - because the reports indicate that that bridge is under procurement but the processes with which the other bridges started have been completed but the bridge in question is still under procurement - to fast-track the process so that a proper and permanent construction can be done. I thank you.

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT)(Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am happy that the honourable member has said that the Ministry of Works and Transport should temporarily work on the bridge to help people access other places. We are going to work on it immediately. I am going to get in touch with him and we temporarily find a way for our people to use that road. Then later, we will look for funds to permanently work on that bridge. Thank you. 

2.43
MR PASCAL MBABAZI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding gold mining in my constituency, which started particularly in Kitanda LC I, Makukuulu Parish, Kiruma Subcounty. 

Because of the use of rudimentary technology, as a leader, I am in fear that lives might be lost due to these heavy rains that have started. The miners have dug deep pits, into which they walk long distances under the ground. However, when you reach there physically you notice that cracks have started to develop. So far, three people have died in there since the mining activities started. 

Mr Speaker, it’s my prayer that the responsible ministry goes and regulates the mining activities before people perish. More so, the available water sources that have been providing water for my people, have already been destroyed. 

Now, my people are depending on running water, which is full of dust and silt that comes from the gold refinery. I am in fear that anytime, diseases are going to break out and attack my people because of using dirty and unsafe water. 

My second prayer, therefore, is that Government should swiftly go there and at least fix some water sources so that my people can have a better living. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Oh, you want to give him water? Very good! Hon. Pascal Mbabazi, your issues are settled.

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT)(Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I sympathise with hon. Pascal Mbabazi and the people he represents. 

Mr Speaker, water indeed is life and yet the problem he is presenting is actually not unique to his area alone. On our part, as a ministry, we need to ensure that the water sources are safe. He has made a prayer in this Parliament and we need to act on it. 

Meanwhile, to have it comprehensively done, we need to link up with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development so that we get to the root cause and solution to the problem. 

Therefore, I undertake, on behalf of the ministry, that we will link up with my friend, Hon. Mbabazi, so that we give them a source of water. We shall also have an investigation done to ensure that the mining activities do not contaminate the source of life, which is water. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Hon. Lukwago? 

2.46
MR JOHN-PAUL LUKWAGO (DP, Kyotera County, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I too condole with the nation over the loss of Gen. Elly Tumwine. 

I rise on a matter of urgent importance regarding Kyotera District Referral Hospital. This hospital serves over 500,000 people and is not only limited to Kyotera but parts of Rakai, Lwengo, and even Masaka. This hospital does not have a functional x-ray. The existing x-ray lost its usefulness in 2019 and this was duly communicated by the supplier. The technical team communicated that and so it has not been in use. 

Mr Speaker, patients who require these services are directed to go to Masaka Regional Referral Hospital or private facilities in Masaka. The way Masaka-Mutukula Road is today, it is very difficult for patients to move that long distance. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, Kyotera District Referral Hospital has not had medicine, not even Panadol, for the last three weeks. Members of Parliament from Kyotera District have patients lining up at our area offices seeking support. We keep giving them money to go to private pharmacies. 

My prayers are for the Ministry of Health to remedy the issue of the x-ray at Kalisizo Hospital, which is the District Referral Hospital. Secondly, I pray for an immediate solution to the issue of the drugs in the hospital. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip?

2.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua): Mr Speaker, first of all, I wish to communicate that the ministers from the Ministry of Health wrote to you notifying Parliament about their absence because of other state duties within and without Uganda. 

Secondly, I undertake to inform the Ministry of Health about the issues raised by the honourable member from Kyotera that will require their response within two weeks. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chief Whip, on the issue of medicine, National Medical Stores (NMS) should intervene. I tried to call the General Manager today because I was concerned but I could not get him; a colleague saying that for three weeks they do not have medicine and now it is the Member of Parliament purchasing drugs!

On that one, I request you to intervene right away. Call the General Manager NMS so that they deliver the necessary drugs. 

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, what I know is that when National Medical Stores deliver assortments of medicines, they normally send messages. For instance, for Alebtong District, as a Member of Parliament, I normally receive their messages when they deliver. 

Mr Speaker, before the end of today’s sitting, I will move out with the Member and try to find out directly from National Medical Stores what is happening to supplies to Kyotera. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Honourable Chief Whip. Hon. Lilian Aber?

2.50
MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I condole with the family of the late Gen. Elly Tumwine and I pray that his soul rests in eternal peace. 

Mr Speaker, I rise under rule 64 of the Rules of Procedure to raise a matter of national but urgent importance. There are Government schools and institutions which have been constructed and others are still underway but those which are already completed are not yet being utilised. This is causing a lot of challenges and wastage of Government resources. 

Mr Speaker, there is Pajong Technical School in Mucwini Subcounty, Kitgum District, which has been under construction since 2002. This school was constructed in memory of the 56 people who were massacred by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and buried in a mass grave. 

His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda made a pledge that the school be constructed and indeed the construction was done. Since then, the school is not yet functioning and the locals are faced with the challenge to continue doing bush clearing in the school and it is a big problem. One day, the school will be burnt down and the rationale of having the school constructed would not have been met. 

My prayers, Mr Speaker, are:

    i) The ministry pays a visit to this school and ascertains why the school is not yet functioning.

    ii) The project to be re-embarked on and we do the equipping of this institution so that we can help in skills training of our children.

    iii) Government recruits and deploys instructors in the institution so that they can open in the next financial year.

    iv) The institution should be opened immediately for the next academic year.

    v) The earlier plan for a direct road leading to the school be opened immediately.

    vi) Electricity and piped water be installed, Mr Speaker. 

Another school called Padwong Seed School, Mr Speaker, was also budgeted for -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, we have two minutes for this item. Let us take one issue; when the minister comes, you will address the rest of the issues to the minister.

MS ABER: Much obliged. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister?

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Mr Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking my sister, Hon. Lillian Aber, for raising issues concerning the sector where I am now. For those who do not know me, I am Peter Ogwang. I am the new Minister of State for Education and Sports (Sports). (Applause)

I am here to represent my boss, the minister, Mama, the First Lady. For the record, according to the rota which is in my ministry – (Interjection) - Now, my brother Hon. Ssemujju -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, it is a maiden speech so the Member is protected. Let him finish. 

MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, Hon. Ssemujju is a personal friend; I have been here with him for some time. So, Hon. Ssemujju, as of every Thursday, I am the one who will be representing the Ministry of Education and Sports. For that matter, and for the specific issue which has been asked, I am going to follow up. I will work with my sister and even move with her up to that school then we shall come and give the answer together to the august House. I thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Peter, congratulations. We know you for that; we know once you promise, that is delivered. 

Honourable colleagues, some of you are sending me matters of national importance here. Please, if you have a matter of national importance or a matter of urgency, come to my office. I do not receive them from here. 

Hon. Juliet Bashiisha?  

2.56
MS JULIET BASHIISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand with the people of Mitooma District to condole with the family of the late Elly Tumwine. May his soul rest in peace. 

Mr Speaker, I am rising on a matter of national importance about the welfare of soldiers who were arrested on a mission in Somalia and convicted. One of my own was sentenced to death. I am not rising to contest the court decision but I am concerned about the welfare of his family.

On 10 August 2021, a one Capt. Charles Asiimwe, who is from my constituency, was commanding a group of soldiers in Somalia and he faced occupational challenges that made him get convicted to death. 

The family is facing challenges because they have tried to access his funds from the Wazalendo Savings and Credit Cooperative Society (WSACCO), but the people in charge are telling them that if someone is convicted to death, he or she is not supposed to access anything.

Mr Speaker, they have been on my neck because they think a Member of Parliament can solve everything, including a capital punishment of such nature.

My prayer is that this family be allowed to access the funds that this soldier worked for in Somalia - and even other soldiers. (Applause) 

This man has a family of five children and one known wife –(Interjections)- I am using the word “known” because he may be having others. He has very aged parents who are already psychologically tortured because they know the fate of their son.

Another prayer is that - unfortunately, the majority of UPDF Members are not here -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Nekesa will - 

MS BASHIISHA: If you do not have a department that prepares these people for such circumstances, especially if the person is convicted and is going to be sentenced to death, create it; so that they prepare the family for whatever repercussion that is going to befall them. 

The family is now coming to me. Next, they will come to you, Mr Speaker. I request that at least the family is prepared for whatever challenges their son or -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will request Gen. Muhoozi to be the one to answer this. Since he was the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF) and knows the operations of WSACCO very well - though he is not a Minister of Defense and Veteran Affairs, he is still a General. He can help us with useful information.

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I note the concern of the Member of Parliament. Wazalendo money is out of members' contributions. So, that statement of saying they cannot access it is wrong. I will contact the leadership of Wazalendo and the Minister of Defense and Veteran Affairs to ensure that the family accesses that money. (Applause)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The UPDF fraternity in the House knows that the CDF sits in this House; so CDF, help the Member because I know how the family has been pushing Hon. Juliet.

3.00
MR ISAAC KATENYA (Independent, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to present a matter of national importance. In the Bugisu subregion, especially Elgon, we have just faced disasters such as landslides and floods. These two issues ruined many roads, water sources, and bridges. 

As I talk, in my constituency, six bridges have broken down. As a result, three people have died and six roads, which stretch about 22 kilometres and 12 kilometres, have been destroyed and washed away. 

I request the Ministry of Works and Transport to immediately come and restore these roads. The Ministry of Water and Environment should disinfect the water sources, which have been contaminated; dig some trenches in areas that are flooded with stagnant water and repair the bridges which are broken so that my people can be rescued. 
This is something very urgent so that we save the lives of our people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Works and Transport. He has left?

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do hear my brother, Hon. Isaac. We have just been from a meeting in the office of the Prime Minister with my brother. There are already strategies that were agreed upon that we are going to work on especially on the issue of water. 

We also agreed from the meeting with the Prime Minister - she is even coming to brief Parliament on some of these undertakings - on the bridges, it was agreed that it will be incorporated into what we are going to undertake. 

I pray that we address that issue comprehensively as we are handling the Elgon region, as one of the interventions agreed upon in the meeting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item.
	
DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, read the names of all your Members so that we finish and not take a lot of time. The same applies to the Dean of Independents and the other party whips.

3.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Dennis Obua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In accordance with rules 15(10)(c), 158, 162 and 165 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I designate the following honourable members to the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation:

    1. Hon. Achia Remigio – Chairperson;
    2. Hon. Florence Asiimwe Florence – Deputy Chairperson.
    3. Hon. Boniface Okot Henry;
    4. Hon. Alex Niyonsaba;
    5. Hon. Joanne Okia Aniku;
    6. Hon. Jennifer Muheesi Abaho;
    7. Hon. Janet Okori Moe;
    8. Hon. Herbert Kinobere;
    9. Hon. Joel Leku;
    10. Hon. Patience Kinshaba Nkunda;
    11. Hon. Betty Awor Engola;
    12. Hon. Kibaju Naome;
    13. Hon. Patrick Bingi Nyanzi;
    14. Hon. Esther Mbayo;
    15. Hon. Patrick Aeku;
    16. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara;
    17. Hon. James Kubeketerya;
    18. Hon. Catherine Mavenjina Akumu;
    19. Hon. Margaret Nafuna Muloni;
    20. Hon. Sarah Najjuma; 
    21. Hon. Clare Mugumya; 
    22. Hon. Alex Ndeezi;
    23. Hon. Bernard Odoi Onen;
    24. Hon. Okullo Anthony Aabuka Jallon. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to designate. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule 15(10)(c), Rule 187, Rule 188(2) and 188(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I designate the following Members of Parliament to the sectoral committees as follows:

    1. Hon. Thembo Gideon Mujungu: to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure;
    2. Hon. Ssekikubo Theodore: to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs;
    3. Hon. Nebanda Andiru Florence: to the Committee on Health;
    4. Hon. Agnes Acibu: to the Committee on Education and Sports. 

I beg to designate.

Thirdly, in accordance with Rule 15(10)(c), Rule 158(1)(g), Rule 158 (1)(i), Rule 158(1)(e), Rule 160(2) and Rule 160(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I designate the following Honourable Members to the following standing committees:

    1. Hon. Thembo Gideon Mujungu: to the Committee on Equal Opportunities;
    2. Hon. Kambale Ferigo: to the Committee on Public Accounts (COSASE);
    3. Hon. Ojok Andrew Oulanyah: to the Committee on National Economy. 

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. The Chief Opposition Whip?

3.08
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule 160 (2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, I hereby designate the following Opposition Members to the new standing committee on Science, Technology and Innovation: 

    1. Hon. Lutaaya Geoffrey of Kakuuto (NUP);
    2. Hon. Sserukenya David of Makindye-Ssabagabo (NUP);
    3. Hon. Sekabira Denes of Katikamu North (NUP);
    4. Hon. Kagabo Twaha Mzee of Bukoto (NUP);
    5. Hon. Aol Betty Ocan of Gulu City (FDC);
    6. Hon. Ssasaga Isaias of Budadiri East (FDC);
    7. Hon. Okot Santa of Aruu North (PPP); 
    8. Hon. Alum Santa Sandra of Oyam (UPC).

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule 188 (5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, I hereby designate the Opposition Members to the sectoral committees as follows: 

    1. Hon. Nakimuli Helen of Kalangala (NUP) to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;

    2. Hon. Kirumira Hassan of Katikamu South (NUP) to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry;

    3. Hon. Isabirye Aga of Jinja North (FDC) to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry; 

    4. Hon. Serukenya David of Makindye-Ssabagabo (NUP) to the Committee on Information, Communication and Technology. 

I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chief Opposition Whip. Hon. Zijjan for Independents?

3.11
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Pursuant to Rule 160(2) of the Rules of Procedure, I would like to re-designate the following Members to the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation:

    1. Hon. Katenya Isaac of Bulambuli County;
    2. Hon. Ogwari Polycarp of Agule County;
    3. Hon. Wamala Florence Nambozo of Sironko -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, under our rules, political parties designate under whips. Independents are designated by the Speaker. They cannot be designated by one of them – that will be in another Parliament, not this one.

So, the procedural issue I am raising is whether this Member is proceeding well by usurping the powers of the Speaker and appointing himself the Speaker and designating people as though he were the Speaker of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now I have known that with Hon. Ssemujju in the House, my seat is safe. He cannot allow a coup. (Laughter) I am the one who told Hon. Zijjan to designate, on my behalf. (Applause)

MR ZIJJAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your protection against a colleague. (Laughter) 

Pursuant to Rule 188(5) of our rules, I wish to designate the following Members to the Committee on Education and Sports:

    1. Hon. Katenya Isaac of Bulambuli County
    2. Hon. Wamala Nambozo Florence of Sironko. 

Pursuant to the same rules, Mr Speaker, I wish to designate the following Member to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources:

    1. Hon. Ogwari Polycarp of Agule County. 

I beg to designate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Zijjan. Government Chief Whip, we need the list of the ministers on schedule. 

MR DENIS OBUA: Mr Speaker, following your guidance during the 20th Sitting of the First Meeting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament of Uganda held on Thursday 18, August 2022 and in accordance with Rule 15(2) and Rule 15(10)(b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda and in further reference to a letter dated 7 July 2022 by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to all ministers in regard to the same and my subsequent communication in Parliament and Cabinet, I hereby lay on the Table a weekly schedule of ministers’ attendance at the sitting of the House, ministry by ministry. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. This list should be uploaded on our Alfresco platform for all Members to access, especially the non-compliant, so that we know those who have defied the Prime Minister.

Colleagues, this list will help you. Before coming on the Floor, you should know that “Today, I am going to be interfacing with honourable so-and-so”. However, that does not mean, honourable ministers, that that day when you are not gazetted to be here you do not attend. No; you are a Member of Parliament. So, anytime, as a minister and Member of Parliament, you can always be in this House. We would be really happy if most of you continue coming. 

Colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the leadership of the Democratic Party. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Thank you. (Applause)

In the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have Hon. Henry Bazira Ssewanyana, a former Member who represented Masaka South West in the Fourth Parliament and a current leader in the Democratic Party. He has come to observe the proceedings of this House. You are always welcome, honourable member. (Applause)

Honourable Minister of Trade, I had allowed you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ADULTERATED GINS 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This should take us about five minutes, honourable minister.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement has been uploaded on our system. However, first, I join the rest of the country in registering my sympathies to the family of this courageous Ugandan soldier who sacrificed much for Uganda’s stability, security and freedom – Hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine.

Mr Speaker, on Tuesday, we informed the House that the Uganda National Bureau of Standards enforcement team travelled to Arua City to establish the circumstances under which 17 people, who consumed a local gin known as City 5, died and others taken ill. We once again extend our heartfelt condolences to the families who have lost their dear ones. 

The bureau staff went and picked samples. Also, when they arrived, the Uganda Police Force had already apprehended four suspects and taken them into custody at Arua Central Police Station. The suspects included the manufacturers and the person who was selling the City 5 Gin in a particular kiosk.

The Uganda Police Force had also picked the sample of the packaged bottles of City 5 Gin from the kiosk where most of the victims had purchased it. This led them to the factory where the gin was produced at a place called Pajulu. The manufacturer was trading under the name “Luluwiri Fruit Wine”.

Mr Speaker, the bureau staff noted that it had certified Luluwiri Fruit Wine to produce semi-sweet still table pineapple wine after undergoing conformity assessment. The same factory had attempted to apply for certification of City 5 Pineapple Flavoured Gin, which failed laboratory analysis for having low alcohol content, which was below 37.5 per cent.

Therefore, the City 5 Gin had not yet been certified by UNBS for conformity to the relevant standards and should not have been in production or for sale to the public.

The UNBS, together with Uganda Police, inspected Luluwiri Fruit Wine Factory and found 40 unmarked drums containing alcohol and eight filled jerry cans containing alcohol. Eight samples were, therefore, picked for laboratory analysis by UNBS. The results from the laboratory are as follows: 

    1. The sample picked by Uganda Police from the kiosk, where the product was being sold, was found to have been adulterated with excessive levels of methanol, above the maximum limit of 50 milligrammes per litre and had low levels of ethanol - below 37.5 per cent mass per volume, as specified in the standards.

    2. Five out of eight samples picked from Luluwiri Fruit Wine were found to have been also adulterated with excessive levels of methanol, beyond the maximum standard.

    3. One sample out of the two picked from Dbtech Enterprises, which is a nearby factory, was also found to be having excess levels of methanol - above the maximum limit of 50 milligrammes per litre, as specified in the standards. 

Conclusion of the analysis

    i) Based on the results of the laboratory, it is clear that the likely cause of death for the people who consumed City 5 gin was excessive adulteration of the gin with methanol, which was found to be 17 to 16,183 times far higher than the permissible level of 50 milligrammes, which is specified in the standard for gin. 

    ii) It is likely that this was done deliberately and illegally. They used methanol as a cheaper alternative to increase the potency of City 5 Gin, instead of ethanol, which is commonly used in making alcohol beverages.

    iii) Unlike ethanol, methanol is poisonous for human consumption, since it can easily be absorbed through the eyes, skin, lungs and digestive system, with its over-exposure causing death. 

    iv) Methanol is an industrial chemical, which is mostly used to create fuel and as a solvent, anti-freeze or denaturant for ethanol; and in synthesis of other chemicals, plastics, polyesters and others. Methanol is also commonly used for diluting or dissolving wall paints and wood varnishes. So, it is a very dangerous chemical for this purpose. 

So, what are the actions taken by the ministry and the bureau?

    1. The suspects involved in manufacturing City 5 Gin have been arrested and are in custody of Uganda Police Force.

    2. The bureau has sealed off and suspended production facilities where this adulterated gin was found, until further notice.

    3. The bureau has suspended the certification process for products from this particular facility because they came for wine but when they got certification, they produced other things.

    4. The bureau has also placed advertisements in local radios in West Nile region to caution people against consumption of City 5 Gin and other uncertified beverages. So, in case there are some which are already in the market, we are putting adverts for people to stop drinking them.

    5. The bureau will intensify enforcement activities on the market against producers of uncertified alcohol, beverages and other consumer products.

    6. The bureau has already established regional offices in Gulu with fully-fledged food safety testing laboratories to provide quality assurance and conformity assessment of all products manufactured and produced in northern Uganda.

    7. The bureau appeals to those enterprises involved in the production, manufacturing, processing and value addition activities to voluntarily embrace application of quality standards in their businesses.

    8. We are also appealing to the general public and local authorities to be vigilant and always report anyone involved in the production and distribution of uncertified products to the bureau to take necessary action. We call upon Ugandans to join hands in promoting the culture of consuming safe and quality products, which are certified by UNBS. We should avoid looking for cheaper and often harmful alternatives, which are detrimental to our health and safety. 

    9. And also we put “Q” marks on all products. We know some people attempt to forge them but we think that with our “Q” marks and by now at least in every subcounty, there is a smartphone; this can be traced, if we use the local authorities.

    10. As guided by you, Mr Speaker, and this House, an inter-ministerial committee has been put in place to address the issue of the advertising of non-certified products by different media houses. So, the Uganda Media Council will soon be directed to stop all those media houses, which are advertising products like Mukama Nayamba without being certified by UNBS – (Laughter) - Mukama Nayamba, Mujakukule and all those products, you know them. Therefore, we would like to say that if you are a media house, and you are advertising a product, you have a responsibility to ask UNBS if that product is certified. 

    11. Mr Speaker, we will also work with the local authorities, including the Village Health Teams (VHTs) at the LCI, to increase vigilance and awareness of the population of the dangerous products on the market. 

I beg to lay the results of our analysis, which are positive that the chemical that killed people, was in this Gin 5 alcohol, which should have never been on the market. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Thank you for responding quickly and taking action. I request you to keep in touch with the West Nile Parliamentary Group whose people have been mainly affected by all this so that we do not really get such cases again in the region. 

Colleagues, we talked about this last time so let's go to the next item. Thank you. You can always access the minister; he is always available to serve you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE STATUS OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Onzima, you promised that 30 minutes would be enough for the two reports. So time yourself very well.  At 4.00 p.m., we have Prime Minister's Time.

3.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Godfrey Onzima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take the chance to present the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the status of the implementation of the Parish Development Model in the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

Before I present it, one observation I would like to make here is that this report was ready by last session, but we were not able to secure space on the Order Paper. I am going to present it the way it is. 

Before I present, I would like to lay on the table a copy of the report and the minutes of the committee’s interaction with the various agencies. I beg to lay.

Mr Speaker, I am not going to read the whole report. The status of the implementation of the Parish Development Model was laid by the honourable minister, Hon. Raphael Magyezi, the Minister for Local Government, on 7 December 2021 and was referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. 

The Committee on Public Service and Local Government examined the status of the implementation of the model in detail, made inquiries in accordance with rule 159 and rule 189. Therefore, I hereby present this report. 

Methodology 

The committee held consultative meetings with and received submissions from the following stakeholders: 

    i) The Minister of Local Government, 
    ii) The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development,
    iii) The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, 
    iv) The Minister of ICT and National Guidance, 
    v) Operation Wealth Creation, 
    vi) The Civil Society Budget Advocacy Group, 
    vii) Action Against Hunger, 
    viii) Food Rights, 

We also reviewed relevant literature and made references to relevant laws. 

Mr Speaker, the rest of the details of the report are there. Let me go to the committee’s observations.

Committee observations and recommendations 

Mr Speaker, as I said, by the time we compiled this report, there was no Parish Development Model Policy Framework. So, I am going to read it the way we had written it. 

Currently, there is no clear policy that sets the overall tone of the implementation of the Parish Development Model (PDM). Some of the closest policy frameworks on which the PDM is premised include the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, as amended under Article 179(2) B, D and E and the Local Government Act, sections 95, 96 and 97. Unfortunately, these are not sufficient in setting the basis for developing the guidelines, development of an action plan, and possibly the development of a clear and realistic implementation roadmap for the PDM. 

The decentralisation policy presented by the minister does not regulate certain pillars like financial inclusion, infrastructure and mindset change under the model. 

The committee further observed that a clear policy framework for PDM will provide a vision, goals and principles to guide actions and implementation. The policy framework would clearly spell out the roles and responsibilities of each and every PDM, the governing framework on PDM, the oversight function, monitoring and evaluation and many others.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairman, can I allow you to remove your mask so that you are heard very well?

MR ONZIMA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, number two is inherent inequalities in the allocation formula for PDM funds. The committee observed that in the Financial Year 2022/2023, Shs 465.48 billion is earmarked for the operationalisation of the Financial Inclusion Pillar that was in the National Budget Framework Paper of 2022/2003. However, the committee notes that that criterion for allocation of the funds is not based on equity, and may not be helpful to some parishes. 

Government is proposing to give parishes the same amount of money regardless of the variations in demographics and geographical size, including unique needs of the various parishes and different poverty levels. The one-size-fits-all criterion implies inherent inequality and unfairness.

Committee recommendations 

The committee, therefore, recommends as follows: 

    1. There is need to promote equity and inclusivity. 

    2. The Government needs a clear equitable allocation formula for funds under the PDM that takes into consideration the different demographic, geographical and socio-economic dynamics. 

    3. Inadequate capacity and readiness for PDM implementation 

The committee noted that in the Financial Year 2021/2022, Government allocated Shs 200 billion for the recruitment of parish chiefs across the country, establishment of the Parish Development Model Secretariat and development of PDM guidelines. The committee was informed that so far, 9,847 posts (93 per cent) have been filled, according to the Budget Committee Report on the National Budget Framework Paper of 2022/2023. 

Despite this significant progress, the capacity of the parish chiefs, the parish development committees and the intended beneficiaries on the model have not been built. In addition, most parish chiefs do not have offices from where to operate. 

The committee further noted that the magnitude of the parish management functions, responsibilities and the higher expectation of the model exert a significant burden of expectation on the parish chiefs. 

Committee recommendation

    a) Capacity building programmes and retooling for the parish chiefs and parish development committees on the Parish Development Model should be prioritised as they are the beacon of the model’s success. 

    b) In future, given the magnitude of the parish management function and the responsibility, the Government should consider upgrading the minimum qualifications for the position of parish chief to a level of degree holder. 

4. 	Limited public awareness of the parish development model among the citizens, policymakers and policy implementers 

The committee was informed that the parish development model is meant to improve the livelihoods of the ordinary citizens living in the subsistence economy. However, many of the citizens/beneficiaries and policymakers are not fully aware of the concept and objectives of the model and their roles and that of other stakeholders in its successful implementation. 

The committee further noted that there is no clear relationship between the PDM, the subcounty and the district yet inherent functional synergies across the hierarchy of the local government is one of the preconditions for successful implementation of the PDM. 

Committee recommendations 

    a) Government should invest in undertaking a well-coordinated citizens’ awareness exercise and develop a clear dissemination roadmap of the PDM guidelines translated in the respective major local languages. The guidelines will be widely distributed by the Ministry of Local Government and other implementing ministries, departments and agencies. 

    b) For effective oversight for policymakers and policy implementers, it is very critical that any orientation is done on PDM. 

    c) While this strategy of PDM is appreciated and encouraged for the purpose of socio-economic transformation, there is need for thorough explanation of the policy, legal and institutional framework to all stakeholders to enable successful implementation of the model. 
    d) There is need to streamline and harmonise the policy and operational framework for the PDM for greater role clarity, as a precondition for its success. 

5. Biased and selective focus on Pillar 3 on financial inclusion at the expense of other pillars 

A lot of effort has been put on the parish revolving fund, which is the third pillar (financial inclusion) of the Parish Development Model yet there are other pillars, which are equally important for the success of the model. 

Interventions under the third pillar are intended to promote savings and investment by households in activities with a potential for generating production supplies. The specific interventions include: 

    a) Establishment and the capitalisation of the parish revolving fund;

    b) Supervision of parish based SACCOs by Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority;
 
    c) Capitalisation of constituency-based SACCOs under the Presidential Initiative for Wealth Creation and Jobs (Emyooga) for households in the non-subsistence economy. 

The committee noted that Pillar No.5 on Mind-Set Change and Cross-Cutting Issues, which will aid to prepare citizens and clarify upcoming concerns before funds are disbursed, is not being given priority. 

The committee further observed that the Parish Development Model might suffer the same fate as Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, where more emphasis was put on Pillar Two (NAADS). 

Committee recommendations 

    i) Government should equally focus on changing the mind-set of the implementers of the PDM and citizens while showing linkage of other pillars to each other to ensure complementarity. 

    ii) Government should equally prioritise other important pillars under the model. 

6. Poor coordination and linkage between ministries and other stakeholders

Improving coordination and the linkage among the various MDAs and stakeholders is critical in the success of the Parish Development Model. The committee observed that currently, there are numerous Parish Development Model implementation guidelines, for example, implementation guidelines from the Ministry of Local Government (February 2022), operational guidelines for Financial Inclusion Pillar by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (February 2022) and implementation guidelines on agriculture from the Ministry of Agriculture Volume 1 (without a start and end date). 

This will lead to duplication in the planning and budgeting, thereby increasing the cost of implementation. This will further encourage the silo approach in implementing Government programmes, which the National Development Plan III is supposed to address. 

Committee recommendation

Government should harmonise and consolidate various guidelines that will help in the implementation of the model, taking into account monitoring and evaluation. 

7. Inadequate funding in the Financial Year 2022/2023

The committee noted that, with the exception of pillar three on financial inclusion; other pillars of the Parish Development Model will continue to be funded under existing arrangements. There is no more funding to be availed for the other pillars in the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

The second budget call circular dated 15 February 2022 stated, on page 10: 

“…apart from the financial inclusion pillar that has been allocated a total of Shs 1.050 billion, all accounting officers of MDAs in charge of the seven pillars should rationalise and budget for the Parish Development Model activities under their respective jurisdiction, as no additional resources will be allocated.” 

The committee further noted that the budget for the Parish Development Model activities under ministries, departments and agencies remain unfunded priorities in the Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2022/2023 presented to Parliament, as highlighted in the table. 

Committee recommendation 

Government should provide sustainable funding for the rest of the pillars for successful implementation of the model, since all the pillars are complementary to each other. 

8. Contradictions of programmes by Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs)

The committee observed that Pillar Four on social services also proposes the construction and equipping of health centres II in every parish yet, the Ministry of Health is also phasing out health centres II and upgrading others to health centres III in subcounties where there are no health centres III under the UGIFT programme. 

Committee recommendation 
The coordination function and linkages among stakeholders need to be streamlined to avoid carrying out or implementing Government programmes by ministries, departments and agencies.
 
9. Emerging issues

The Parish Development Model is not taking into consideration other emerging issues like climate change. Most households in Uganda are engaged in smallholder farming activities as a means to supporting their livelihoods, highly depending on the unpredictable weather patterns. As such, farmers face harsh effects of climate change, which limits their capacity to increase production and productivity. 

The impact of climate change arising from an unprecedented destruction of the ecosystem, environment and natural resources like mass deforestation, building in wetlands, degradation of the hills, mountains and rangelands, and poor waste management resulting in pollution among others is bound to jeopardise farming activities. If these harmful human practices on the environment are not addressed, these will affect the success of the Parish Development Model implementation.

Committee recommendations

    a. The Government should streamline and integrate climate change adaptation interventions in PDM to ensure the conservation of the environment.

    b. Capacity building for farmers should integrate climate change adaptation and adoption of climate-smart and nutrition-sensitive agricultural technologies, management practices and innovations even as they acquire the revolving fund to improve on productivity.

10. Lack of linkage between the Parish Development Model and other existing systems 

Whereas the Government has devised the PDM to ensure strategic socio-economic transformation, there are still other interventions aimed at uplifting citizens out of poverty, which are still active at various levels. For example, Emyooga remains at the county level, and the Youth Livelihood Programme, UWEP and Operation Wealth Creation are at the subcounty levels. 

Committee recommendations 

    a. Since the Government is of the view that the PDM will deepen decentralisation, all funds under other socio-economic, interventions should be amalgamated and channelled through the PDM.

    b. There is a need to structure those other ongoing parallel development interventions and integrate them into the Parish Development Model. 

11. Inadequate recovery rates of revolving funds initiated by the Government in the past 

The committee observed that on several occasions, the Government provided revolving funds such as Entandikwa, Emyooga, Youth Livelihood Programme and the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme, to alleviate poverty, yet such funds have been construed by the citizens as donations from the Government. This has impeded repayment and recovery. 

Under the Parish Development Model pillar on financial inclusion, the Government proposes to establish a parish revolving fund that will lend to parish SACCOs. Each of the SACCOs was scheduled to receive Shs 38.1 million in the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

The parish SACCO is supposed to coexist with Emyooga, which are constituency-based SACCOs. Each of these constituency SACCOs was allocated Shs 30 million. 

Concern is raised about the fact that revolving funds set up by the Government have poor recovery rates. For instance, in the Financial Year 2019/2020, the Youth Livelihood Programme had so far recovered only Shs 37.04 billion, that is, 40 per cent, out of Shs 93.3 billion disbursed while the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Fund only recovered Shs 16.9 billion, that is, 23 per cent out of Shs 66.7 billion disbursed. 

Committee recommendations

    a. Right from inception, the Government should make it clear and sensitise citizens that the funds under revolving funds are not free donations. 

    b. The Government should come out with a clear fund recovery strategy for the funds being disbursed. 

12. Inadequate entrepreneurial capacity of the citizens

The committee observed that although there were previous Government interventions to improve citizen socio-economic conditions, the issue of building the entrepreneurial capacity of the population adequately has been lacking. This has been identified as one of the areas for the poor performance of some of the previous interventions. 

The committee further observed that many enterprises identified by some of the beneficiaries under the previous interventions were not within their knowledge and ability, leading to poor performance, and in most cases collapsing of the enterprises. This is one of the causes of poor recovery of previous funds.

Committee recommendation

The Government should adequately build the entrepreneurial capacity of citizens before disbursing funds to ensure optimal utilisation of resources in pursuit of national development objectives, and avoid the pitfalls of previous similar development interventions. 

13. Lack of clarity on procurement 

Procuring and disposing entities are required under the Local Governments Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets, Regulations 2006, to keep records and papers relevant to all procurements and disposal activities. 

The committee observed that there is a lack of clarity on how procurements shall be undertaken under the Parish Development Model. Whether the community procurement principles apply or the PPDA guidelines will be followed. This is not clear under the model. 

Without a proper procurement plan, the procurement of goods and services will be exposed to risks characterised by irregular sourcing of supplies, shoddy works, substandard quality of goods and services, and inflated costs of inputs, among others. 

Committee recommendation 

In order to achieve value for money, the Government should issue proper guidelines on the procurement of goods and services under the PDM. 

14. Lack of facilitation for the parish development committees. 

The committee observed that parish development committee structures in the past programmes like Uganda Poverty Eradication Action Plan were disbanded due to lack of facilitation. 

Previous programmes were only provided with functional funds leaving out funds for facilitation, hence poor implementation of the past interventions. 

Committee recommendation 

The Government should consider providing some minimal facilitation to the parish development committee members to ensure smooth implementation of the programme. 

15. Failure of the previous interventions

Since 1987, the Government has implemented various interventions to reduce poverty in Uganda. These include the Rural Farmers Scheme (1987), Entandikwa Scheme (1996), the Poverty Eradication Action Plan, (1990) Kulembeka (To tap) (2001). This is not my language so you should understand - (Laughter) - Prosperity for all Programme (Bonna Bagagawale) (2007), Operation Wealth Creation (2011), Emyooga (2020), Youth Livelihood Programme and the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme. 

The committee observed that those interventions have not positively impacted the long-term poverty situation in the rural and urban communities. Poverty levels continue to be high at 39 per cent despite the interventions. There is need to appreciate the fact that poverty eradication is a responsibility of the poor themselves and Government programmes only supplement their cause. 

Committee recommendations

    a) The Government should develop an effective programme that must approach the problem of poverty eradication from the household level, that is, micro level, and not macro level, by involving the locals to contribute in decision making about what best can be done to change their conditions.
 
b) 	National planners and implementers of poverty eradication programmes should design poverty eradication programmes that are demand-driven and, therefore, put the poor at the forefront of the planning process through community-level dialogue and consultation. 

Conclusion 

The implementation of the Parish Development Model should deliberately focus on uplifting the socio-economic condition of households. This requires equity and inclusivity, transparency and accountability, non-partisanship and a national outlook. This requires capable leadership at various levels, a competent and responsive civil service at implementation; and beneficiary and community involvement at the grassroots.

PDM should be incremental, building on the success of the preceding development interventions and learning and avoiding the pitfalls that plagued those earlier interventions. In addition, the Government should normalise regular evaluation of the impact of PDM to enable timely and strategic adjustments. This requires a functional design, monitoring and evaluation component. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the first report on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First, take your seat. We have to call an item. 

Clerk, please, get the record very well because I was listening to the chairman – there are some words, which were difficult for him. So, since he has read verbatim, just capture the whole report. Like on page 15, the third last sentence, you mentioned Shs 34.04 “million” when it was in “billion”. So, it happens on some of these – but I want the Hansard to capture the full record. 

So, since he read it verbatim, please, capture the whole report. Anyone who will be following the Hansard will find it much easier in future. 

(The report is hereby appended.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE DIVERSION OF SHS 17 MILLION FOR THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL FUNDS IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman, if the Prime Minister comes in, as per Rule 41 of our Rules of Procedure, I have to stop you and we go to Prime Minister’s Time. You are lucky she is not yet here. 

Of the 30 minutes you asked for, you have used 28 minutes. So, on the next report, please, go straight to observations and recommendations.

3.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Godfrey Onzima): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the diversion of Shs 17 million for Parish Development Model (PDM) funds in Financial Year 2021/2022. 

Before I proceed to read the report, allow me to lay on Table a copy of the report and the minutes of the interactions with the various agencies. I beg to lay.

Mr Speaker, at the Sixth Sitting of the First Meeting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament held on Tuesday, 12 July 2022, Hon. Gilbert Olanya, raised on the Floor of Parliament a matter of national importance concerning the diversion of Shs 17 million of the Parish Development Model for Financial Year 2021/2022, for payment of salaries in Amuru District Local Government. 

The matter was further expounded by other Members of Parliament that some parishes in their respective districts had received less funds under the Parish Development Model budget. Similar sentiments were raised by Hon. Henry Kibalya, Member of Parliament Bugabula County South. 

Further, during the sitting of Thursday, 4 August 2022, Hon. Patrick Oshabe, Member of Parliament Kassanda County North, raised a matter of national concern, namely; that whereas the rainy season had commenced, requiring farmers to be facilitated with planting materials under the PDM, funds for the purpose had not been released.

On 11 August 2022, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning), Hon. Amos Lugoloobi, presented a statement on the status of PDM. 

Subsequent to the above, the Rt Hon. Speaker referred the above matters to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for interaction with the relevant departments of Government on the matter and report back to the House. 

The Committee on Public Service and Local Government has examined the matter in detail, made inquiries and, in accordance with rules 159 and 189, now begs to present its report with observations and the recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairman. Kindly, let us stand over this item. It is 4.00 p.m.; Prime Minister’s Time. 

MR ONZIMA: Okay. 

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman, remain nearby because you are going to proceed after.

4.01
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, before I go in for Prime Minister’s Time, allow me to join the rest of Ugandans to pay tribute to our brother and father, Gen. Elly Tumwine, who lost his life. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

Hon. Hellen Kahunde, Woman Representative Kiryandongo, gave a narrative that: “Most of the districts and municipalities in Uganda have poorly managed, dilapidated and overwhelmed market infrastructure resulting into poor working environment for market vendors. Markets are overpopulated and lacking many basic amenities such as toilets, drainage and sewerage systems among others. Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project, a high-end project, was only implemented at the regional level.”

Mr Speaker, her prayer is to know the plans the Government has to decentralise relatively decent markets at district level. 

My response is that the Government is cognisant of the state of the markets and has taken initiative to develop them, beginning with existing markets in a phased approach. This redevelopment of the market infrastructure will ensure better working conditions for the vendors and increase revenue generation by local governments and promote local economic development and prosperity for all. 

Mr Speaker, the Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project (MATIP), which is a partnership between the Government of Uganda and the African Development Bank, has redeveloped 19 markets, plus three high-level value addition facilities, namely; Arua, Soroti and Busia. 

A concept proposal for 18 markets has already been submitted to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for consideration. 

Mr Speaker, the Government is, therefore, committed to decentralising and redeveloping decent markets in rural areas, in the medium term. Mr Speaker, in the next phase, Government will continue expanding the portfolio to cover other areas in the country, including Kiryandongo District. 

Hon. Mbabazi Pascal, Member of Parliament Buwekula County in Mubende District. He is concerned about the inability of some districts to effectively maintain their road networks due to dysfunctional road maintenance equipment and the need for urgent intervention by the Ministry of Works and Transport. His prayer is that I may give Parliament an update on this matter. 

My response, Mr Speaker, is that in 2017, Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Works and Transport, procured 1,151 units of road construction equipment from Japan that were distributed to 121 district local governments across the country. 

Mr Speaker, each district was equipped with one motor grader, one-wheel loader, one vibro roller, two dump trucks and a water bowser. 
This was in addition to delivery of the previous consignment of 1,450 assorted road equipment units from China that were procured in 2012. 

Apart from the district local governments, other beneficiaries of local equipment procured from Japan were Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), the Ministry of Works and Transport, other Government agencies and the National Enterprise Corporation (NEC) under the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. 

The road equipment procured from Japan has commendably delivered the district road network in a motorable state. 

Mr Speaker, Shs 12 billion has been provided for equipment maintenance, inspection and monitoring activities of utilisation and usage of the road equipment around the country and is an integral component in its sustenance. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport conducts a monthly monitoring exercise called “Joint Caravan Inspections”. The Ministry of Works and Transport centralised road equipment maintenance. 

In the Financial Year 2022/2023, a total sum of Shs 55 billion has been provided for procurement of road equipment units for 16 new districts. The procurement process commenced and delivery of the road equipment is expected in May 2023. These districts include Rwampara, Karenga, Obongi, Kwania, Kapelebyong, Kalaki, Kitagwenda, Kassanda, Bugweri, Nabilatuk, Kazo, Kikuube, Madi-Okollo, Lusot, Terego and Rukiga. 

Hon. Norah Nyendwoha, Woman MP, Buliisa District said: “The Uganda Police Force has been cracking down on the defaulters of Express Penalty Scheme (EPS) tickets. Over 300 cars have been impounded since Monday. The Kampala Metropolitan Police started operations without giving guidance to the public on how to pay the express penalty.” 

Mr Speaker, her prayer was that can I update the House on this operation?

It is true that the operation started on Monday and sensitisation adverts have been running on radio stations. The Police spokesperson issued a press release on the same at the Uganda Media Centre before the start of the operation. By close of business on Monday, a total of 1,020 out of 1,024 impounded vehicles had been cleared.

Honourable colleagues, the ticket has 25 codes for traffic offences whose fines vary depending on the offence committed. The penalties range from Shs 20,000 to Shs 200,000, which the offender has to clear within 28 days. 

Mr Speaker, Government has a responsibility of collecting over Shs 8 billion from the violators of the Express Penalty Scheme tickets that traffic rules offenders have defaulted. 

Hon. Nyamutoro Phiona, National Female Youth Representative: “The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) together with the World Health Organisation have announced the resurfacing of Ebola in some parts of eastern Congo. Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister tell us what Government is doing so that we do not have a spill over in Uganda given the fact that Uganda hosts refugees from the DRC?”

Mr Speaker, my response is that Government, through the Ministry of Health, has intensified surveillance at border points and screening at all points of entry. 

We are also working with authorities in the DRC to monitor the contacts of victims since some are being quarantined in the DRC. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. You have used 12 minutes out of the 40, meaning you have done very well. We have items under your office which we would need to sort out in that time. There is one Member who was not gazetted by the Government Chief Whip. Let me allow the Chief Whip to do that since it is within your time, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the precise and concise responses. 

Mr Speaker, in accordance with the provisions of Rule 15(10)(c), Rule 158(1), Rule 162 and Rule 165 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I designate Hon. Nebanda Florence Andiru, the District Woman Representative Butaleja District, to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government). I beg to designate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Colleagues, Rule 41(8)(b) of our Rules of Procedure allows us 20 minutes for Oral Questions. And they start from now. 

Hon. Margaret of Kotido?

4.14
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are well aware that Karamoja is faced with challenges of famine and the situation is not any better; people are still dying. In response, there was a Cabinet decision and communication that Shs 135 billion was earmarked to provide food assistance to the subregion. Up to date, no action has been taken and the situation is not any better; people are hungry and dying. 

Rt Hon. Minister, why is the Government considering famine in Karamoja not an emergency?
Two -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is one question, honourable. Clerk set one minute for each question.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, it is not true that Government is not concerned about the plight of our people in Karamoja region. We have already sent food, we have had a number of meetings with many leaders, including, with my sister. Government is procuring more food. The process is ending this week and more food will be sent to Karamoja region. We have also mobilised development partners to provide more food. More food, in many tonnes, is going to Karamoja region next Sunday. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.15
MR SAMUEL OPIO ACUTI (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is now more than one and a half years since the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation was transferred to the Office of the President. However, more than 150 employees who are not absorbed in the new structure have not been redeployed to other ministries, departments and agencies as had been committed. I would, therefore, like to know when is the redeployment going to be done and why has it delayed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Public Service is here.

MS NABBANJA: I saw him and I am confident he has the answer –(Laughter)- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We use one minute to answer these questions, honourable minister.

4.17
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, the redeployment is being handled and certainly all those employees are going to be redeployed in due course.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee, please follow up on that.

4.17
MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA (NUP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in regard to the unfairness in the enforcement of the law on property rates by local governments. The annual levy on any commercial property that exists within their jurisdiction, under the Local Government Act 2005 - Mr Speaker, the law provides for a prescribed percentage of levy for particular areas and exemptions for non-commercial structures. This has not been done in the case where citizens continue to pay even where they should not be paying. I have received numerous complaints in my constituency about residential structures, which have been slapped with this levy. The complaints from the property owners were ignored.

I also want to note that this law excluded exemptions for the less privileged members of society, for instance -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please conclude. 

MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA: Let me just complete this, Mr Speaker. For instance, widows, orphans, who own property for majorly sustenance and not material benefit. In all fairness, these people should be considered during assessment and given exemptions.

My prayer is that the Minister of Local Government should explain to this House why enforcement of the law on property rates continues to be unfair; and what remedies can be introduced to avoid the unfairness. Of course, it was a question to the Prime Minister. 

MS NABBANJA: The Member has the Prime Minister and he is still asking the Minister of Local Government – (Laughter) - but nevertheless - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is here - (Laughter)

MS NABBANJA: I saw my sister here. What I want to tell you, brother, is that if there is a law in place, we shall just enforce that law. Just give us information and we do the needful.

4.19
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there has been selective giving out of beds to some hospitals in some districts – (Applause). I would like to know the criteria they used to give out those beds because some of the districts, which are doing badly in their health centres IV and other health centres, do not have beds. Children sleep on the floor, mothers sleep on floor after giving birth-

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, this seems to be a popular view, because I have heard all Members showing concern. I request you, Mr Speaker, to give me time so that we can investigate and come back here with a report.

4.21
MR YUSUF MUTEMBULI (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is simple and it goes to the Prime Minister: Who has authorised the people or the team from the Ministry of Water and Environment to go and evict my people from the swamps of Lelesi, Nakwasi, Namulo and Namatala yet the President has on several occasions stated that the people of Bukedi and Busoga should not be evicted from the swamps? 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, it is not true that the President directed that the people of Bukedi and Busoga should not be evicted. The fact is that Cabinet came up with a decision and we said, following the drought and the environmental degradation, we needed to restore our environment and wetlands.

Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, please read rule 41. Only the Leader of the Opposition has a right of reply or comment on Prime Minister's Time. Just read the rules. Read rule 41. No information, no procedure during Prime Minister’s Time.	

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I request Members to allow me to conclude. The President has been very categorical that people of those regions were lured into those swamps by some of the leaders and, therefore, they should be given time to harvest their crops. I believe that maybe NEMA has seen that they have harvested their crops at least for this season. I think that is why they have swung into action.

4.23
MR SOLOMON CHELANGAT (NRM, T’oo County, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the 9th of this month, I raised an issue of insecurity in our district from where animals are stolen and brought to Sironko District. On the 22nd and as we talk, 12 animals have been stolen again by these bandits. Our people are in Sironko looking for those animals. The footsteps have been trailed up to there. I would like to inquire from the Prime Minister as to what steps have been taken since we raised this issue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is the effect of the raids on Sebei.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, we shall investigate the matter and come up with an answer.

4.24
MR BOB OKAE (UPC, Kwania North County, Kwania): Mr Speaker, in my district, the Government opened four dams around 2009 to 2016 and these dams did cost a lot; each of them was at about Shs 2.6 billion. According to the weather patterns of today, my people would be using these dams for irrigation. I want to know the plan of the Government regarding these dams because since they were constructed, nothing has taken place and yet they -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, the questions are to be sharp and to the point and the Prime Minister always picks the point.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture is here. Brother, come and assist.

4.26
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, through my effective boss, the Prime Minister, I would like to assure you that MAAIF is increasing its fleet of earth moving equipment and we shall be able to come and desilt all those dams. Allow me to bring information to Parliament next week on the dams lined up for de-silting in this financial year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Abubaker Kawalya.

4.26
MR ABUBAKER KAWALYA (NUP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Currently, NEMA is evicting people in areas of Kawaala, Namungoona and Busega. Sometime back, Government planned to compensate these people before the construction of Lubigi Channel. 

What happened to the Government plan of compensating these people before evicting them? As we speak, over 500 people are homeless; their houses were demolished yesterday and even today. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need your intervention. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I am rushing so that I can pick three more of you because our time is running out.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, today we had a meeting over the same and the Minister of Environment is here. The fact is, we want to restore the environment. Let us be serious; if people constructed in wetlands, they must vacate and that is it. Thank you.

4.27
MS MELSA AVAKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is delaying the commencement of construction of Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo Road because the budget for this road has been availed by World Bank? Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the Member’s concern. I request that I invite the Minister of Works and UNRA, we go through the matter together and I will give you a definite answer.

4.28
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Ten years down the road, Government extended electricity through the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) to Moroto. During the extension of the line, transformers were not put in some areas because people had not settled there yet. 

Now people have settled there and they need connection to the grid but they cannot get connected because there are no transformers in that area. Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited (UEDCL) is saying that was the role of REA. I do not know whether the Government took initiative to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Question?

 MS ATYANG: What plan does Government have to put transformers -

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the NRM Government will provide power in all areas of this country, including Moroto.

4.30
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Uganda is well endowed with water bodies and yet we cry over lack of food because of drought. What plan has Government put in place to ensure that we tap water from all these lakes and rivers to irrigate the surrounding areas to provide food for the people just like it is done in Egypt and other places?

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, this Parliament approved a master irrigation plan for this country in 2020. It is that plan that we are going to use to make sure that we irrigate and all the water will go to other areas.

4.31
MR FADIL TWALLA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 13 June, the President visited us in Sebei and we raised the issue of the boundary between Bulambuli and Sebei. He promised that the Prime Minister would handle. Prime Minister, how far with the boundary issue?

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, today I had a meeting with the Minister of Lands over the same and money has been earmarked to make sure that activity is done. In a month’s time, it will be done. 

4.32
MR POLYCARP OGWARI (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, about six to seven months ago, the Pallisa District Woman Representative and I presented here a matter about the bridges in Pallisa. We even gave you documents that show what happened to the bridges but to our surprise, nobody reached there. As we talk, six people are in hospital because a truck overturned on the bridge. My question is, you gave the instructions but what happened?

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Member has not been categorical and specific so I do not want to give a blanket answer. I do not know the bridges he is talking about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please honourable, link up with the Prime Minister.

4.33
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is related to the one of Hon. Kawalya. It is true that Government gave a directive to evict people from wetlands. However, it is also true that Government allowed people to settle in those areas and establish businesses. 

Yesterday I watched people crying as they were being evicted from Lubigi wetland. They said that the people who went to evict them just woke up and started breaking down their stalls, making them lose out.

This is their livelihood; we are a Government of the people, Rt Hon. Prime Minister –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this is a question you needed to have written to the Prime Minister. These are not questions for oral answer. The Prime Minister will pick what she has picked.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, thank you for your guidance. My sister, the woman MP Bugiri is aware of the number of people we are losing and the famine we are going through because of tampering with the ecosystem. (Applause) Therefore, let members of the community get it from me - I know they are watching - that enough is enough. (Applause) We shall evict people in wetlands. 

4.35
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda came to Nakasongola on 30th July to inspect the construction –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Taaka, we need order in the House. Honourable Member, just wait a minute. Colleagues, you have said it has happened today.

If you notice, colleagues, the Prime Minister has 40 minutes. She used only 12 minutes; meaning you gave her a few questions. If you had, for example, liaised with the Chief Whip or even my office - I would have forwarded these questions and in one or two hours, she would have consulted with the minister responsible and given an answer. 

Now, you want a satisfactory answer to a question she needs to first consult on. She cannot answer you beyond what she knows. Therefore, I request you, colleagues, to please, write questions to the Prime Minister. 

You made the rules that I am implementing. Under Rule 41(8)(a) of the Rules of Procedure,  it is 40 minutes for written answers and Rule 41(8)(b), it is 20 minutes for oral answers. 

That said, my hands are tied by the rules you passed. Hon. Mutebi, you are the last and I go to the Leader of the Opposition.

MR MUTEBI: Mr Prime Minister, you came on 30th July to inspect the construction of the bridge connecting Nakasongola to Kayunga, which was supposed to be constructed for only 18 months. From 2019 to-date, the contractor is dilly-dallying with the work. We do not know whether he has some invisible power. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when will Omega Construction Company Ltd, hand over the road to the people of Nakasongola and Kayunga for use? Thank you. 

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, Omega Construction Company Ltd was given only two months to complete the work. By the time I was in Nakasongola, it was almost 92 per cent complete and, therefore, we expect him to hand over this work latest October 2022. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I had allowed Hon. Christine. Let her be the last.

4.38
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Uganda Parliamentarians Land Management Forum, the Bamugemereire Land Commission of Inquiry report was released to the President on 29 July 2020. Up to today, the report has never been made public. 

Can we know when the report shall be availed to us? This Commission of Inquiry used public funds of up to Shs 13 billion. We are hearing of proposals in land management. What are they basing on, when that report is not yet available to the public? Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the fact is I have no powers over the President and I cannot deceive you that I know when the report will come out. However, I will undertake to find out from the Head of State and report back to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Leader of the Opposition -

4.39
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have very few comments to make and I will commence with the one from the female youth representative about the outbreak of Ebola in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

The response by the Prime Minister is that they have started screening at all border points. Yet, the information and alerts we received from the World Health Organisation is that because of the porous border, a number of people who had contracted Ebola crossed and they are in this country.

However, the million dollar question to the Prime Minister is about the hype of the vaccine trial for Ebola. We were reliably informed - and that was way back in 2019; I have been checking - that Uganda Virus Research Institute had developed a vaccine and it was already on trial, even when it is not yet licensed. I expected you to furnish this House with some information on that vaccine. 

Mr Speaker, the NEMA eviction is an on-going and serious concern, especially here and it has been alluded to by the Honourable Member for Rubaga North. A pledge was made to those people residing along the Lubigi Channel – to be compensated. Besides, funds were appropriated to that effect. Up to now, it has not happened. The pledge has not been honoured. What we see are evictions in Namungoona, Kawaala and the other places that have been mentioned.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the funds were appropriated and this is taxpayers’ money. What happened? Justice should be dispensed to these people who are living along Lubigi Channel.

Again, these evictions are very selective. We know of investors –(Applause)- who have their developments in wetlands, including petrol stations, factories and we have seen the Sino-Uganda Industrial Park flood. They are all in wetlands. Why wouldn’t you do that with the big ones before you finish the small ones? (Applause) Big fish first - and even more investors are being allocated land in wetlands.

Mr Speaker, on the question about the national irrigation master plan, it has failed because – and Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I expected you to hint on this. You should definitely throw some light on it.

The fund on water for production is – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, you are using a lot of time. This is not your time; it is the Prime Minister’s Time. You are supposed to comment or reply and this should take around two to three minutes.

MR NAMBESHE: Most obliged, Mr Speaker but you know, I am mandated, under the same rule, to make my reply and I am ably doing so.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, one minute for you to conclude.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The National Master Irrigation Plan has failed and it is taking ages because the sister ministries – and the Prime Minister knows this - the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Water and Environment have not harmonised their positions on which ministry should implement this National Irrigation Master Plan. Even when funds have been appropriated, they have failed. I expected the Prime Minister to say this because it is under your glare that this wonderful plan is gathering dust; it is just merely on blueprint. Isn’t this also evidence of sleeping on the job? (Laughter) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Since we are in question time and I still had a few minutes, I will allow another item in the form of a question. Colleagues, we have very many questions. You can ask a question to a Member but you have to do it with the leave of the Speaker. 

Therefore, let me allow the Chief Opposition Whip, under Rule 43(1) of the Rules of Procedure, to ask a question to the chairperson of the Committee on Budget.

4.45
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In accordance with Rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure, I raise this question to the chairperson of the Committee on Budget. 

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, under Objective XXIII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, enjoins the State to institute an effective machinery for dealing with any hazards or disasters arising out of natural calamities or any situation resulting in general displacement of people or serious disruption of their normal life. 

You are aware that the Government formulated the national policy for disaster preparedness and management, with the objective of ensuring that disaster preparedness and management forms an integral part of the development process in order to reduce the risks associated with natural disasters in Uganda. 

You recall that Uganda has witnessed a number of natural and human-induced disasters in the form of civil strife, famine, drought, earthquakes, landslides, flooding and road accidents that have culminated into loss of lives, property and displacement of Ugandan citizens. 

I am also aware that Section 26 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, creates a Contingencies Fund and requires the Government to appropriate to the Contingencies Fund, funds equivalent to 0.5 per cent of the appropriated annual budget of the previous year to meet some of the urgent or unforeseen expenditure of the Government, including expenditure arising from natural and human-induced disasters. 

I note with concern, Mr Speaker, that since inception of this Contingencies Fund, way back in 2015, Parliament has been appropriating between Shs 62 billion and Shs 65 billion in each financial year to the Contingencies Fund, an amount that is far less than the statutory requirement of 0.5 per cent of the appropriated annual national budget. 

Now, the failure  by the Government to appropriate this Contingencies Fund of the statutory requirement of 0.5 per cent of the appropriated annual national budget has affected the Government’s preparedness, mitigation, resilience and prevention of natural and the human-induced disasters in Uganda, thereby rendering the implementation of district contingencies plans highly impracticable, as well as delaying the Government’s response in addressing the needs of persons affected by natural and human-induced disasters in Uganda. 

Now, considering that Uganda has and continues to witness increased exposure and the vulnerability to natural and human-induced disasters, which necessitate the strengthening of disaster risk resilience through the provision of adequate resources to respond to the immediate and future exigencies caused by natural and the human-induced disasters in Uganda, the question, is:  can the chairperson of the Committee on Budget explain to this august House why the committee, while exercising its mandate under Rule 173, has not recommended to Parliament to appropriate to the Contingencies Fund, an amount equivalent to 0.5 per cent of the appropriated annual national budget of the previous year? 

For instance, this year, we would be having Shs 244 billion as required under Section 26(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. I beg to question the chairperson.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairman, Committee on Budget, please respond to this question in two weeks’ time. These are the kinds of questions that will guide us in terms of - and also they check us because if you are the chairperson or a commissioner, you can be asked. All these are provided for under the rules and we usually give time to respond so that the chairpersons know that Members can check them at any time.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, your statement is not yet uploaded. I wanted to use your time and I really cannot call a statement, which is not yet uploaded, to be read. Therefore, let the Chairman, Committee on Local Government and Public Service resume.  - Is it uploaded? Can you confirm? 

Members, we have a statement – response to Highlights from the Report on the Oversight Visit by the Leader of the Opposition and the Shadow Cabinet to the Elgon Region to Assess the Disaster Situation. Is it uploaded? Is it on our system, colleagues? 

Please, if there is any colleague who has it on the system, you can stand up instead of - honourable is it there? Can you read it for us? (Member rose_) You see, I am disturbed with points of procedure. Very good. Colleagues have confirmed that it is there. Therefore, Prime Minister, since we are in your time, please, use 10 minutes to complete your business for today.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I respond to the Highlights from the Report on the Oversight Visit by the Leader of the Opposition and the Shadow Cabinet to the Elgon Region to Assess the Disaster Situation. 

Like I told you the other time that I would come here with the response, allow me to state as follows:

During the sitting of Tuesday, 23 August 2022, the Leader of the Opposition presented a report on the disaster situation in the Elgon region to which I committed to respond. Below are my responses to the issues raised:


    1.  Alleged negligence during rescue and response

Mr Speaker, the NRM Government, under the able leadership of Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, has a track record of not being negligent. That is why the people of Uganda have entrusted us with power for this long. (Applause) The flash floods and floods give little or no time for early alert and action. 

Various Government entities, led by myself, responded to the disasters. These include the Ministry of Health Emergency Response Team; Mbale Regional Emergency Operation Centre; Ministry of Works and Transport, through Uganda National Roads Authority; the Ministry of Water and Environment through the National Water and Sewerage Corporation; the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development through Uganda Investment Authority; Mbale City and Mbale District Disaster Management Committees; Uganda Police Force; Uganda People's Defence Forces; local leaders; Uganda Red Cross Society, and other local and international actors. 

Relief items from my office through the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees were delivered and distributed in good time after a rapid needs assessment that was carried out to identify the beneficiaries. H.E. the President provided Shs 5 million each to 23 families out of 29 who lost their dear ones through the Minister for the Presidency, Hon. Milly Babalanda. The six remaining families have been identified and will also be supported. 

Mr Speaker, Shs 1.2 million was the money used to buy fuel, Shs 2 million for hire of equipment in addition to the Shs l4 million that I used to support the bereaved families to transport the bodies. Therefore, it is not true that Mbale City was given only Shs 1.2 million in this response to disaster.  

In addition, allow me to thank the Uganda Police, Uganda People’s Defence Forces, the local leaders and the general public for the response activities that included: 

    1. Rescuing people and retrieving bodies; 
    2. Provision of food and non-food items; 
    3. Public communication and awareness raising; 
    4. Rapid assessment; 
    5. Supporting victims including psychosocial support; 
    6. Management of bodies by the Mbale City Mortuary. 

Furthermore, Cabinet directed line ministries, including the Ministries of Health; Water and Environment; Works and Transport; Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to provide follow-up support, including repair of bridges, restoration of farmlands, reconstruction of schools as well as consideration of long-term interventions.

The UNRA has mobilised equipment and now, they are at Mbale City Council headquarters ready to work. Culverts have been mobilised to work on Busamaga Bridge on Bufumbo Road, Manda Bridge on Butaleja Road and Nabisiso on Kaguta Road. 

Nambale Bridge on Mbale-Tororo Road is being worked on by the contractor who was contracted to reconstruct Malaba-Tororo-Mbale-Soroti-Lira-Kamdini Road. 

National Water and Sewerage Corporation has restored water supply in Mbale City and surrounding areas. Umeme has restored power and fixed all the poles that had been damaged by the floods.

The issue of no response to the plight of those affected by landslides in Bududa

Similarly, food and non-food items were sent to the victims as relief after a technical team had carried out assessment and identified 26 households from Bufutsa Parish in the villages of Bukitongo, Nangwe and Shikhamosi that were affected. In addition, eight households in Naposhi were affected by the landslide and are currently with host families in Nangakho Town Council.

Another 163 households across the subcounties of Bushika, Bubiita, Nabwela, Busiriwa, Bulucheke, Bukalasi, Bundesi, Bufuma, Mabono and Bushiyi were also identified during assessment to be living under high risk due to widening cracks and potential landslides. 

My office, in collaboration with development partners, has provided, as immediate response the following items; 20 tonnes and l0 tonnes of maize flour and beans respectively, together with 150 tarpaulins. 

It is not true that the entire parish of Bushika and Buriri Village were affected. There are areas that are still safe to live in. The risky areas have since been mapped and households at risk have been registered. 

M/S Give Directly, an international NGO is partnering with the Government of Uganda to provide cash transfers for purchasing land in safer areas within the Mount Elgon Region for 4,000 households as follows; 

Bududa – 2,050 homesteads 
Manafwa – 900 homesteads
Namisindwa – 500 homesteads 
Sironko – 550 homesteads

We are working on modalities to support the implementation of the offer from the Non-Governmental Organisations. This process is expected to be finalised by October 2022, when the cash transfers will commence. By the way, today, we had a meeting with the Members from Mount Elgon Region and we have agreed to start the cash transfers tomorrow. 

We have also mobilised other donations from UNICEF; Uganda Red Cross; Uganda Muslim Supreme Council who gave us four tonnes of salt, 30 tonnes of posho, 20 tonnes of rice, l0 tonnes of beans, four tonnes of sugar, 2,000 bars of soap, 2,000 blankets and 2,000 mattresses; Miracle Celebration Church, through Pastor Edward, 4,000 bunches of matooke and 300 kilogrammes of rice.

On allocation of Shs 1.2 million for distribution of relief food in Mbale City, once again, I wish to make it clear that the Shs l.2 million was given to support the rapid response assessment team. Our Standard Operating Procedure provides that the District Disaster Management Committees manage the relief distribution. There was no way the issue of money could affect distribution as the operations continued. My office has continued its presence, including during the distribution of food and non-food items.

In the same vein, it is wrong for the Leader of the Opposition to accuse Government of negligence and betrayal.

On the issue of updates and situation report in the region, it is on record that I have updated this House on a number of issues, especially on this matter. I was here on the Floor of Parliament on 2 August 2022 to give this House the situation report about the Elgon subregion.

Limited financing for Disaster Risk Management for local governments

Rt Hon. Speaker, the Government is aware of this and is taking the necessary measures. Cabinet adopted the Disaster Risk Management Plan, which spells out roles and responsibilities; its implementation started this financial year and strengthening of capacities and structures of districts and city management structures is one of the components.

Mr Speaker, on the absence of disaster response coordination, I wish to reiterate my earlier position that the Government strategies of strengthening structures of local government levels that are embedded in the National Disaster Risk Management Plan are under way.

Limited capacity of Disaster Risk Response and Management

I would like to say that as already indicated in our response, the newly adopted Risk Management Plan, highlights capacity strengthening as one of the key priorities and these include: 
Budgetary provisions for District Disaster Management Committees, provision of training and equipment to committee members, establishment of regional hubs and the provision of necessary equipment for disaster response, mainstreaming of disaster risk management in local governments budget process and early warning systems.

Negligence and the delayed response by police and other forces 

Mr Speaker, I hereby inform this House that police and sister security agencies were continuously present in response and rescue efforts. Flash floods give little warning, as I have already told you, or no time to predict exactly when and where they will occur.

Water accumulated rapidly and the victims were trapped in the incident. The loss of lives was an unfortunate occurrence. Volunteers also joined the rescue operations.

Incapacitated early warning systems in Mbale

It is not true that Uganda National Meteorological Authority forecasts are inaccurate. This authority is a member of the Interagency Technical Committee.

The Interagency Technical Committee utilises the information including dissemination of early warnings and advisories to the public as early alerts for every action. 

In addition, the Ministry of Water and Environment developed and disseminated an early warning system for River Manafwa and River Aswa catchment areas. These are running and information is being analysed by the Directorate of Water for Development.

The Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission

Mr Speaker, we are in the process of formulating the National Disaster Risk Management Bill and in this Bill, the establishment of the National Disaster Management Committee is one of the objectives.

Alleged Sino-Uganda Mbale Industrial Park as a significant contributor to the floods in Mbale

After our assessment of the floods, the following has been done:

    a) Energy has been restored and six factories are now functional out of 10, which were devastated;

    b) In Cabinet, an inter-ministerial committee was formed led by Uganda Investment Authority and it has been to the industrial park. Assessment of the extent of damage is complete and the following recommendations are being undertaken; 
One, a comprehensive drainage by the Ministry of Water and that of Works and MAAIF to ensure that we guard against any repeat of these floods.

Money has been provided to the National Investment Authority and a contractor has been secured. Mr Speaker, a report will be attached.

Those who were living in high-risk areas, due to landslides in Mount Elgon.  Construction of more houses is continuing in Bunambutye.

The issue of delinking the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees from the Office of the Prime Minister will be drawn to the attention of His Excellency, the President, who under Article 111 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda has the mandate to organise Cabinet. For the record, H.E, the President is already aware of this matter.

The Office of the Prime Minister, as per its mandate, will continue to coordinate and support the responses to the disaster-affected areas. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt hon. Prime Minister. Both the report and the statement are forwarded to the Committee on Presidential Affairs that will keep a watch on this issue. I am sure that very soon, they should be able to visit the areas, if necessary; we shall give them all the support needed so that they go and scrutinise. I do not want this to be my word against hers. 

Colleagues, on the Order Paper, I want us to have enough time for debate without any disturbance and pressure for the items, which we have on the Parish Development Model, hunger and all that. So, you will allow me to tackle item No. 9 and get it out of the way; then, we concentrate on our issues. Clerk, please, call item No. 9. It is a very short one.

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER ON THE STATE OF AFFAIRS IN THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Lulume Bayigga, 10 minutes are enough and then we go back to our – colleagues, it is your right under Rule 54, you can bring such.

5.13
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you. Mr Speaker, Members of Parliament who came here on DP ticket are in a conundrum. We are in an awkward state and we have had a discussion with the leadership of the Opposition together with the Opposition Whip.

They have been expressing concerns on how to place Members of Parliament belonging to the Democratic Party given the fact that their party was decapitated, and their President sits on the opposite side of the House.

Mr Speaker, in that situation, the activities of our party have been closed and any other activities are regarded as rebel activities. 

Our party headquarters have been closed to members, including Members of Parliament. It is on that basis, that one week ago, I, together with other members of the Democratic Party, were arrested at the gate of our party headquarters. We had gone to have political discussions with the party branches who wanted to know about the agreement made by our former party President and the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. 

On 16 August 2022, I went to the Democratic Party headquarters at Balintuma Road in Mengo for a meeting with party leaders of Kampala District. I found the gates closed and as I was fidgeting to ensure that they were opened. The media converged around me and told me that several members of the party had been arrested while they were trying to access the party headquarters. 

How did we come to this kind of situation? Mr Speaker, on 20 July, the media was awash with reports of the Government signing a document between the President of Uganda and the President of the Democratic Party. This document culminated into the absorption of our party President. This caused countrywide anxiety and it is the cause for many members of the Democratic Party being in the gallery today. We are delighted that you accepted to introduce them. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, let me guide you. Rule 54(2) of our Rules of Procedure says such a statement shall be written and submitted to my office, which you did. Since it is a written statement and I approved it based on what you have written, please, stick to what you have written. I am hearing a lot, which I do not have on record. 

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, let me read it verbatim. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please. 

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, the said agreement has caused countrywide anxiety among members of the Democratic Party. It is being interpreted by the media as extinction of the Democratic Party because it’s being swallowed up by the ruling NRM, with an unprecedented absorption of its Party President. 

Worse still and most confusing is where Hon. Norbert Mao, who is the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, took oath of minister, serves in and is bound by collective responsibility of a Cabinet of the Government his party opposes; sits on the Government side of Parliament and continues to hold out as a Democratic Party President after effectively crossing to the NRM Government side. 

It further baffles us and the public that the agreement affects the composition of committees of Parliament, including the sitting arrangement in Parliament. The agreement is out of reach from not only the DP Members of Parliament but also the general membership of the affected party, other than the person mentioned above; the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

The Democratic Party caucus has nine members who are members of the DP organ called the DP Parliamentary Group comprised of over 100 members who stood on the DP ticket in the previous general elections. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs claims to have briefed only four Members of Parliament to constitute a consultative process of the grand old party. We would like to state categorically and clearly that we have never been part of the party process that sanctioned the negotiations or consultations to get the impugned agreement done. 

Mr Speaker, peaceful assembling of the organs of the party have been dispersed by the Uganda Police Force while scores of others were arrested on 4 August at Tal Cottages in Rubaga. 

The DP national legal advisor, acting on our request, wrote to the party Secretary General, Mr Gerald Siranda, to avail the original copy of the said agreement but there has been no response to the request 24 days later - a blatant violation of the Access to Information Act.

The Democratic Party Members of Parliament had a meeting with the Leader of the Opposition and the Chief Opposition Whip and they raised the following questions and they are very pertinent to the functioning of this House: 

    i)  The question of Hon. Nobert Mao, a Cabinet Minister –[Text expunged]–  as President of an Opposition Party but sits on the opposite side of the DP Members of Parliament who are under the Leader of the Opposition and the Chief Opposition Whip. 

    ii)  The question of accessibility to the said cooperation agreement, its constitutionality and its implications on the sitting Democratic Party Members of Parliament, with respect to Article 83(i)(h) and Article 83(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the general membership of the Democratic Party.

    iii) Whether any private member of the public may not sue the Attorney-General in pursuit of the implementation of the agreement to the detriment of the DP Members of Parliament who may be deemed to have crossed to the NRM side on which platform they were not elected to Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, whereas some of us sit on the National Executive Committee and the National Council, which are the decision-making organs of the party, we state unequivocally and in no uncertain terms that neither the National Executive Committee or the National Council nor the parliamentary group to which we belong has ever sanctioned the process of negotiation for a cooperation agreement between DP and NRM.

Our prayers:

1. 	That Nobert Mao, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, lays on the Table the original copy of the impugned agreement to enable the Office of the Leader of the Opposition take a stand on DP Members. 

2. 	That Parliament pronounces itself on whether DP Members of Parliament should be bound by an agreement made without their consent in as far as voting is concerned with the NRM party positions as opposed to the Opposition positions.

3. 	That the learned Attorney-General clarifies the unclear position of the cooperation agreement vis-a-vis the Constitution of Uganda and the Political Parties and Organisations Act.
 
4. 	That the learned Attorney-General clarifies the legality of the DP Members of Parliament participation in the Opposition activities, including their sitting arrangement in Parliament in respect to the agreement in the face of a Cabinet minister continuing to hold the position of the president of the party that he is opposing in his current position as minister. 

5. 	That Parliament pronounces itself on whether its Commission vetted the President of the Democratic Party for the position of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs or the person of Hon. Nobert Mao for the same position.

6. 	That we, DP members, having been elected on the Opposition platform, be left to enjoy our freedom of choice to perform our functions on the same platforms, whatever the interpretation of the impugned agreement would be. I beg to submit. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, this should not take us long - Honourable, you have finished, please, take your seat. I just want to make the following clarifications and we move on. 

Firstly, on prayer 5, on who Parliament vetted. Parliament vetted Hon. Nobert Mao. It did not vet the President of DP –(Applause)– and the President did not appoint the President of DP as a minister. He appointed Hon. Norbert Mao, and that is the person the Parliament Appointments Committee vetted. 

Secondly, colleagues, I want to put it clear that the arrangement between the two parties is not for this House. (Applause) These are issues beyond this House. Parties can have their arrangements - we hear of coalitions. Anything, which is not registered with the Electoral Commission is not recognised. That is why, even in Parliament, we only recognise parties that have members here. The party we know that has members here is DP; we do not know DP-NRM. 

I want to clarify that this does not affect the operations of the House because DP, as a party, has its chief whip, Hon. Peter Okot, Member of Parliament for Tochi County, who has not reported any – let me make this clear - any collaboration between DP and NRM to be recognised by this House - who have remained sitting on the side of the Opposition - it is not for this House.

Any gazettement of DP members are submitted to the Chief Opposition Whip by the DP Whip, not by any other member. The Chief Opposition Chief has not come to my office to complain that the DP Whip has failed to do his work. The moment that is done, then, we can intervene because it would affect the operations of this House. 

This House, therefore, colleagues, cannot involve itself in the internal affairs of DP, whom it has appointed or not been appointed – it is difficult. Otherwise, next, it will be NRM with another faction coming and reporting here, then NUP and so on. We shall be setting a very dangerous precedent. However, I allowed the Member to make a statement for purposes of him recording his discontent as a member of this House. This is a forum where any Member can be given an opportunity to speak. 

Finally, there is language that has been used in this statement that we cannot allow to remain on the record of the House. For example, when you say that “Hon. Mao is -[text expunged] - as the President of DP” when the Electoral Commission has not forwarded any other name. Honourable colleagues, you know we appropriate money for these political parties and we base it on the leadership of these political parties. No other leadership of a political party called DP has been brought to the attention of this House. The money we shall continue to appropriate will go to the DP whose President is Nobert Mao and that is very clear. 

The one we shall appropriate to NUP will go to the National Unity Platform whose President is Robert Kyagulanyi. The one for NRM will go to National Resistance Movement whose President is Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. 

The one for JEEMA will go to JEEMA Party whose President is Hon. Asuman Basalirwa and a member of this House. The one for the People’s Progressive Party will go to PPP whose President is Hon. Bidandi Ssali and represented by Hon. Santa. The one for UPC will to go Uganda People’s Congress whose President is Hon. Jimmy Akena and his wife Betty Amongi sits on the Frontbench of the NRM. (Laughter) 

So, colleagues, with that, any language, which is not based on clear facts, for example, saying Hon. Mao is  - [text expunged] 

I thank you, honourable colleague, for exercising your right under Rule 54 but when we are exercising that right under Rule 54, it limits us to the functions of the House. Dr Lulume Bayigga explained and linked it; that is why I allowed it. I thank you for presenting the statement. Thank you. 

Clerk, we go back to – (Member rose) – now you, of NRM, what do you want with DP issues? (Laughter) Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government), please resume your seat. You might want to defect and you do it.

To DP members, your status in this House is very clear and not questionable. You are members of the Democratic Party. If there are some of you who disagree with the leadership of the Democratic Party, please, go to the DP constitution; it shows you how you can handle your issues.

Other members of this House will not participate in determining how the Democratic Party is led. I hope that is very clear. (Member rose_) Honourable member, you want to -

5.31
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Omoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague Dr Lulume for the personal statement he has made and I sympathise with him for the incident that happened at Balintuma the other day. 

Mr Speaker, like you rightly said, most of the issues raised in the personal statement - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, he did not make a personal statement. Personal statements are under Rule 55. This is a statement by a member on any matter. 

MR OKOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the statement he made, most of the issues can ably be addressed by the various organs of the party and I urge my colleague to make good use of the organs because they do exist. (Applause) The organs still exist and I call upon him to make good use of them. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. So, Hon. Lulume Bayigga, always consult your party whip. Hon. Onzima, please, resume. 

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had already read the introductory part. I was on methodology. 

The committee held consultative meetings, reviewed some literature, consulted relevant laws and received submissions from the following stakeholders:

    i) The Chief Administrative Officer of Amuru District Local Government;

    ii) The Chief Administrative Officer of Hoima District Local Government; 

    iii) The Chief Administrative Officer of Kamuli District Local Government;

    iv) Chief Administrative Officer  Gomba District Local Government 

    v) Chief Administrative Officer Gulu District Local Government.

    vi) The committee received a written response from Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, titled, "Statement on the Status of Funding the Parish Development Model (PDM) for Financial Year 2021/2022 and Financial Year 2022/2023".

Mr Speaker, the background and the rest of the information is there. I will not repeat it. Members can read the background.

Operationalisation of the PDM strategy in the Financial Year 2021/2022. Members can read that.

Establishment of the relevant structures at the parish level. The Members can read that.

Supportive logistics and equipment at the parish level for running PDM. Members can also read this.

Budgetary provision for PDM for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 
This one is also there, including the table. 

I now go to page 8 on the performance and utilisation of selected district local governments on the PDM. 
This section of the report looks at the performance and utilisation of PDM funds by selected district local governments.

Amuru District Local Government 

In the Financial Year 2021/22, Amuru District Local Government had a budget of Shs 1,008,567,113. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in the course of the financial year, released a total sum of Shs 530,633,919 representing 52 per cent of which Shs 298,029, 906 (43 per cent) was a revolving fund. Amuru District Local Government is comprised of 58 parishes and according to the instructions to all accounting officers by PS/ST, each parish was to get Shs 17,389,081. However, each parish got Shs 5,138,441. This was in disregard by the Accounting Officer to follow the instructions in the letter issued by the PS/ST to repurpose Shs 75,189,262 for gadgets and tools towards the Parish Revolving Fund, hence reducing the budget from Shs 6,434,814 to Shs 5,138,441 that each parish was to get on the basis that the resources were to be disbursed equally across all the parishes.

The details are captured in the table.

Let me go to observations on Amuru District Local Government alleged misuse of PDM funds to pay salaries

    i) The committee observed that Amuru District Local Government had a budget of Shs 17,389,088 per parish, based on the equal sharing on the 58 parishes and these resources were for all the four components budgeted for under PDM. However, it should be noted that if all the funds directed to the revolving fund plus funds for gadgets and tools were all released to Amuru District Local Government, each parish SACCO would receive Shs 13,645,460 not Shs I7 million as is being communicated.

    ii) The committee also observed that the Accounting Officer did not follow the instructions in the letter issued by the PS/ST to repurpose Shs 75,189,262 for gadgets and tools towards the Parish Revolving Fund, hence reducing the share of each parish from Shs 6,434,814 to Shs 5,138,441 on the basis that the resources were to be disbursed equally across all the parishes.

    iii) The committee further observed that Amuru District Local Government had a budget of Shs 58,032,847 for administrative costs, which was used for recruitment and partly as salaries for parish chiefs.

    iv) The Accounting Officer informed the committee that out of the budgeted Shs 99,385,884 for staff costs, he spent part of it for paying parish chiefs.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Amuru District Chief Administrative Officer should be audited on the usage of the funds for gadgets and tools that was not repurposed as revolving funds.

Hoima District Local Government

The details of the monies sent to Hoima is there. Members can read. Let me go to our observations.  

Alleged misuse of PDM funds for payment of salaries. 

    i) The committee observed that Hoima District Local Government had a budget of Shs 17,389,081 per parish based on the equal sharing by the 55 parishes and these resources were for all the four components budgeted for under PDM. However, it should be noted that if all the funds directed to the revolving fund plus funds for gadgets and tools were all released to Hoima District Local Government, each parish SACCO would receive Shs 13,077,282.

    ii) The committee observed that the Hoima Accounting Officer followed the instructions in the letter issued by the PS/ST to repurpose Shs 62,299,424 for gadgets and tools towards the Parish Revolving Fund, hence the 100 per cent performance on the resources disbursed across the parishes.

    iii) The committee also observed that although Hoima District Local Government had paid all the 55 parish SACCOs through their respective bank accounts, Shs 21,063,309 belonging to three PDM SACCOs bounced due to errors in the account details. This was returned to the Treasury.

    iv) The committee further observed that Hoima District Local Government did not divert any of the PDM funds for payment of salaries since they had an allocation of Shs 55,131,150 meant for that purpose and was released 100 percent.

Kamuli District Local Government

The details are indicated. Members can read.

Let me go to the observations under Kamuli. 

Alleged misuse of PDM funds to pay salaries 

    i) The committee observed that Kamuli District Local Government had a budget of Shs 17,609,203 per parish based on the equal sharing by the 79 parishes and these resources were for all the four components budgeted for under PDM. However, it should be noted that if all the funds directed to the revolving fund plus funds for gadgets and tools were all released to Kamuli District Local Government, each parish SACCO would receive Shs 13,818,187.

    ii) It is also observed that the Kamuli Accounting Officer followed the instructions in the letter issued by the PS/ST to repurpose Shs 90,617,324 for gadgets and tools towards the Parish Revolving Fund, hence the 100 percent performance on the resources disbursed across the parishes.

    iii)  The committee further observed that Kamuli District Local Government did not divert any of the PDM funds for payment of salaries since they had an allocation of Shs 55,131,150 meant for that repurpose and was released 100 per cent.

Gulu District Local Government 

The details are indicated there. 

Observations 

The alleged misuse of the PDM funds to pay salaries. 

The committee observed that Gulu District Local Government had a budget of Shs 17,389,088 per parish based on the equal sharing by the 47 parishes and these resources were for all the four components budgeted for under the PDM. However, it should be noted that if all the funds directed to the revolving fund plus funds for gadgets and tools were all released to – (this is not Amuru, but Gulu. There is a mistake there) -  Gulu District Local Government, each parish SACCO would receive Shs 13,645,460. 

The committee also observed that the Gulu Accounting Officer followed the instructions in the letter issued by the PS/ST to repurpose Shs 53,237,683 for gadgets and tools towards the Parish Revolving Fund and hence the 100 per cent performance on the resources disbursed across the parishes. 

The committee further observed that Gulu District Local Government did not divert any of the PDM funds for payment of salaries, since they had an allocation of Shs 129,923,919 meant for that purpose and was released 100 per cent.

Disbursement schedule to parishes 

In addition to releases to the respective districts mentioned above, the committee was required to interrogate the matter raised by Hon. Nsamba Patrick of Kassanda North, namely that whereas the rainy season had commenced, requiring farmers to be facilitated to access planting material and related inputs through the PDM, funds for the purpose had not been released. 

In this, the committee was to inquire into the PDM funds disbursement schedule to establish, among others, if the releases are in tandem with the agricultural seasons. 

We have taken into consideration the report presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the House and referred to the committee on 11 August 2022, and noted that the report does not adequately address the matter raised by Hon. Patrick Nsamba. 

The minister in his report under “3.7 Way Forward” stated that “In future, the ministry plans to release the Parish Revolving Funds into trenches in July and January, so that the beneficiary households can plant their crops by the start of the two major rainy seasons in the most parts of the country.”

This response is not sufficient to answer the question of disbursement of funds to the parish SACCOS. The statement indicates that in the course of the Financial Year 2021/2022, the ministry released the funds as follows:

    i) Only Shs 62.69 billion was released as Parish Revolving Funds.

    ii) All the funds totalling to Shs 10.5 billion for administrative costs to cater for the offices and overheads were released to the local governments by the end of the financial year.

    iii) All the funds totalling to Shs 28.79 billion to cater for staff costs for recruitment of parish chiefs and town agents were released to local governments.

    iv) Only Shs 11.87 billion for gadgets and tools was released and later with the instruction from the PS/ST to all accounting officers was supposed to be channelled as revolving funds. 

    v) The minister, in his report to the House, states that the funds that were not released was on account of non-readiness of the local governments and parish SACCOs.

    vi) He further states that Shs 1 billion was released to the Ministry of Local Government for the operationalisation of the PDM Secretariat. 

The committee notes that in the Financial Year 2022/2023, Shs 1.142.05 billion was approved as the budget for PDM, of which Shs 1.059.4 billion is appropriated as revolving funds for all the 10,594 parishes and each to get Shs 100 million. 

According to the minister, in his statement, Shs 134.83 billion has been released in quarter one for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

I beg to report that whereas the committee wrote to the Honourable Minister scheduling meetings to receive clarifications on the disbursement schedule and the amounts involved, the minister did not honour our invitation. 

The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development lays before this House the disbursement schedule for the PDM funds.

Committee observations 

    i) PDM strategy

The committee observes that the PDM or concept is new under the National Development Plan III Framework and it has not yet been understood by many stakeholders due to its multi-disciplinary and multi-sectoral strategy.

    ii) Distribution of funds for the PDM strategy for Financial Year 2021/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you will not read verbatim. We need time for debate. You have used up your time. Please, conclude.

MR ONZIMA:  Okay, let me just read some few recommendations.

There is limited public awareness of-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Members have reports. Please, conclude.

MR ONZIMA: Honourable members, the report is uploaded; you can read the remaining parts, including some of our recommendations. Let me go to the conclusion. The committee first concludes that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe you can read Section 8.0 and the conclusion.

MR ONZIMA: 8.0, recommendation on the PDM strategy –

The committee, therefore, recommends as follows: 

Government should prioritise the implementation of all the pillars of the PDM chronologically, to enable maximum intake, understanding and the utilisation by all the stakeholders in the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

The provisions and commitment of Shs 100 million per parish will push the PDM strategy to another level. However, the inadequate support for pillars, especially the following: 

    a) Production, storage, agro-processing, value addition, marketing and community mobilisation, mind-set change and crosscutting issues, gender, environment, disability and so on. Pillar (five) might slow the intended progress of the strategy.

    b) Monitoring and supervision of Government programmes under the PDM. The PDM strategy should be intensified by a relevant organ of Government including private sector and Non-Governmental Organisations at all levels in order to achieve the success of the intervention.

    c) Government, as a matter of urgency should implement a phased capacity building programme for parish chiefs with focus on multi-skilling in handling complex PDM interventions. This can be through training workshops and seminars. 

The committee thus concludes that the alleged case of misuse of PDM funds by the district local governments was an isolated case in Amuru District Local Government, where the Accounting Officer did not follow the instructions in the letter issued by the PS/ST to repurpose Shs 75,189,262 for gadgets and tools towards the Parish Revolving Fund and hence reducing the share of each parish from Shs 6,434,814 to Shs 5,138,441 that was to be disbursed equally across all the parishes. 

In his own admission, the Accounting Officer for Amuru informed the committee that out of the budgeted Shs 99,385,884 for staff costs, he spent part of it for paying parish chiefs. Secondly, the minister’s statement to the House and the written submission to the committee do not answer the question of request for releases of the disbursement schedule. 

The PDM is a good model, premised on the principle of uplifting households and improving livelihoods, and should, therefore, strategically be placed for the benefit of ordinary citizens.

The success of the PDM interventions will depend on the actual understanding of the PDM concept, total commitment by implementers and effective support, proper monitoring and supervision by the respective local governments. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Finance, is there any clarification you wanted to first make to guide us in the debate? 

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the statement. However, the statement is dated March 2021. So, a lot has since happened and I thought I should update the House because it is very important that on record, I update the House on the current position about the disbursement of the PDM funds, particularly, the Parish Revolving Fund for the current Financial Year 2022/2023.

We have a total of Shs 1.059 trillion appropriated to Ministry of Finance for the benefit of the parish SACCOs.  We also have money that was appropriated to various agencies, for purposes of coordinating the PDM and that amounts to Shs 82.65 billion. 

In the first quarter, we have released Shs 125 billion for the Parish Revolving Fund; in other words, the PDM SACCOs. That money was released by Ministry of Finance to the vote of Ministry of Finance, for the benefit of the parish SACCOS. So, it is now available on the vote. 

I need to mention, Mr Speaker, that this Parish Revolving Fund is a capitalisation grant because somewhere in his report, he indicated that it is a loan but it is a capitalisation grant from Government to the PDM SACCOs, for the sole purpose of lending to viable income generating activities in the production, processing, marketing and storage of agricultural products – pillar one. 

Honourable Members, in the Financial Year 2022/2023 - the current financial year - the Parish Revolving Fund Disbursement Plan is as follows - this is how we are going to release the funds:

    a) Shs 25 million per parish has been released in quarter one and that money is residing on our vote in Ministry of Finance;

    b) In quarter two, Shs 50 million is planned for disbursement. So, the quarter running from October to December, parish SACCOs will receive Shs 50 million; and

    c) In the third quarter running from January to March, they will receive Shs 25 million. That is what we shall disburse.

Honourables members will need to note that disbursements shall only be made to properly established and ready PDM SACCOs - and I think that is very important, Mr Speaker. The SACCOS have to be ready to receive that money.

Parish Development Model SACCO readiness implies compliance in the following areas: 

    a) The PDM SACCO corresponds to a parish on the list of gazetted parishes to guard against sending money to ineligible SACCOs that could be formed by schemers targeting PDM money;

    b) The PDM SACCO is duly registered under the Cooperative Societies Act and has been issued with a Certificate of Registration by the registrar;

    c) The PDM SACCO has an account in a supervised financial institution - a bank such as Post Bank, et cetera;

    d) The PDM SACCO has signed the Parish Revolving Fund Financing Agreement with the Chief Administrative Officer/Town Clerk. We have availed these financing agreements; they are simple agreements. The purpose of this agreement is to formalise the relationship between Government and the PDM SACCOs;

    e) The local government accounting officer has submitted an attestation form to confirm that the PDM SACCOs were formed in accordance with the Pillar Three guidelines; and 

    f) The PDM SACCO has been verified by the Chief Administrative Officer/Town Clerk, supported by Operation Wealth Creation against data on subsistence households in the PDMIS. This is a Parish Development Management Information System, which we have developed to manage the 10,594 SACCOs and their operations. 

My ministry, therefore, urges all local government accounting officers to fast-track the prior activities necessary to ready the PDM SACCOs for disbursement, specifically to complete data collection on all households and finalise the establishment of PDM SACCOs in all the parishes under their respective areas of jurisdiction. 

Mr Speaker, I mentioned last time that we have 8,333 SACCOs that have been formed. Therefore, we have I think close to 2,700 SACCOs - or slightly beyond - that are yet to be formed and established on the system. So, we are urging the accounting officers to make sure that they verify and finalise the process of creating all the parish SACCOs within their areas of jurisdiction. 

In July 2022, my minister requested local government accounting officers to work with Operation Wealth Creation to validate the PDM SACCOs formed - and that exercise has been going on - and verify the membership in the PDM enterprise groups and the SACCOs, prior to disbursement of funds. This exercise is aimed at ensuring that the PDM target beneficiaries participate in the PDM enterprise group SACCOs.

Mr Speaker, I beg to conclude by saying that for effective management of Parish Revolving Funds by PDM SACCOs, and learning from past experience, the target beneficiaries should not access the disbursed Parish Revolving Funds before they are prepared. Initial access to funds shall be preceded by training and preparation of PDM enterprise groups and PDM SACCOs on governance, loan management, record keeping and good agriculture and agribusiness practices.

Furthermore, the Parish Development Management Information System has been designed, with the capability to track daily transactions in the PDM SACCOs. If the system is effectively used, the tool will provide full accountability and traceability for Parish Revolving Funds. So, the system is already working towards whatever I have mentioned here and the money is already available on the system, awaiting disbursement to the successfully established SACCOs. I beg to clarify.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable Minister, you have seen that you had prepared a response that has very useful information. I request you to sign it and lay it on the Table so that we can upload it on the system for all Members to access. It has very important information that will guide us as we go to the constituencies. You can read it.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table my statement on the readiness to disburse Parish Revolving Funds under the PDM in the Financial Year 2220/2023. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I hope it is signed. Clerk, upload it quickly. In about 10 minutes, Members should be able to access it so that we are able to refer to it. 

Colleagues, if you remember - and that is why I was calling the Chairperson here - the minister laid on the Table the schedules and I referred them to the committee to go and update the report so that you scrutinise the update. Those documents need to be put in the library so that Members can access them. 

Secondly, honourable Minister, a quick one before I open up the debate for which I need a clear answer. I remember that as we were ending the financial year, a promise was made that the Shs 17 million that we had appropriated last financial year, which was returned to the Consolidated Fund - we were promised that this financial year, we shall release Shs 117 million. 

Now, from the releases that are projected for the different quarters, I can see you are going to release Shs 100 million. I know we did not appropriate the Shs 17 million, which would require a supplementary. The Prime Minister had promised that, indeed, this would be done. Can we know the fate of the Shs 17 million? If it is available and you are not ready to use it here, why don't we use it for seedlings and the shortcomings we are having? (Applause)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, it is our commitment to pay Shs 17 million per parish. Indeed, last financial year, for the first two quarters, we made releases. We had to continue in the third and fourth quarter but we did not because we had realised that the SACCOs were not getting ready to receive that money. 

However, towards the end of the financial year, some SACCOs had been created and, indeed, the CAOs went ahead to release part of that money. A number of them returned the money to the Consolidated Fund. However, because we did not know what quantum of money would be required at the end of the financial year as a balance, we did not know how much money to present to the House for appropriation. Therefore, we have a duty to come back to the House to appropriate that money to these SACCOs; we are not going to send the money to the districts again but to the SACCOs and we are now ascertaining the balances pertaining to each of the SACCOs in the various districts. 

We already have a schedule, which we are verifying and that is how we intend to move. Therefore, as soon as we are ready, we are making arrangements to transmit that money to the respective parishes. However, we thought that we should not delay the parish SACCOs any further; that this money that has been properly appropriated can be made available and any SACCO that is now ready should receive its funds. That is how we are proceeding, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Colleagues, I now open debate. I am going to try my level best to ensure that each one of you who wants to speak, speaks on this matter. However, if you check the Order Paper, we are not only handling this matter; we are handling three matters in our debate. Two of these matters will require a vote. 

We have a statement to Parliament on actions taken to improve food security and mitigate the impacts of the long dry spells as well as the performance of the tractor scheme. Therefore, I will allow any issue related to that. 

The PDM has been mooted as if it is the one which is going to solve all problems and that is where the money went. As such, we are going to be repeating ourselves discussing one statement and leaving out the others. Therefore, let us relate  to it and we see how best we can have a convergence of ideas. 

The second issue is about the two statements presented by the minister on diversion of the Shs 17 million for the PDM where districts have been cleared. The Auditor-General will carry out their audit; ours was just oversight. 

The third is the status of the implementation of the PDM. Let me start here - Colleagues, I am going to allow you; do not mind. I will first pick those who have not spoken today. I will start with Mama Cecilia Ogwal, Dr Bwanika - I am picking all of you and so, you should not mind. (Member rose_) Honourable, you have already spoken; I will first pick those who have not spoken but I will pick you later after exhausting colleagues who have not spoken today. Two minutes each. Clerk, please, set the clock. 

If you see a member of the committee speaking, please, alert me. Members of the committee, you cannot debate your matters. Therefore, Hon. Adriko, Hon. Martin Muzaale and group, you are out of this. I will give the shadow minister time to respond.

6.10
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the statement given by the Minister on this important matter of the PDM. However, I have a lot of difficulties, having interacted with my district team very many times on this subject. I still encounter lack of preparedness on the part of the team on the ground. 

We have received many statements and we have had discussions around the PDM; even we, as Members of Parliament, cannot answer some of the questions and those people on the ground are less exposed than us. Therefore, one of the things that we have to do as a House is to try and come up with a mechanism of sensitising the people on the ground; people who are going to manage the fund. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, how are we going to demarcate the money for the women and the money for the youth - because this is also causing us problems? We know the money has been sent for the PDM; we would like to know how much is for women and how much is for the youth. 

Thirdly, who will determine which women group will benefit as the others wait? These are some of the grey areas that the two ministries of Local Government and Finance should help us to understand so that we can guide our constituents accordingly. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, you tabled the guidelines and regulations. I think it was the Minister for Local Government - Chairperson, you can help if they were tabled.

MR LUGOLOOBI: I am informed that the guidelines were tabled. Mr Speaker, if you allow me one second, there is something I forgot to mention. Previously, we had indicated that the parish chief would be a signatory on the SACCO account. That position has since changed. The Cabinet meeting held last Monday, changed that position and decided that the SACCOs should be able to appoint their own signatories. 

On issues of gender, before a SACCO receives Shs 100 million, for example, we have already indicated that 30 per cent of that money should be loaned to women and another 30 per cent to youths. Therefore, the ratios have been divided as such. People with disabilities have 10 per cent and then, there is another group that gets 20 per cent.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister, on the issue of the parish chief, we wanted a Government official that we can hold accountable at parish level. Anyway, if it is a Cabinet decision, thank you for updating us but the committee can scrutinise it further. 

Minister for Local Government, I request that you get all the Members copies of the regulations and any guidelines. 

6.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Businge): Although we had given them out during induction, very many things have changed, like my colleague has said. I pledge to go and organise hard and soft copies for all Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need updated copies here. Thank you, honourable minister. Let us have the questions and then, the minister will come in to answer them. 

6.14
DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The core objective of the PDM was to transform the subsistence farmers, who are 39 per cent, into the money economy. However, the Government seems to tell us that the entire 100 per cent of households are involved in the PDM, which is defective. The PDM targets 39 per cent. 

When the Minister of Finance came here, he told us that one of the characteristics of subsistence farmers is that they are landless. If these people are landless and they are 39 per cent, how do we render the cash crops, including tea, coffee, and the like into their hands? The Government seems to run away from these very important cash crops and is rendering them in a programme that leaves them out and targets only the 39 per cent. 

I would like to ask the Ministers of Finance and Agriculture; What is going to happen to the 61 per cent Ugandans who are now outside the programme of PDM? We do not have seedlings. Right now, the farmers are calling us for seedlings and seeds but the Government has said they are not going to provide them. Where are the other Ugandans going to run? 

Then, Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, did you set the two minutes? (Dr Abed Bwanika rose_)  You can go ahead and ask your question.  

DR BWANIKA: I am asking as the shadow minister so that I comment on the food -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is the Shadow Minister of Agriculture? 

DR BWANIKA: I think she is the Shadow Minister of Local Government and I am the Shadow Minister for Agriculture. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you not sure about your minister? NUP, you do not know your Cabinet? 

DR BWANIKA: She is for local government. Mr Speaker, I would like to comment on food security. In this country, we produce lots of foods - grains and cereals - but we lack a national food storage system. That is our biggest problem. We do not have the silo systems. Farmers, at the end of a huge production, end up losing out because they cannot store their food. Then, we find that in one area, like Karamoja, people lack food. 

I would like to hear from the Minister of Agriculture when we are investing in the national silo system so that we are able to secure food for the future and also help the farmers not lose out in the post-harvest issues. 

Lastly, on the extension workers, the PDM has recruited parish chiefs who are not specialists as regards to agriculture and yet, the main activity in PDM is agriculture. Why did the Government think that these administrators are the priority, instead of the extension workers? What are we going to do? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.18
MR HASSAN KIRUMIRA (NUP, Katikamu County South, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The PDM targeted household incomes but now, the 39 per cent that they are talking about - even its categorisation is problematic. In my subcounties, there are families that have applied for the PDM. They went to the parish chiefs and now, they are being told that they are not part of the 39 per cent. 

Therefore, we would like to know from the minister how they arrived at the 39 per cent of the beneficiaries of the PDM. Basically, in most of our communities, the people are poor. The parish chiefs are telling them that they do not belong in the category that has to benefit from the PDM. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

6.19
MR NABOTH NAMANYA (FDC, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to put it clear to the minister that they went ahead to recruit parish chiefs but it is a tug of war to find parish chiefs in their respective parishes. In your assumption, the parishes have offices but these offices are not there. Therefore, where will these SACCOs consult from, since many parishes do not have offices? 

Another issue, Honourable Minister, is that your assumption is that all the parishes will get an equal share of Shs 100 million. However, I would like to state it clearly that some parishes are bigger than others. For example, in my constituency, I have a parish, which has less than 1,000 people and then, another one, like Kisiizi, has over 5,000 people. How will this be equitably distributed since parishes are not equal? 

Lastly, Honourable Minister, you tend to hinge on agriculture. We would like to agree that even where the Parliament is, there is a parish. There are also poor people around here, including those on Nasser Road. How are you bringing them on board? There are those who are not agriculturalists but are in the urban areas. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.21
MR DAVID SSERUKENYA (NUP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We remember very well the challenges that we found when we were sent to monitor Emyooga. We know Emyooga was a mirror reflecting the PDM. However, one of the challenges we found is that the people that were managing Emyooga were not well paid. Therefore, I suggest that we get qualified people who must be facilitated so that we can monitor this huge amount of money. 
Secondly, some parishes have many people. For example, Masajja Division in Makindye-Ssabagabo has around 150,000 people. If you say that each parish will get Shs 100 million, to me, it is not fair. We should revise that. Thank you very much.

6.22
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (Independent, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue is with the local government. That is what is in my constituency; the matter of the recruitment of parish chiefs. The ideal situation would have been that the parish chiefs should be recruited from the parishes or in the subcounty and, at worst, from the district. 

However, I have parish chiefs who are recruited from outside the district. These parish chiefs come on Monday, stay in hotels and then go back home. Therefore, they are not on the ground. In the long run, these parish chiefs are going to be very expensive to maintain. Honourable minister, please, do some homework and see how this situation can be put in order. 

Number two, I have a subcounty called Bukiro where people are charged Shs 2,000 for registration and those without money, who are about 39 per cent, were not recruited. Therefore, they are saying their money should be refunded. Of course, that was not good. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, there is a policy framework, which is on record here, where the minister was saying that he consulted Parliament as far as the PDM is concerned. Since the last Parliament, I have not heard him consult Members of Parliament about the PDM. I do not know if there is a Member who was consulted or whether you, Mr Speaker, were consulted on this matter. I think Parliament was not consulted and that is why we have these issues. (Member timed out.)

6.24
MS SARAH NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The chairperson of the committee observes lack of coordination between the PDM Secretariat, the subcounties and the district. The PDM is going to be operated at the local level. If there is no coordination with the secretariat, we will end up having challenges. 

I do not see any policy put in place, which determines who does what while PDM is being implemented. There is going to be conflict in not understanding who is handling what. 

Mr Speaker, the sanctions being put in place on those who fail to repay this money – how do we recover this money and what timeframe do we give so that we do not lose these funds like we did in the past? Thank you.

6.25
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister and the committee for the presentation about the PDM. 

My concern is about pillar number five, which is on mindset change. We were told that these people are being trained on mindset change. I do not know whether there is a standard training manual for these farmers. 

I need the minister to tell us whether there is a standard manual for training these farmers because we need to have copies. We need to know what these farmers are being taught so that when we go there, we can also train. 

My suggestion is that in the manual, we need to include the enterprises that have been selected. Information must be very clear to the farmers on how they should go about the selected enterprises. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.26
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for the work they have done. However, that report needed to be responded to by the Government because it is a very good report and it has raised fundamental issues. 

Secondly, there is a conflict already between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Talking about the PDM, in my place, is very dangerous because it is unpredictable. 

It is also undermining NAADS because they are saying the money that was supposed to be for seeds is now for the PDM. So, it is becoming very dangerous. 

Secondly, we need to amend the Local Governments Act to receive the money. Unless you amend the Local Governments Act to receive the money from the Central Government, there is a very big challenge on the sanctions; who does what – and accountability because accountability functions is by law. 

Now, if you say that the money will go directly from Finance or local government to the SACCOs, it is going to raise a very big challenge. 

If we want to relate the PDM to food security, the Minister of Local Government should come up with a statement to relate to them. Is he satisfied that Shs 100 million is going to answer all the issues of food security? 

Otherwise, talking about the PDM in some constituencies, you will get many questions, which you cannot answer, yet questions must be answered here either by policy or law. You cannot have guidelines or regulations where you do not have the law. Regulations come from the law. Let us have the PDM -(Member timed out.)

6.28
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will begin with the committee's report. They talked about the qualification of a parish chief to move from either diploma to degree. I vehemently disagree because these people are going to work in the rural areas. We have had subcounty chiefs who are graduates but is there any change?  Let us maintain them and train them regularly. 

Secondly, Mr Chairman, you talked about Shs 453 billion in a given financial year of which Shs 404 billion was for disbursement. There is an element of saying that they must provide services such as roads and others. Is the Shs 404 billion going to be part of the money that this parish will use to make a better road and a bridge? We need that clarification from the chairman and the Minister for Finance. 

The other matter is that regarding the parish chief - Honourable minister, we had convinced these people that the parish chief must be the signatory for purposes of sanctions. 

However, here, you are giving those villagers a bonanza to choose somebody to be a signatory to the account. I think there is no way we shall follow up. It is better we go to the original idea that the parish chief should be a signatory. Otherwise, if, politically, you have been convinced that they select their own, we are going to get a disaster. Thank you.

6.30
MR DONALD KATALIHWA (NRM, Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The concern I have with this PDM is to do with the guidelines, which are changing on a daily basis. As you notice, even this afternoon, the minister has brought another change to the guidelines regarding the signatories. 

Sometime back, we were in the communities sensitising people about how the model is going to work. Is the ministry going to organise other sensitisation meetings in communities to tell people about these changing guidelines?  Even the Ministry of Local Government has already brought other changes. What are we really going to do with PDM? 

Mr Speaker, in my view, the PDM is still a pilot. We are piloting and putting every resource of this country in it. 

I urge this august House to scrutinise the PDM again. Otherwise, we are headed to burying our economy. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is the honourable colleague at the back. Colleagues, I am going to pick you. I am trying to mix. People from one region are seated together. Now, if I am going to pick people from one region, someone will say Tayebwa is planning to do something in West Nile or is covering his westerners or he has a deal with Buganda. (Laughter) So, that is why I keep skipping and coming back. I want to implore you – here, the language we use is English. Colleagues from the same region, stop sitting together. Please, interact with others from other areas. (Laughter) 

6.33
MS BRENDA NAMUKUTA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is Hon. Brenda Namukuta, oh sorry, I was not seeing well. (Members rose_)

Colleagues, look, maybe if you want to tell me that you want to talk and go. We are still here; so, do not put me on pressure to pick you first. If you want to speak and rush out - do not ask questions and you cannot even wait for answers. All of us are going to speak. 

MS NAMUKUTA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the presentation. I also thank the Honourable Minister. However, there is a big gap in the sensitisation programme. Mr Speaker, you will bear witness to the fact that there are even some Members here in the House, who are still singing PDM but the whole concept is not understood. I am being honest. 

Let us not lie to the public with these changing guidelines on a daily basis. My main concern is on sensitisation because from the top leadership, we, the Members of Parliament – even when we go down to the district councillors and all local leaders, the whole concept is messed up, yet, all funds were referred to the PDM. 

Every time we speak here, we refer to the PDM; all programmes have been referred to the PDM. Now, we are getting a big gap between the implementation and what we say. 

I request the honourable Minister together with Cabinet, to review the sensitisation programme because most of the programmes come as a rumour and they end up being messed up. 

The other concern is; how will you cater for the different percentages? Initially, you talked of women’s percentage, the youth and all other sectors. Every sector was given a particular percentage – (Member timed out.)

6.35
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am concerned about what the minister has just tabled, especially the conditionalities of the SACCOs that qualified to benefit from those funds. How I wish they had started with that before exciting people to get into the groups. 

We have been singing different things and now, they are bringing these conditionalities. What will we tell our peasants who belong to the 39 per cent? I think we are going back to the bureaucracy of getting this money for the peasants that we really speak for. No wonder that is why your boss said that they did not have updated data and people started rebuking UBOS that they have the data. 

Now, he is telling us that they are still collecting the data. I think we are not really prepared for this programme. We have excited people; when we go for burials and weddings, we talk about the PDM and people just rebuke us. 

I want to find out from the chairperson; when we went out with the minister to all the regions, what did they pick from those meetings - because we were set and we went with the ministers? Is there any report that has been put together that you referred to, chairperson, that gathered all these? There were very many issues that were generated during our meetings and we expected the report to be tabled by either the Minister of Local Government or the Minister of Finance. 

So, are we going back to discussing issues and then letting them go, and collecting issues and we do not implement? What is wrong with us, Ugandans, in terms of implementing programmes that would – (Member timed out.) 

6.37
MS DORCUS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I thank the minister and also the committee, for the report on PDM. A quick one, on some of the issues, which other Members have already hinted on, about the manual. I request that the minister and the team on the ground, who are already trained, that if we are working on the manuals before you give to the Members and before we send them back, can you, please, make efforts to ensure that we harmonise? 

As she has already stated, when we went out, we realised that the information in the guiding documents are not speaking to each other. I pick on the example of the interest rates; in one document, they are talking about six per cent and in another you, seven per cent and eight per cent. If we are talking about the recommendation from the committee, which is talking about clear recovery strategy for the funds that we are disbursing, let us clarify so that all of us are on the same page. Even if they ask me from Alebtong or somebody from western, we should all be speaking the same language. Otherwise, we shall end up confusing our people. I thank you. 

6.38
MR BENARD SEKYANZI (NRM, Budyebo County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee and the minister for the report. 

This is a very good programme, if it is handled well. The training they are talking of; they trained only the leaders but we need to train also the targeted beneficiaries because they do not know what to do and they are going to misuse this money if they are not trained. 

So, I request that if it is possible, we first hold on and we train these beneficiaries so that they know what to do in order to benefit from this programme. 

Another thing I am grateful for is the Cabinet resolution. Indeed, I saw during Emyooga, these technical people misused money and the beneficiaries did not benefit. So, if they are the ones to be the signatories, they will benefit. I wish this money had gone direct to their accounts and not to the district. You can see that what is taking place in Kitgum is because the money went to the district accounts. 
So, we are giving them the money to misuse. Let us take the money down to these people. Thank you.

6.40
MR DENIS SEKABIRA (NUP, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raised a matter of national importance concerning allocation of coffee seedlings by UCDA, to Members of Parliament. You fully supported this matter and ordered that the ministry works out a formula and then reallocation be done to Members of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are coming back on Tuesday with a statement. The minister committed to it yesterday.

MR SEKABIRA: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, the last one is a clarification because I learnt by proxy that the PDM was first tried in Hon. Amos and Hon. Galabuzi’s constituency. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did they succeed? 

MR SEKABIRA: They did not succeed and that is why I am asking because they do not seem to be ready. I honestly would not support an idea, where the accounting officer in the name of a parish chief is being dropped to allow villagers to manage their SACCOs by being the signatories. 

Who is going to be accountable in case Government wants to make follow-up on public funds? Thank you very much.

6.42
MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is about the people going to benefit. I have tried hard to register as many SACCOs as possible and the Honourable Minister here is my neighbour. He knows how Mukono is very - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have tried hard? 

MS NABUKEERA: He is my neighbour. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the record, it is not you registering SACCOs; you mobilised. 

MS NABUKEERA: I help because some of them do not have certificates for those -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you have mobilised. We do not want you to be held accountable. You have mobilised people to register SACCOs. 

MS NABUKEERA: Yes, I have mobilised people to register SACCOs and they are very many. Therefore, I want to know the criteria, which they are going to use to consider who is going to benefit from this and who is not. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

6.43
MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NUP, Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two main points of concern.

First, the PDM concept is only focused on production, yet, Uganda’s economy is also characterised by challenges of storage, transportation and marketing. After the 39 per cent farmers or business persons have put more efforts in the production of crops, animals, fish, among others, I would like to know the comprehensive Government plan towards addressing the challenges of storage, transportation and marketing since it affects the economy very much. 

Lastly, I would like to know if there is a chance to reverse the PDM money so that we concentrate on service delivery to the community because when you analyse the Presidential directive and interest of transforming the country on socio-economic development, that is best suitable when there is proper service delivery in terms of good roads, water, electricity, good schools, health units, to mention but a few. 

All these, according to the PDM programme, convince the public that all shall be catered for in PDM, which I really doubt. Is there any chance to reverse this Fund and focus on service delivery so that we do not build a totally dependent population, people who will be equipped to work for themselves and look for money – (Member timed out.)

6.45
MR GERALD NANGOLI (NRM, Elgon North County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much for the opportunity, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the report but there are very many gaps. When this programme was brought to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This report was presented by the chairperson. 

MR NANGOLI: When this programme was put before us, we welcomed it and started explaining to our voters how good the programme would be. However, at the moment, we are getting discouraged because, if you say you are giving each parish Shs 25 million, especially this time when farmers are eager to plant, given the fact that they have been experiencing a dry spell for the last six months – I thought this would be the time that Government would say, “Instead of Shs 25 million, let us make it Shs 50 million. Then during the second quarter, we give Shs 25 million” other than giving them Shs 25 million now when they need more money than second quarter because this is when farmers are expecting to plant. 

As Members of Parliament, you know very well that we have been supplementing them with seeds but simply because we did not budget for the money, we do not have seeds to give them. 

I would propose, Honourable Minister, with due respect, that if we cannot increase on Shs 25 million, then, we come up with a short-term measure. You bring here a supplementary budget and we shall process it so that we are able to get more seeds and give them out to our farmers because they are waiting for them and they are disturbing us a lot. Otherwise, Shs 25 million will not solve the problems of these farmers. 

I want to assure you, as both an ordinary person and as a Member of Parliament representing the people of Elgon North, that it is not going to solve anything. That is why people are saying; “Maybe, it is just a token of appreciation.” (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Rose Obigah - 

6.47
MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report but I would like to disassociate myself from what they say about removing the money for NAADS and UWEP. In Terego, when you give birth to a child, you do not kill the mother. We explained this to the House that we were going to keep these programmes. 

Honourable Minister, you do not know what NAADS has done in Terego. Therefore, this PDM in Terego, Mr Speaker, is a nightmare. I have parishes that have over 20 villages and each village has more than 300 people. What kind of miracle are you going to perform in Terego? We have not divided our parishes; our parishes remain as they were in colonial times because Terego is under Arua; Arua did not do a service to us. 

Therefore, we either divide this money according to villages or we are going to divide this money according to the population. If we are removing the local person like the last girl in Terego; like the last population in Terego; you either go by population or we go by villages. 

Lastly, the degree holders to be the parish chiefs. Mr Speaker, we have very many degree holders; Bachelor of Business Administration graduates – they are there, why don’t we employ them? Why are we still getting these people who have given up? Some of my parish chiefs are very old; they actually do not know what they want next. Therefore, I would think employing degree holders is an excellent recommendation to this PDM. 

Lastly, mindset change is a driving machine to the PDM because we need it. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Mbarara City - 

6.49
MS RITA ATUKWASA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbarara City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Representing a city comes with its package; transient communities that live in cities and the issue to do with working groups that spend their time in cities. When Emyooga and UWEP came, there were issues of women who work in markets and issues of artisans that perform their work in urban centres and cities like carpenters and welders. 

The PDM defines their jurisdictions as where they reside, possibly at the ward, yet, they cannot find time to associate and belong to those groups or SACCOs in the parish, which could be more villages. There is need to redefine; that even a workplace can be a jurisdiction where you can come together and form a SACCO to be able to access these funds. 

There is an issue to do with marketing. When you see what is happening to agricultural products – yes, we want to produce more because we have a big population but there is the issue of packaging and marketing. We have done all this work but the issues to do with UBOS and URSB are not critically addressed in the package. So, in the end, we shall have more products that are not allowed to go on the market. 

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Local Government promised, when we were at Imperial Royale, that they were going to design a special package for cities and urban communities so that they can partake of this properly. So, we are looking forward to receiving that package so that we can use it to sensitise the people. 

Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.51
MS KENNY AUMA (UPC, Woman Representative, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The PDM is meant to promote economic growth across the region and also gender. However, when you look at it, you notice that some regions are lagging behind. Also, we have vulnerable groups like people with disabilities, people who are infected and affected by HIV/AIDs, who have been left behind. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Tom Bright - 

6.52
MR TOM BRIGHT (NRM, Kyaka Central County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The PDM is still challenging. It has confused me more. We have been telling people how it will work. Today, I have heard there are new guidelines and I do not know even what to say in my area because our people know the money will come to help them soon. They knew before that it would be Shs 50 million in advance but now it is Shs 25 million. I do not know how Shs 25 million will be distributed amongst all our villages. 

For example, in my constituency, I have 22 parishes and you find that a parish may have about 13 or 50 villages. It becomes very hard. Mr Speaker, I think it is the right time for the minister to go back to the drawing board and sensitise us, as honourable members, so that we can get the right information to tell our people on the ground. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, if you have spoken today, I will allow you later. I want to give chance to those who have not spoken.

6.52
MS AGNES ACIBU (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two observations. One, we need to get started then we shall keep on improving. Two, I feel if we are not ready, as Members of Parliament, we should not be sent out to tell lies because in the face of the people, we are looking like liars. 

I am going to give a scenario: the other week, we were with one of the ministers and when she talked about the Parish Development Model, people shouted at us. You can see the extent to which we are -

To the minister, I believe that you are going to top up the Shs 17 million we are shouting about. In my district, we got only Shs 9 million while others got Shs 10 million. Before you give the Shs 25 million, top up the other Shs 17 million so that we are consoled. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Clare – No, are you Hon. Clare? (Laughter) Hon. Atima, I know you are among the most romantic West Nilers but you are not Clare. (Laughter)

6.54
MS CLARE MUGUMYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very sorry to note that this PDM has started off on a wrong note. First of all, we went to the villages and mentioned so many figures. We mentioned Shs 100 million, Shs 17 million, Shs 25 million and Shs 117 million – Now, we are being regarded as liars. I do not know how the Government is going to help us go back to the communities and clear that and ensure that we are delivering the right message. 

When we went to carry out sensitisation together with the ministers, the parish chiefs were already complaining that they have a transport challenge. Moving from one point to another in those big parishes to verify SACCOs whenever they are formed, where the terrain is not good, is a very big challenge for the parish chiefs. 

Government, we need to do a lot to ensure that we straighten up things and ensure that the PDM starts and continues without all these guidelines that are changing like the dollar rate. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.55
MR PATRICK BINGI NYANZI (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to address two pillars specifically - Pillar 2 on infrastructure and economic services and Pillar 5, community mobilisation. I want to allude to the fact that Shs 100 million in the 64 parishes that make up Butemba County is no mean support. We cannot achieve much if, for example, my ordinary farmer has milk and that truck of milk cannot make it to the main road. Many of them are already failing to make it to the main road. 

The designers of this model looked at all the pillars and I think the earlier we addressed ourselves to all these other pillars like the chairperson of the committee alluded to, the better. Otherwise, this might not see the light of day, just like the previous interventions. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.57
MR JOHN FAITH MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The chairperson of the committee was very clear and articulate; he alluded to the Government interventions that had been in place earlier, Bonna baggagawale and others. He declared and demonstrated how they could not achieve the desired objective. Now, we have come to our very precious Parish Development Model, on which some of us have even been quoted in our constituencies. When we went there, we called it a magic bullet that was going to lift 39 million people from a subsistence to a money economy. We gave all these scenarios; we presented Shs 30 million, Shs 17 million but in my constituency, what every parish received was Shs 7 million.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: While I was Government Chief Whip, I spent an entire evening in your constituency confirming - (Laughter) - We climbed Mountain Wanale.

MR MAGOLO: You are right, Mr Speaker. Now things have changed again and again. We were speaking of this PDM so that we own this programme and cooperate so that we all go out there and speak with one voice but when these things keep changing again and again, we develop cold feet. We cannot keeping doing the same things and expect different results.

We plead with the policy makers, ministers and other people that if anything changes, let us have that information so that we -

6.59
MS NAOME KIBAAJU (NRM, Sheema County North, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in lamenting. I think this evening, we are lamenting. We all know that we went out there and told our people - Some of them have spent their money in advance, in anticipation of the Parish Development Model money. We did not only promise agricultural products, we promised them that this would come with electricity, with proper roads, education and that everything would be okay in the districts. Now, our role as Members of Parliament has been made impossible. We are even scared to go back and face the people once again to tell them that on what we promised them, there has been a little change.

Mr Speaker, at the moment, there is rampant poverty in the villages. People want to improve their lives. When this money comes, I want to promise you that it will be ‘chewed’ immediately because of the immediate needs of our people. If it is so little and we cannot distribute it equally and we do not even know how to select, our position as Members of Parliament has been made very difficult. I thank you.

7.00
MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not going to read from the book of Lamentations, as my colleague has done. I am going to read from the book of Psalms but before I do that, let me first take this opportunity to thank the committee for presenting us with a report on the status of the implementation of the Parish Development Model. That said, I first want to observe that the Parish Development Model, by design, is for everybody.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member is giving his views. Honourable, you are protected and he is even reading from the book of Psalms. (Laughter)
    
MR OCHAI: It has got seven pillars and pillar No. 4 takes care of the social services. Social services, once provided at parish level, do not discriminate whether you are from the 39 per cent household or not. In that respect, therefore, the Parish Development Model is for everybody.

Even in urban centres, the ward development model is for everybody. So far, progress has been made, although minimal, but let us have hope. All we need to know is to remember that onetime, Dwight David Eisenhower, the 34th President of the United States of America said, “Plans are nothing. Planning is everything.” So, we must take into account the dynamics of the world. If we note that, for instance, - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Faith Nakut? The book of Psalms is very long –(Laughter)- so you cannot have - it is very beautiful but -

7.02
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two issues to raise. One is on issue 12 of the report on entrepreneurial capacity – (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, for record purposes, the previous speaker talked about presenting based on the book of Psalms. I would like to know, specifically, which Psalm –(Laughter) - because the book of Psalms has 150 chapters and some of them are very lamentative. So, I do not know which particular Psalm he talked about. You could have been relatively right if you said that you are making your presentation based on the book of Revelations. For record purposes, he should have clarified to us the particular Psalm. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, you are making this very difficult for Dr Musa, Hon. Hanifa and company.

MS NAKUT: Mr Speaker, my comment is on two issues that are in the report. One of them is issue 12 of the report on inadequate entrepreneurial capacity of citizens. 

When we were passing the Appropriation Bill, we increased the money of Enterprise Uganda from Shs 12 billion to Shs 87 billion to cater for the Parish Development Model.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In this budget?

MS NAKUT: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

MS NAKUT: Okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the record -

MS NAKUT: But it is good to check.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have met the team from Enterprise Uganda and I think we did not even give them Shs 1 billion. They are doing badly.

MS NAKUT: Okay, it is because I sit in the committee that passed it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which committee?

MS NAKUT: The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Colleagues, the budget is passed on the Floor. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development reported to the Budget Committee and then the Budget Committee proposed figures. We came here. I can tell you, I have met Mr Ocici and team but they are not doing fine at all. They need the intervention of the Ministry of Finance.

MS NAKUT: In that case, it is important to put in resources for Enterprise Uganda to do entrepreneurship capacity building of Ugandans. If we had done that, my question would have been: how many parishes have benefited from that capacity building? 

The other issue is on page 10 of the report on inequality in our allocation. The PDM itself is meant to equalise the population - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, are we having a sitting in a sitting?

MS NAKUT: The PDM is meant to be an equaliser, bringing in the 39 per cent from subsistence into the money economy but the way it is being implemented now is as if it is not an equaliser. It is implemented for all and yet we know who the 39 per cent are and where they are. 

So, at the end of it all, we will not achieve because we are spreading everybody to 100 per cent. If we are targeting the 100 per cent, let us change the narrative so that we know it is 100 per cent not the 39 per cent. 

The Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) said they are not ready and yet we are relying on their statistics of the 39 per cent. Perhaps, we do not know where the numbers are. I want assurance that we should know who the 39 per cent are, and where they are.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. What Hon. Faith Nakut has raised - the point on business mind-set change - Now we have that pillar of mind-set change but what does it target? Good discipline but the business mind-set change, which Enterprise Uganda focuses on; that entrepreneurial aspect -

Honourable minister, Enterprise Uganda is under your ministry. When they train your people, you see a change - even talking to us MPs, you will see a change. So, if we want this money to be a revolving fund to benefit people to do business, whichever kind, especially around the agricultural sector, then we need to train our people on business mind-set change, not just mind-set change. I believe that is a component you can focus on and it would help.

7.08
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have three concerns. First of all, I am an advocate of the Parish Development Model, if it is implemented very well. 

Hon. Kwizera raised an issue of the law under which we are implementing this programme. The reason we are seeing these guidelines changing every day and night is because there is no law on which these guidelines are hinged. Honourable minister, we need a law that will govern and guide this programme.

The Parish Development Model is envisaged to be implemented under pillars. The money we are talking about here is for only one pillar but the other pillars are neglected. 

Just recently, we raised the issues here to do with releases to the Uganda Road Fund. You can imagine a mountainous district like Bundibugyo is given Shs 30 million in a quarter to maintain the roads. 

As I speak, I have, in my constituency, four subcounties that are completely cut off because all the bridges and culverts were washed away. We are going to have a lot of production but we shall not be able to access the markets –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I pick from Hon. Gafabusa is that under the Parish Development Model, we more or less only financed the financial inclusion pillar. Others are suffocated.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, as we have indicated, we have seven pillars. If you take the first pillar, that is production, processing, marketing, you will realise that agriculture is already a programme within the National Development Plan and our budgeting system, that is allocated money and that money is spread across the institutions in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

When it comes to processing, industrialisation, we have various agencies including the Uganda Development Corporation (UDC), the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and several others. Now, some of these pillars are already adequately catered for. The one for the parish revolving fund is what has not been funded. 

We can establish the amount of money that is appropriated to the various pillars of Government. When we talk about social services, education; the schools that we are talking about are funded. The health centres or hospitals are all funded. It is only that we are not presenting - when we are presenting it - maybe we are making a big mistake - we should be presenting the numbers for those various pillars that are provided within the budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what I am going to do - because the minister is really throwing the ball in our court. He is saying the other pillars have money, but what we see is different. You got money from the other pillars to go and finance the financial inclusion pillar and we see it from clear reality - if you removed money for NAADS and others.

So, what I am going to do, colleagues, is to give an assignment to all committee chairpersons. I will talk to my boss, the Speaker, so that we have a session, where we shall discuss the Parish Development Model and each committee of the House that has a pillar, directly, will come and explain to us how that pillar is financed, facilitated and linked to the Parish Development Model. (Applause) Honourable minister, you will see the glaring gaps.

If agriculture was well financed, why would the President write to you, saying “Go and finance agriculture” or coffee which has been helping us? I want to give you an example, honourable minister. On coffee seedlings, I do not have any nursery bed operator in my area in Bitereko. The tenders were always given to people from far. 

Now, when you say that my farmer should go and buy seedlings, yet he is going to borrow Shs 100,000 from a SACCO – you know, Shs 1,000,000 would be for 10 people. If it is Shs 100 million, they are going to first give me Shs 25 million. So, you are telling my farmer to borrow Shs 100,000 and use Shs 30,000 for transport to go and bring seedlings. It does not help. We did not prepare. 

What we are saying is that for issues of seedlings and all that, give us this year – it becomes a transition year. (Applause) Honourable minister, we are saying give us a transition year to go and sensitise our people and say, “You people who want coffee, Government will no longer give you seedlings. What is going to happen is that you will be buying with the Parish Development Model money.” 

So, we shall have a nursery bed operator from within our vicinity, putting up a nursery bed and we shall now be able to buy coffee seedlings from nearby. (Applause) I will buy coffee seedlings from Mitooma. Transport from my constituency in Bitereko to Mitooma is Shs 25,000. I do not have any public means; that is the reality we are talking about. 

Honourable Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, we just want to talk reality. We have what is written, but our focus is reality.

7.15
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, I hear you very well. My appeal to you, Sir, is to allow us to have a discussion with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Cabinet on that policy issue because the President got complaints that people who were procuring suppliers of inputs had vested interests. 

He got complaints that Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) distributors would give to some and leave out others. So, a decision was taken that money goes to the parish. By the way, when you look at the money per parish, it is collectively the largest amount of money a rural development programme, targeting production, will ever get. It is much bigger than the previous ones. 

So, the assumption is that when people get the money, they buy on their own. It is believed that it is more transparent and it cuts out the dealers. Now, the worry from Members and you, Sir, is that this may not work, especially as we transition to a new arrangement. So, I beg you that my colleague here and I - because we cannot pronounce ourselves on a policy position without reverting to Cabinet. 

Also, on the other concerns, the PDM only took money for seedlings. The other components on mechanisation, disease control and agro-processing machines, despite the limitation of funds, are still ongoing. Mr Speaker, the Ministry for Finance, will soon table to you another project on climate-smart agriculture that will help to do the road chokes that the Member was talking about. 

So, I am really optimistic. It is not that the PDM has replaced any other intervention. There are other programmes ongoing but I pick the concern of whether this policy direction of farmers buying for themselves is better, compared to the previous system, where the Government was procuring for them. That is something we must resolve and get back to you. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I want to give you an example, which the minister should take note of. I have an area called Kaburara. It neighbours Queen Elizabeth National Park. The poverty levels there are so high. 

Recently, I called leaders of that area. I asked: “What is the problem here? I want to give you support.” They said: “Roads. For us here, we do not even have access.” I used personal money. I have opened up the roads; it is now accessible. 

I then asked: “Why are you only dealing in waragi? Why are you dealing in things that cannot bring much money yet the other part of the subcounty is developed? Why can't you plant coffee because your area is a rift valley; it has good Arabica Coffee in other parts?” They said? “For us here, there are poor seedlings.” I said: “We have been giving seedlings in this area. Don’t you get?” They said they get their seedlings from the national park – wild seedlings. (Laughter) They go to the national park for seedlings.

Tell me if such a person, who has even failed to go for free Government coffee seedlings and has been going to the national park to look for seedlings, will borrow money from the SACCO to go and buy seedlings. So, those are the challenges and that is a reality. 

As leaders, colleagues, we have to go in and intervene. 

7.19
MR SAM OTUKOL (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The Parish Development Model is connected to very many things for it to succeed. First, enterprises need electricity. You find a county like mine, Pallisa County, which has eight subcounties, power is connected to Pallisa Town Council only. The seven subcounties have no power. 

When the President was coming to launch the Parish Development Model, it was rushed in Bukedi subregion. I think everything was done quickly. Parish chiefs were not educated about it. When we moved recently with ministers, you could see that parish chiefs do not know anything about the Parish Development Model. 

Most of them are recruited from far; they need transport such as motorcycles, like you have done with LCs III. I think these are degree holders. The honourable minister should really look at the issue of transport for parish chiefs to succeed in the Parish Development Model. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Had Hon. Tom Bright spoken? [Members: “Yes.”] Okay. Honourable member?

7.20
DR ABRAHAM ISAMAT (NRM, Kapir County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To the best of my knowledge, the PDM strategy is a very good one but the unfortunate thing is that the PDM is coming at a time when the scope of vulnerability has actually widened.

Most communities where we come from are already vulnerable. Even in our own sectors, vulnerability has increased. Now, here is a situation whereby we are coming up with a lot of money to be injected into our communities, which are already needy. 

Yesterday, I raised an issue whereby my community in Kakor has been stopped from accessing the lake where they have been getting food from. Unfortunately, yesterday, there was also a hailstorm in the area that destroyed their crops. Now, in a situation like that one, when the money is given to those people, what do we expect? They are going to misuse the money. 

And then also certain sectors, for example, the road sector - on a daily basis we are registering broken bridges. Don't we think that it is wise, first of all, to consider stopping giving this money? And if possible, instead of incurring more emergencies, let the money be probably injected into those areas that are likely to cause the economy to go down. That is –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, tomorrow is a Friday and we do not have House. So, I am going to ensure each one of you - we have the minister here - I am going to ensure - and Hon. Kabanda will be last.

7.22
MS ANNE MARY TUMWINE (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is to thank the committee and the minister. We remember very well that when UPE was beginning in Uganda, there were guidelines which kept changing. So, I was of the view that we should start on this Parish Development Model because we have already motivated our communities and we have prepared them to put groups and now money is not coming down. 

And there is also a big problem of information flow from the centre to local governments. Those people do not have information and all these changes they are doing in the Cabinet and in the guidelines, people down in the local governments do not have information. Therefore, there is need for a quick flow of information to local governments for people to know what is happening next. 

Secondly, there is a problem of transport for the district workers, especially the parish chiefs and commercial officers who educate people on the SACCOs and teach the enterprises on financial literacy. They do not have transport to move into - (Member timed out.)

7.24
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me start by thanking the committee for a very good report. I would like to call upon the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Local Government and the Cabinet in general, that we should take what the people who represent the general public -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, can I have? (Interjection) Yes.

MR AYOO: Mr Speaker, I am calling upon the Cabinet that they should begin to take seriously what the Members of Parliament who live with the community bring to them because it is going to be unfortunate that if at the Cabinet, you rush to implement programmes without taking time as if you are under pressure, this is going to fail the Parish Development Model. 

For example, the pillar of community mobilisation and mind-set change should have formed the foundation upon which the Parish Development Model was going to be a game changer. And this has not been done. And you are throwing a programme on the people who have not changed anything in their mind to deal with this. 

This is why I am calling upon the Cabinet that we look at these issues that have been raised, the gaps that have been highlighted and include them in your programme so that we move forward. 

Mr Speaker, putting everything under the Parish Development Model for instance in terms of improving food security, the Minister of Agriculture is here to say they are just looking at 39 percent of very poor people. And then you are telling us that those are the people who are going to change by improving food security and yet you are not very sure whether this will work. 

Therefore, I think the programme of looking at the medium and small scale farmers should be taken up and funds should be provided so that while these 39 percent are struggling, those other groups will be increasing production for the country. 

Mr Speaker, we should get away from confusion. We know the Parish Development Model at the moment is majorly looking at rolling out financial inclusion. And that is the main problem which is going on. Now, these other ones would be clear because I am tired. I tell people, wait, this one is coming the next day; later, it changes and then I become a liar to people. I am now afraid to take your message not until I am very sure because the minister here is saying the – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am going home this weekend to meet all the parish chiefs and LCII chairpersons and I will give the current information. If they change it - (Laughter) – I will go back, call another meeting and I will update. (Laughter) 

7.27
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja City): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the chairperson and the committee members for the report and I also thank the minister for the statement. 

Mr Speaker, we are talking and everyone has raised issues about the different guidelines and the minister has said that they will look into them. I do not know whether the Minister of Agriculture is aware that his ministry gives out guidelines concerning the voucher system; the Minister of Gender has different guidelines and the Office of the Prime Minister is saying they will buy for themselves. 

Talking about the PDM in Jinja, just like most of the people have said, is really confusing. It is a mess. And you know, when you talk about it, people look at you like: “What is she talking about?” because they are sick and tired of the guidelines that change on a daily basis. 

Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister of Finance to assure the House and the Ugandans that you will be able to give the Shs 100 million. We had Shs 17 million last time and it was not paid; for the case of Jinja, out of the 34 parishes only 30 got Shs 17 million and payments for the four parishes bounced.

Mr Speaker, in finance, when you close the financial year, we have what they call “carried forward”, which is brought forward in the next financial year. The ministry keeps on saying the MDAs did not spend the money and therefore, it went back to the Consolidated Fund. 

However, they never come to Parliament or they never tell Ugandans, how much was returned and they never come back to appropriate that money. Now for parishes in Jinja district; Buligo, Buwabuzi, Wansimba and Nakakulwea did not get their money. It bounced because of some technical errors and up to now, they have not yet received the money. My question to the – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Loy Katali.  Even the Shs 17 million, we need it. 

7.29
MS HOPE NAKAZIBWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is to my surprise that the Minister of Finance has told the House that the other pillars of the Parish Development Model received the money yet on a number of occasions, we go to several MDAs like UCDA asking for seedlings from NAADs and they tell us that the money has all been pushed to the PDM. 

This Parish Development Model was a very good model to pull people out of poverty. The President called it the “magic bullet”, and we thought it would actually serve the purpose but I think it was designed on a very poor background, based on the fact that a number of parishes seem to be bigger compared to other parishes. And this was not catered for. 

The other thing that is really surprising is the fact that this Parish Development Model was put up and designed to benefit the people, but it looks as if it was designed to swallow all the other MDAs – like a whale in our fish pond. 

Therefore, I request the minister to give clear information about what the Parish Development Model is supposed to tackle compared to the pillars that we are all looking at because when the Minister of Agriculture stood up to respond, he said all the other factors were kept constant other than the financial inclusion pillar. 

Mr Speaker, good enough, the Minister of Local Government is also here; we request that they talk to the parish chiefs as well to go –(Member timed out.) 

7.31
MS JANE BAINOMUGISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The Parish Development Model has got a very good approach for wealth and employment interventions. However, the 39 per cent beneficiaries of this programme have not had thorough sensitisation. They really do not know what the Parish Development Model is; they just know, “parish model.” 

My proposal is that we should put in a lot of effort on the first and fifth pillar so that these people can understand the benefits or the positive objective of the Parish Development Model. This is because when you talk about the 10,595 SACCOs that have been registered - if they are not well sensitised on how this money is supposed to be used, we may not realise the positive objective of this Parish Development Model. 

Secondly, in my district, that is Ibanda District, you will realise that some parishes are very big, like Kijongo, Keihangara and even other parishes. People have been complaining and asking about how they are going to benefit from this money. The other parishes are very small. I would like to know how I will go down to my village and tell my constituents about that challenge. 

Indeed, I would take your advice, Mr Speaker, that every intervention I get from here, I will always call and also tell them about all the changes, but again, my reputation, as a Member of Parliament – (Member timed out.) 

7.33
MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join you, on behalf of the people of Central Division, Arua City, to condole with the family of the late Gen. Elly Tumwine. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

I would like to thank the committee for the report presented. I just want to comment on the recommendation that the parish chief, who will be in charge, should have an education level of a degree. I would like to support that but I will recommend that it is ring fenced for a person who comes from that parish. If we do not do that, it is going to allow other people to be recruited from other regions, and not promote the local content of that parish. Therefore, I support that but it will be good to ring fence it for the local people in that parish – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They have already been recruited. 

MR ATIMA: Secondly, I would like to agree with the committee that the pillars are not well supported by ministries, especially pillar No. 2. For instance, in West Nile, the infrastructural development of road networks and electricity is a big challenge. If the ministries do not collaborate to sort this out in the region, it will cause a big challenge to the Parish Development Model to succeed. 

Lastly, the funds given for this project are really insufficient. For example, now, it has been – (Member timed out.) 

7.36
MR WILLIAM MUSEVENI (Independent, Buwekula South County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With this Parish Development Model, I call upon everyone concerned to save the programme because it is becoming very unpopular, before it has kicked-off. The reason being that it found other programs in place and it engulfed or abolished them; for example, the provision of seedlings to Ugandans. 

I come from Mubende District, which is a cattle corridor and it faces prolonged drought. The people never harvested during this season. It has been a practice that at every season, they get seeds but they never got them. These seeds would have acted like some form of intervention for the natural calamity they faced but they did not get them. We only tell them that the money for the provision of the seeds is in PDM yet we cannot tell them where to benefit from at this particular moment. 

Then with the coffee, some people had prepared their fields – it is a process if one wants to plant coffee. They had prepared their fields to plant coffee, but this time, the seeds were nowhere to be seen. We are telling them “go to the PDM,” where they cannot benefit at this particular moment. I think we are not prepared. There was no sufficient notice to the people to change according – (Member timed out.) 

7.37
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest in appreciating the committee for a very good report done. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for enabling us, as Members of Parliament, to join the Cabinet when it flagged off the sensitisation in the whole country because it got us in recess. 

I would like to appreciate my honourable ministers from our region. The information they gave us - apart from some of the changes in the circulars - is still relevant and consistent. Therefore, we thank you so much. 

What I observed in Adjumani District is that there are high expectations on the monies to go to the parishes and a drastic shift in form of transformation. When you relate the expectations to the Shs 100 million or Shs 117 million - if we do not prepare and supervise our people - people were going to undervalue these monies and misuse them. 

Therefore, I propose that sensitisation be done at parish level.  This is because many of the stakeholders – (Member timed out.) 

7.40
MR NULU BYAMUKAMA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is very simple. The honourable minister is talking about 39 per cent. I tried to invite 39 per cent of the poor in my parish to my home and I was equally surprised. They do not mind about what you are talking about. They do not mind about developing themselves. They are equally worried about the Shs 1,000,000 you are going to give them. Therefore, how did you design this project? You want to give money to the people who are neither concerned nor bothered - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are your supporters or people scared because they are going to give them money?

MR NULU BYAMUKAMA: The 30 per cent of the people the Government is looking for is really a terrible group that cannot afford the money. 

Secondly, the district looked for Emyooga groups; these are the groups that are going to take the Parish Development Model money because they could not get the other group - I know the President thinks a lot – (Member timed out.)

7.42
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the committee for the report. On the Parish Development Model, I want to talk about lack of facilitation for the parish development committees chaired by the chairperson LC II. This is very dangerous; some of them have already told us that they are not volunteers and that if the Government fails to recognise and facilitate them, they are going to transfer their costs on the beneficiaries. Therefore, the Government should think twice and consider supporting them. 

On food security, I want to call upon the Government to prioritise and fund research and commercialisation of key research findings and innovations. Uganda has very good scientists; they are doing very good work. We have a lot of research work on drought resistant varieties and pest resistant varieties but their work lies on shelves for lack of commercialisation of their research work and innovations. If our scientists are supported, this will go a long way to improve food security in the country. 

Mr Speaker, the statement of the minister emphasised the tractor hire system, which will help crop farmers leaving out livestock farmers. Livestock farmers in my district request that Government also considers giving them water bowsers - (Member timed out.)

7.44
MR DAVID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. Hon. Gafabusa said he is an advocate of the Parish Devolvement Model. I do not encourage the Government to give out free money to people. I am not an advocate of free money. The Government should concentrate on working on our roads. For example, I was doing some calculations here.

I have 43 parishes in my constituency. If you give my constituency Shs 4.3 billion, you do not know how many roads I will be working on. Do you know how many roads Shs 100 million can do for you in Mitooma? You give me Shs 100 million; how is it going to benefit my people if I give Shs 1 million per household? If you give me Shs 100 million and leave me to work on my roads - The other day I was in Bukimbiri. One of the reasons Hon. Kwizera has returned to Parliament is because he has worked on most of the roads in that constituency. 

Work on people's roads because the road network helps them to transport their agricultural products. Give this money to the Ministry of Local Government, the Ministry of Agriculture or the Ministry of Works to work on our roads. I can use the Shs 100 million to work on so many things in my constituency; I can rehabilitate schools and health centres –(Member timed out.)

7.46
MR TOM EKUDO (FDC, Gweri County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In order for us to achieve value for money, we need to emphasize pillar No. 5, which is mindset change. I have been in the local Government for 20 years at the sub county level and I know how the parish chiefs work. They are the ones who bring programmes down even if the Government comes up with good programmes. 

The Cabinet decision to put parish chiefs aside is very right; I know them, I have worked with them, I have utilised them. Therefore, in order for us to achieve development, let us put these people aside and emphasise on mindset change. That is my point, I thank you.

7.47
MS JOAN ACOM (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the team for the precious report. My submission is on one or two issues. I want to ask the minister and the executive team; what plan do you have to reduce the misery around this place? We have all talked about the misery that is down there under mindset change. What are some of the measures you have laid down in order to net the thieves that are already looking at this money for their own personal gain? 

I would request that as a ministry, you take what we have agreed on as Parliament seriously because we are tired of postmortems. When you come back here and tell us, parliamentarians, to go for a postmortem, I am sure we shall show you where our anger comes from because this is taxpayers’ money we are playing with. 

About parish chiefs, I also want to add my voice on that; they are not going to do a good job. Once we employ people who are looking for jobs to help us go through this activity, I am sure we are going to fail just like we failed in other programmes like Bonna Baggagawale.  

I will not be embarrassed to tell my people of Teso or Soroti, to get this money and ‘eat’ it because the mindset is that it is a grant from Government that has replaced the DDEG Fund. People are asking, where has this gone? The Parish Development Model has replaced it and yet this has been helping people down there. So, please help - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are those who also have their own argument that stealing has been at the centre; eating has been at the top. Now, if these people eat it, at least the locals would have eaten it properly. There are some who are arguing like that - universal eating - but this is not the aim. Therefore, we should prepare our people early to avoid universal eating. 

I will have Dr Musa, Hon. Siraji, Hon. Timuzigu, Dr Sharifah, Hon. Okot – Hon. Atkins you are a member of the committee, I cannot allow you to debate your report.

7.50
DR NOAH MUSA (Independent, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the entire committee for the elaborate report. I also want to thank the honourable minister for the statement. 

Mr Speaker, you remember in June, you sent Members to their constituencies to see the progress of the Parish Development Model. If we look at this report in line with what we found on ground, my view is that actually, we are not prepared for the rollout of PDM. 

One of the things is that this programme is coming at the backdrop of the Emyooga Programme, which completely failed. In my constituency, people did not want to hear anything to do with groups. And it took us time with the PDM, to explain that the groups are basically for enterprise, working together, accessing extension services and this money will be going to the households.

Now, a colleague has already talked about the voucher system. I thought that would be the only way the communities would be able to use this money for buying the inputs. The other day, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries presented a report and told us about the situation of hunger in the country and it is the 39 per cent, who are experiencing this and this is where the money is going to. What is the guarantee that somebody who is hungry now, can get this money – (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since Dr Musa is your neighbour, complete his submission.

7.52
MR SIRAJI EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for the comprehensive report submitted. 

When you see this programme, it incorporates a lot of activities. We have provisions for purchase of gadgets, administration and other things. I want to suggest that the percentages for those specific things should be made categorically clear. We are already making leeway for the administrators to embezzle most of this money under the pretext of doing administration, if the percentage is not clearly elaborated there. 
So, I suggest that in order to succeed in this programme - there are programmes like NAADS - I worked in the local Government; so, I really know how people can manoeuvre around administration in order to embezzle Government’s money. 

Therefore, in this respect, honourable minister, my suggestion is that let us get specific money for those administrators so that they do not dip their hands into what is supposed to benefit the communities. This issue of infrastructure should be done before everything is done. How can we put money when the infrastructure is not in place? 

The communities will have a lot of things – (Member timed out.)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I told you to complete Dr Musa’s but you also did not complete yours. (Laughter)

7.54
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The truth must not be suppressed. I was here in the 10th Parliament when the PDM issue came and I am one of those people who were sceptical about the programme. The pilot study was made in Ntungamo, in Kikoni Parish and it did not succeed. If you go there, you will see that it did not succeed. 

Secondly, I was wondering who told Cabinet that the problem of Ugandans was lack of cash, and not lack of services in the hospitals, or lack of roads and not lack of services in schools that you would say, we are going to give you money? Now, the truth has manifested itself in the reports, which were received by the community.

Number one, we lack data to base on to budget for the PDM. We lack awareness among the beneficiaries. There is no enterprise training and people do not know what to do. And from the beginning, there was no policy that could guide the process. 

And again, it is not easy to connect the PDM to NDP III; it is amazing. That makes me believe that even ministers may not be aware of the PDM. If you are aware, I am proposing, Mr Speaker, there – (Member timed out.)  

7.56
MS SHARIFAH AATE-TABAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. And thank you for sitting late beyond working hours to ensure Members debate deliberately. 

I rise to join the rest of the Members to also lament. As I stand here, I fear that in two years’ time, I will be the chief fundraiser in Koboko District; fundraising for the defaulters who will fail to refund the money of PDM. Mr Speaker, you may just enter here and be alone because all your Members will be fundraising for the people in their districts who have defaulted. 

In Koboko District, where I come from, Dr Musa and I are in trouble. One of our parishes, Chakulia Parish, has refused to form parish SACCOs and they said that this money should be shared door-to-door. This is because of the contradicting information that has been reaching our people. They said they are following the sister district, Yumbe, because that is the information Yumbe had received that the money should be shared door-to-door. So, I really do not know how the minister will help me with these people. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, they said Shs 25 million will be sent to the parishes but the season is running out. When will our people receive this money so that they can put it into farming? In a few months to come, we shall again be sending disaster money to save our people in the districts because they have been unable to produce enough food. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. 

7.58
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have already identified challenges that the ekida kyonka population - the subsistence - does not belong to some of the districts. But we realised that the programme was based on the number of parishes and the western region has the biggest number of parishes, with limited numbers of a ekida kyonka population, meaning they are going to get more money. 

We advised the ministry long time ago to revise the programme to focus on the population and not the number of parishes. You find that in Buganda, we have less parishes but the biggest population are ekida kyonka populations.

Furthermore, there are serious challenges with data collection down there. There is more dependency on the LCs I. Local councils are getting stipends of Shs 10,000 per month. They are complaining a lot and they are getting fed up with the visits by the data collectors. 

Also, much of our districts do not have networks and gadgets for sharing information. Many of these youths are not educated on how to use them. So, we are wondering. 

Districts that have parish area land committees should be awakened in this process. Likewise, the climate change actions should be deliberate actions in the programme. But it seems people are going to put all this money as a revolving fund; we thought some of the money would go to service delivery.

Mr Speaker, if you asked us – (Member timed out.)   

8.00
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you have heard, Kabale is a hard-to-reach place. Some of the money has been shared because whenever they go for a meeting, they just share the money as transport refund. 

Now, are we going to keep being embarrassed by the so-called Government planners? This is because, at first, we were told that they would be given Shs 100 million. I would go and brag that Shs 100 million is coming. Then, they reduced to Shs 17 million and when I went there, they were talking of Shs 2 million. Mr Speaker, is it not an embarrassment for us who went telling people that they were going to get out of poverty? 

When you reach there, they do not know what Parish Development Model means. They do not know who is bringing the money. They do not know when and for what? Why can’t we sit down and plan well for the people? If we are to raise their levels of income, then, we need to involve them to see what they want – what can work better for them. Like in Kabale, you cannot just take anything; it will not work for them. 

Mr Speaker, it is high time we styled up. Like some people have –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kyooma – and you are the last one on your side. 

8.02
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee and the minister. 

Mr Speaker, I think, maybe, the Parish Development Model was a bit hurried because I do not want to believe that even the ministers are convinced about its design. We had the Emyooga Programme and the SACCOs were actually established for that purpose. However, we also have other old SACCOs. 

The Government is deliberately avoiding duplication but, again, under the Parish Development Model, we are promoting duplication because under the Emyooga Programme, we already had SACCOs, which would serve – because SACCOS, Mr Speaker, are a growing concern. They are supposed to operate for a foreseeable future. They are not meant to operate this year and close. If the design was proper, why couldn’t the Parish Development Model use the other SACCOs, which were already developed? 

I think, we have a lot to rethink about. Really, for the 39 per cent to be the model for the 61 per cent - I think, Mr Speaker - when choosing a model, it should be something that will be better and that others should emulate.

I thank you, Mr Speaker, but it is my considered opinion that we still have a lot to think about in this programme. However, if well re-evaluated and reviewed – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, I want to guide colleagues because we have issues of shadow ministers and what not. When discussing committee reports, there is no shadow minister because you all participate in the proceedings of the committee. 

When discussing a statement of a minister, a shadow minister and the Leader of the Opposition are given a right of reply. However, committee reports are reports of the House. They are not reports of Government. 

So, I want that clarification to be made very clear so that in future no one feels they are not being given an opportunity. On this, even the LoP is alloted the same minutes given to other Members because he is not giving an alternative view. This is because he had Members in the committee; his Members represented his views as the Opposition. (Applause) 

Leader of the Opposition, you have two minutes and we conclude. 

8.05
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know why Members are applauding you when you are clamping hard on me. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I was just making clarification because of what goes on here. 

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, this model succeeded where it was copied or emulated from – in the Asian communities. However, here, like in the report, if you read it on page 12, Mr Speaker, there is a prophecy by the committee and it is a prophecy of doom. It says, “the committee observes that this Parish Development Model may suffer the same fate of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture” because it is moving five steps forward and 10 steps backwards.

There are many incidences, Mr Speaker, which one would base on to see that this prophecy may come to pass. One time, the Secretary to the Treasury, wrote a circular to all local governments asking them to stop paying parish chiefs for the tools and gadgets. Moreover, a number of them had already procured laptops and those other tools that were supposed to have been procured. 

The recent case of misappropriation in Kitgum should not be seen to be isolated. There are many more cases because funds are – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I allowed you to conclude, but you are now giving an analysis of the committee’s report. 

MR NAMBESHE: I am just developing my point. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are taking long. (Laughter).

MR NAMBESHE: I am taking long to come but I am coming. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, the Kitgum case is an eye-opener. For that misappropriation, I think, there has to be an audit into the funds that have already been released before any more funds are disbursed. 

Mr Speaker, talk of inclusion of only 39 per cent beneficiaries: what would you term the remaining 61 per cent? Financial exclusion, Mr Speaker? 

Mr Speaker, the minister talked about the policy framework – my friend, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, don’t you think this is tantamount to retrospective legislation, where we should have started with the PDM Act? Now, here, we are starting from the policy and regulations before we go back, tracing - Our Constitution prohibits retrospective legislation, Mr Speaker. So, that should be taken very seriously. 

Mr Speaker, this new directive that the parish chiefs, who are accounting officers, should keep off, brings into question a very fundamental issue of financial record keeping in the SACCO. These are public funds. Who will be held accountable? The accounting officer is the one that would help in financial record keeping in the recovery because this is a revolving fund. These being public funds, you cannot entrust or even hold these locals responsible for any of this. In fact, they may treat it as the usual tokens they receive. 

You know, Emyooga came at the time of campaigns and most of the recipients treated it as a token. Equally, these people may drink it up like the community you have been informing us about. 

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, most importantly, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was, thrice, given invitations and has never honoured even one, according to the report. He has not laid here, as required, the disbursement schedule of the PDM funds, yet he claims that he has one.
        
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. For clarification, I think it was last Thursday; I referred it to the committee to go and update their report. Now, committee chairperson, you did not update your report. 

MR NAMBESHE: The report pins him as a very errant minister who has dishonoured invitations. And if he has done it in arrears, you still stand to be blamed for that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Ministers, structure your responses. Please use three minutes each and we conclude. (Interjection) We cannot sleep here, honourable minister. You are the ones making Members to raise questions because of those things you are changing every day. 

8.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Rusoke): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the members for the concern. As leaders, we must point out where we are not comfortable so that we can move together as a team. However, I want leaders to be courageous. That is number one. First of all, may I say – (Interjection)- My dear, Hon. Nyakikongoro, when you were talking, we listened; so give me time. (Interjection) I think I heard your voice. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, first take your seat, please. Honourable colleagues, let us be honourable. It seems - (Interjection) - Now you are shouting at me, minister? Honourable minister, you are shouting at me; that is the problem of serious business being conducted on the side-lines - you are having your exchanges – (Laughter) – Now they are being put on the record of Parliament. 

Colleagues, I request that we give the minister a chance to respond and thereafter, you can invite each other for coffee.

I request, colleagues, that when you are on the Floor, do not respond to anything that is off the microphone. When you want the Speaker’s protection, you refer to me. You are protected, honourable minister.
  
MS RUSOKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think respect is two-way; we listened, so let us also be listened to.

This programme is not starting today. We have been moving with it as a team and I feel that we should continue moving with it as a team. Where there is need for correction, we accept and correct.

We have all agreed that our people are the poorest of the poor. The President developed this sensitive attachment when he went to Kibuku and when he asked the people, they said, “We work for ekida kyonka - from saucepan to mouth.” The research that was made by UBOS targeted the 39 per cent who live below the poverty line. For that matter, the country drew its attention with the theme and responsibility of not leaving anyone behind - to target these 39 per cent of the people. That is why, when we do not help to understand - the parish SACCO is made up selectively and scrutinised by the Parish Development Committee made of the people who live in the parish. It is chaired by the LCII chairperson of the parish. On the same committee, there is a woman councillor - the NRM leader; there is a youth; one elderly person; one person with disability - all from that parish - to scrutinise the people who should benefit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For clarification, is it the woman councillor at the parish or the chairperson of the women council?

MS RUSOKE: It is the chairperson of the women council of the ruling party. I have clarified on that one. The chairperson of the women council of the parish. These are the people who are going to help us to make sure -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, all of you, take your seats. (Interjection) All of you, take your seats. Chairperson of the committee, leave the phone alone – (Laughter)

I want you to explain, for record purposes, who is on the Parish SACCO committee -

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry. I was trying to-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Who is on the committee?

MR ONZIMA: It is okay. I will answer that one later. Those who are on the parish committee SACCO are supposed to be beneficiaries who are elected out of - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have the LCII chairperson.

MR ONZIMA: We have the LCII chairperson, then the parish chief is also supposed to be a member -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is a secretary.

MR ONZIMA: Now, they have removed that but they have not brought it back.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lugoloobi, can you help?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I think we need to draw a distinction between the parish development committee and the parish SACCO. I think what you are describing is a parish development committee.

The parish SACCO is a formation of members who originate from the enterprise groups. Why are we talking about enterprise? We have about seven enterprises, which are agriculture-related. You have coffee and others. At the village level, out of the 39 per cent, there will be those people who will be categorised as being under coffee production, for example. Those would then form an enterprise group called the village enterprise group. Those will send three people to the parish level. Each village, depending on the various enterprises, would send three people from those enterprise groups from the various villages, then form what we call the parish SACCO. That is privately-owned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now take us to where the minister was referring to political leaders.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Where they refer to the political leaders. The women council being referred to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Just tell us who is there.

MR LUGOOLOBI: Of course I cannot list all of them but it is chaired by the LCII chairperson, there is a parish chief, there is a representative of the women council, representative of people with disabilities, representative of the youth and the elderly and others I cannot remember right now. But- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there an NRM chairperson of the parish?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, the NRM chairperson is there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, meaning Hon. Nambeshe should work hard. Next time, it should be NUP. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Or any other.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not want the minister to be swallowed. She is telling you what is clearly written.

MR NAMBESHE: This is a model that is meant for enabling those that are in subsistence farming to get some cash in their hands, but I realised that it is putting on partisan lenses now. If now it has to be supervised and monitored or even audited by party leadership - one particular party leadership - then it is lopsided, which is going to exclude instead of include other parties in a multiparty dispensation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Other parties have a chance. The LC II chairperson can be from NUP, DP, NRM. The Chairperson of the women council can be from any party. The chairperson youth can be of any party; I do not know in Bududa, how it is. The chairperson of the elderly can be from any party, the chairperson people with disability can be of any party but there is that component of chairperson of the ruling party at parish level.

MR NAMBESHE: That particular one has been ring-fenced; the others are open. My major worry, if we ring-fence for only the NRM and exclude other parties, then we are bringing politics into a programme that should otherwise have progressed better.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think procedurally that is very okay, reason being Ugandans chose a certain party after presenting its manifesto. This programme is part of implementing that manifesto. So, that party must ensure the manifesto it presented and was voted by the people is duly implemented and that is why it is not gazetted as a certain party; it is the ruling party. Tomorrow it can be any other party.

Also, this is a programme, which has been designed by the NRM. Let us not shy away from it - and that chairperson can be in a situation, for example, where people from other parties are the majority; they can out vote him.

His idea cannot win; Hon. Sekabira is still contesting results and when he gets judgment, he will come on board. Honourable minister, sorry, we interrupted you but we always want to get this information.

MS RUSOKE: It is good to get clarity so that we move as a team. I also wanted to point out the difference between the parish development committee and the SACCO executive, because when I heard submissions, it seems there is still a mix-up between the two.

The difference is, the Parish Development Committee is a managerial committee especially when it comes to selecting the beneficiaries because this programme does not benefit people who are employed like teachers.

At first, everybody thought it belongs to everyone, and then the SACCO executive will be a body managed like all SACCOs. At the distribution of the money, approving the applications - and there is nobody who will get the money before intensive sensitisation is done.

Step by step, the SACCOS are formulated; next is the commercial officer, the agricultural officer, the community development officer, production officer, and the parish chief going down to sensitise the beneficiaries.

Those who have already been enrolled to a SACCO without any charges, if there are any charges and anybody gets to know about it, you better tell us and we jump on them and put them to order.

On recruitment, I heard someone say, “This is a sensitive programme, why don’t we enrol degree holders?” The Ministry of Public Service has stipulated the qualifications for every job. Remember, this is someone working at the parish; if we take him on as a degree holder, it would mean his salary scale also raises into the bracket of degree holders. 

His roles are the usual major roles, except his adding on the supervisory role to the SACCO, as its secretary. And the parish chief not being a signatory does not prohibit him, as secretary of the committee, to follow up the usage of this money because there will be the planting, he will make a record of it that someone has planted. If he has not planted and he has got the money, then he will report and action is taken.

To avoid repeating what we went through the same officers - we said it is harmless. Please go ahead, supervise the money, make your recording, and report on time so that if there is need to stop at a certain junction and recover the money, we do it very timely. 

Enterprises for the urban towns, like the woman MP Mbarara City raised, they are in the guidelines. When we called you for induction - the bad thing is that people came in turns, others came on the first day but didn't return on the second day. 

I recall vividly that we were given 67 commonly asked questions with their answers. So, we are going, again, to download the talking points so that every Member has these guidelines. I think mindset change should begin with us. Let us be optimistic. 

Even when we went to assess Emyooga, we found that those who followed the regulations, got the money and used it as a team. For example, there are welders who got the money, bought the welding equipment, made the windows and sold as a team; those benefited. But those who are greedy - of course in society, we have to fight them with the law. They have given us Shs 8 million; let us share it. Those are the people who caused problems, otherwise the Emyooga would not have been a problem. And it is not that every Emyooga group did not perform; some performed well and other didn't because of that kind of negativity and corrupt tendencies.

Training beneficiaries; if we put all the money in training all groups up to the grassroots, then there would not be money left for sharing or giving to the groups. 

In Uganda, we have to fight the syndrome of ‘What am I benefiting from this?’ We trained the key leaders. You went with us, you saw the selection but when I went to recently assess how many people have held three meetings in their villages, very few had done that. So, we have embarked on radio programmes with the RDCs. Let the struggle continue; that is why these people are pouncing on us for everything: give me water, give me fees, give me this. These people can at least earn their own food.

Someone was planting an acre of onions. He is going to get to the seeds, pump, pesticide and remain with an emergency of Shs 100,000; when all the supply is given and he makes two acres of onions, this person is going to reap more, sell more and get what they want. 

The recovery is going to be within three years. We are drafting a comfortable policy where no one will say they are oppressed, they could not save, they could not eat and whatever they are getting, they are bringing back to the SACCO.

This money shall remain at the SACCO; all the profit from the interest is remaining at the SACCO. Each time we disburse, we are adding to the SACCO; so, people should appreciate. I do not see this programme failing. 

If we really put our heads together and put in our efforts and minds to sensitise the public to be consistent and to monitor and apprehend those who are playing around, I know this programme will be a success. 

Finally –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

MS RUSOKE: Let me end with this. Someone asked, “You are sending us to the field; what are our roles?” Ladies and gentlemen, the roles are in the guidelines which we gave you, which I am going to send again. The roles are there in your talking notes - the roles of a minister, an honourable Member of Parliament, district leadership - They are all there; the usual ones of monitoring Government projects. 

We agreed that we will be letting you know whenever we release money. Therefore, when you go for oversight - for whatever plans you go for - let this be part of your oversight role. Inquire, get knowledge, assess and then come back and debate here on what you will have found out and we correct them together. 

I am very happy that you have raised very pertinent points but implementation is our role. Let us implement and put our party differences aside because we are serving people who voted us from different parties. Let us disregard party issues and shoot into the goal of development. I rest my case. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, do not get tired of updating the House. Always update us because it should worry you to find that out of the people who have spoken, you did not even have 5 per cent of them satisfied. It should worry you and yet these are the leaders on the ground. 

Therefore, bringing them on board to have buy-in is very important. Our aim here, honourable minister, is to make the programme better. It is not to shoot down the programme but it is to bring you information that you can use to make the programme better. 

Whenever you make changes, please update the House through statements and we will always come on board.

MS RUSOKE: Mr Speaker, this change was done in the last concluded Cabinet meeting. I want to pledge before this House that we shall be communicating in a genuine and timely manner. Now that we are compelled to attend, I will not miss this Parliament unless I am sick. I have started enjoying it; I will be here and communicate all the changes. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Lugoloobi; and we will end with Hon. Frank Tumwebaze.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, there is this old adage that says, “Rome was not built in one day” and “Practice makes perfect”. I think we cannot claim that we have got it 100 per cent but we have to begin somewhere. The secret is in beginning and then you start discovering a lot of interesting issues, which you address as you go on.

I am trying to answer those people who are saying that maybe, it is not yet time for us to implement the Parish Development Model. This has been one of the programmes where we have consulted very widely and that is why you get the feeling that things are changing regularly. It is out of these consultations that we keep getting from different stakeholders. As we go along, we continue getting advice and new ideas. 

For example, this issue of the parish chief being a signatory to the account, we learnt that, that would be against the Cooperatives Act because a SACCO has members and a parish chief is not a member of the SACCO. So, he cannot legally be a signatory to the account of a SACCO because he is not among the owners of this SACCO. 

Secondly, we were informed - actually we saw because we went around the country – and learnt why certain programmes suffered. It was because Government officers were involved in taking decisions on sharing the money and so, they would claim a percentage before money is released to the beneficiaries. I am sure you must have witnessed this; the Chief Development Officers, etc. We were given that information.

The position we had originally is that a parish chief is a signatory but we had to think otherwise. That is out of this wide consultation that we are undertaking at the moment. 

Mr Speaker, so many questions were raised and I cannot claim that we can have the time to answer all of them now - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can continue with some of them in the committee.

MR LUGOLOOBI: The message I am picking here, Mr Speaker, is that we can add to the list of the frequently asked questions by answering these questions. I think one of our key stakeholders who is going to help us disseminate the information to the local Government and the beneficiaries is going to be the Member of Parliament and we want that Member of Parliament to be fully informed, presenting non-contradictory information to the population. 

We are going to make sure that we provide the information in your pigeonholes so that you have this information handy for you to be a trainer of trainers - the TOT. It is going to be very important that you help us in this exercise because we are all scoring in the same goal. 

The other question, which I thought was very important, was that someone said that this parish model is focusing on agricultural production alone. I wanted to inform the House that in my earlier remark, I mentioned that the PDM initially - On the Parish Revolving Fund, we are talking about agricultural production, storage, processing and marketing. 

Now, a beneficiary could be positioned at any level of that value chain. There are people who live in urban centres and they could be involved in the business of storage or processing. So, that is their entry point. They do not have to own land - because there is someone who indicated that someone must own land before he benefits from the parish model, no. 

We thought that since the majority of our population, especially the target group - because earlier, we had indicated that out of the 39 per cent who are in the subsistence economy, 57 per cent of these 39 per cent are from agriculture. That is why the focus is on agriculture and we are having – 

Why are we doing the parish model? One is we want our growth paradigm to be all inclusive. That is the strategy and that is the paradigm everywhere in the world today. In global economics, growth has to be inclusive and that is why we have the Equal Opportunities Commission here; to make sure that we leave nobody behind. 

That is why we are now talking about full monetisation so that these people who are not earning anything today begin earning something. This is the problem this model is fixing. 

Someone said it is not anywhere in the NDP; it is there. It actually originates from the National Development Plan; from a pillar known as “regional development” to ensure that everybody is - It is one of those interventions within the NDP we are now implementing. And the NRM was wise; they picked this one and put it in their manifesto. You know, others probably left it out. They did not think it was important and therefore, that is why they were not voted. 

The other comment I want to make is about - someone indicated that Parliament was not consulted. We did consult Parliament except that many of us sometimes are busy with other commitments and were not able to come but there was a special arrangement though not here – (Interjection)- at Imperial Royale Hotel, where you were all invited and Hon. Magyezi conducted that session. So, it is not true that you were not consulted. We regularly, when questions are raised, come here and answer even in the committees. At all the levels, we are always available. 

The other question is whether we have a standard manual for training. We have all these manuals; pillar by pillar. We have manuals there. For mind-set change, there is a manual. We have all the documentation. We have the policy document and the general guidelines for this. So, we have the documentation. But as it is – [Member rose_] 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable minister, please conclude. Colleagues, it is coming to 9.00 p.m. [Honourable member: “We can sleep here”] It seems you came with a mattress. (Laughter)

MR LUGOLOOBI: I think I have explained why guidelines have been slightly changed. We do not see major changes in the guidelines. Before, we were changing as we processed the policy and the guidelines - but nowadays, apart from one or two items I mentioned, the guidelines have almost remained the same. 

Mr Speaker, on this one, you need to help us, where someone says the PDM is not understood by MPs, I think that sounds criminal. You know, an MP must understand the PDM because it is for your people. Rt Hon. Speaker, you really need to help and make a ruling on this; that an MP must understand. It is not acceptable.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what the Member meant is that you are changing every day.

MR LUGOLOOBI: No, we are not. It is not correct.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Many changes are coming. I want it to go on record that colleagues really understand the Parish Development Model. They only need to be updated regularly. Anyone who does not understand should speak for themselves.

MR LUGOLOOBI: There was a question relating to Shs 25 million, saying it is too little, and a proposal that we should share the money by village. Then we would have lost the objective, if we are to share this money by village because in a village, we are picking those within the 39 per cent. 

You could have a parish with thousands and thousands of people without anybody in the 39 per cent. I heard of a parish somewhere - I will not mention - that the 39 per cent is not there - (Interjection) - in Uganda. They tried to look for them but they are not there; so, we have a challenge on how to send money to parishes in those categories. Ideally, the money is for those within the 39 per cent in a subsistence economy, which is largely in the agricultural sector. 

Mr Speaker, on this Shs 25 million, if you take the 10,000 parishes - we have 10,594 parishes - you are already talking about Shs 250 billion and that is not a small change. Hon. Nambeshe, that is not a small change. For Shs 25 billion to go out in the economy in one quarter, and in the second quarter, we are releasing Shs 500 billion. In the third quarter, we are again releasing Shs 250 billion. Next year, we are at it again. That is a lot of money going to the population. 

I am concluding, Mr Speaker. So, I think we have agreed that we need to get started and improve along the way. 

Regarding the lack of information in local Governments, we have really tried to go to the local Governments. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has trained trainers in various areas to continue training up to the - we have trained various people. Of course, we can never say that the training provided is enough. We have to continuously provide training. 

Mr Speaker, I go to my local radio in Kayunga every Friday evening to talk about the Parish Development Model. How I wish everybody emulates the same. We need to take on this responsibility to inform our people so that we are able to fight poverty.

On financial literacy, the pillar on financial literacy is providing the training to the SACCOs, and we must give them this literacy before they begin allocating this money amongst the beneficiaries. This literacy is done through designed programmes for training them and we are deploying these programmes. 

Finally, the proposal that we focus on mind-set change is very important. We indeed want to focus on it. We would have wished to do better than the way we are doing but there is a challenge of availability of resources. We mobilised this money we are given to PDM from the existing budget. We did not borrow. We had to remobilise from within. What we have been doing badly, we pick the money from there. So, we put all this money together up to a tune of Shs 1.6 trillion to the parish model. 

However, in the process, you take some bad decisions which you discover later that they were bad decisions. Then subsequently, you change. For example, the issue emerging here is that the seeds and seedlings, perhaps was not probably a good decision. It is information that we are now picking, which we are going to discuss further and see if the Cabinet can change that position. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues for the exhaustive discussion. I just have about four general areas to summarise. 

Point number one, I think with PDM, the stickiest issue is the seedlings for food security and cash crops like coffee. Like my honourable colleague, Hon. Lugoloobi has said - we should even work closer with your office and discuss this. As the agriculture ministry, the 39 per cent targeted were subsistence farmers who hitherto NAADs and UCDA were delivering seeds to, that money had to be repurposed first and foremost. Of course, it caused a lot of internal struggles, but finally, we all understood it. Therefore, if there has to be a policy shift, then we have also to buy it and see whether the old model is better than the current model. 

That notwithstanding, I want to assure colleagues that we are now running agriculture as a value chain. On the Order Paper of this Parliament, we have been having a pending Notice of Business to Follow on the value chain development strategy, which the Cabinet approved. In that strategy, I would show Parliament the different players from production to harvesting and post-harvest. So, it is an entire protocol of managing the value chain. At the right time, with your permission, we will present it to the House. 

In addition to that, we have other programmes, despite the limited funding. Like I explained, we have the tractors and how the tractors are given out. We are now also targeting commercial farmers – the large-scale farmers. We are registering them district by district because the smallholder farmers will need off-takers – they will need people who will be their anchor centres for marketing. So, it is also part of the strategy. 

We continue to struggle with disease control, especially in animal and, partly, crop. We are pursuing, with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, two loans, which are at advanced stages. Those loans will not address the user software issues. They will be addressing the infrastructure of diagnostics and the infrastructure of laboratories for both plant and animal. They will help us to equip the 19 agriculture mechanisation centres across the country. 

I have been convinced by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that, probably in the next budget, they will give reasonable attention, in terms of privatisation, to irrigation, especially the small and medium irrigation systems. Colleagues, irrigation requirements have now shifted. It is no longer the big dams – Mubuku or Kibimba – but the on-farm.

As the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, we have articulated a strategy that for a small farm of one acre, under PDM, what irrigation technology does that person want? The medium and the large-scale irrigation schemes have varying irrigation requirements. 

Therefore, working together with the Ministry of Water and Environment - the fighting is getting out; the traditional fight between our ministries has been, to a bigger extent, resolved. Our technical people are talking. 

To be clear, bulk water is a mandate of the Ministry of Water and Environment. On-farm water development is a mandate of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. What is remaining is among the technical people, who confuse the things: who should do what? What type of dam should be for the Ministry of Water and Environment and what type of dam should be for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries? 

If it is a big water reservoir, to give a whole region a water source to draw from, that is surely for the Ministry of Water and Environment. However, small dams on people's farms and small irrigation schemes, which are a function of production, are a mandate of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Even the President has written to that effect, Mr Speaker. 

Therefore, I am not worried about duplication. After all, we have all agreed that, as ministers, nobody is permanent in any ministry. Today, I am in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and tomorrow, I can be in the Ministry of Water and Environment. 

Finally, colleagues, allow me to say that there is this famous statement that everybody uses: “The previous programmes of agriculture failed: NAADS…” I do not think that is a fair statement. We would rather say that they did not, perhaps, perform well because if they had failed, how did we move this subsistence farming community to 39 per cent? 

In one area, people will tell you that NAADS performed well. I heard a testimony from the Member of Parliament from Koboko who was very passionate about NAADS. In some areas, they will say it did not perform. Therefore, the levels of performance depend on the leadership abilities of the respective implementing districts. These programmes did not fail. They performed to a certain level. 

For every programme that you implement, at the end, you take lessons. That is why the President said that Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) has done well, but he was getting complaints from people saying, “Mwegabila Mweka” – that you give to only yourselves. 

The President has written, saying he does not want corruption, now, to be heightened by soldiers. Actually, the biggest driving factor to change was suspected corruption in the distribution of inputs. The President wanted people to come in and see how they distribute these seedlings themselves, but now, we hear your concerns; we will debate them. If there is where we need to change, there is nothing cast in stone. 

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for your patience and for giving us time to update our honourable colleagues. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleagues. We have spent around three-and-a-half hours on this and you are still here. Chairperson, you will be following up in committees. You know, you are going to be interacting - I do not want to put you into matters of clarification. 

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is only one issue I wanted to clarify because you raised it – that the report, which was laid on the 11th, was referred to our committee and we had not looked into this. That is not the case. 

When you look at our report, on page 16 - the second report – it was trying to answer the issue raised by Hon. Gilbert Olanya and Hon. Patrick Nsamba, particularly on agriculture. There was also a point where the minister was asked to present the disbursement schedule. He presented that report on the 11th and it was referred to our committee. When you look at our submissions, on pages 18 and 19, all those emanate from that report. 

However, what happens is that, on Page 19, we recommended that since the minister did not capture all the issues, which were of interest to the House, he needed to come back here with a schedule indicating how these monies are going to be sent. 

I think the minister might have read our report ahead. Therefore, what he laid today is actually a response to this recommendation. Hence, the two are different. That is the clarification I wanted to make. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record be straight that, indeed, the committee considered the report. 

MR ONZIMA: The one laid today is a different one. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, correct that record. 

MR ONZIMA: I would also like to thank all my committee members who endeavoured to work through this. I also thank the staff attached to the committee, who helped us to process the report. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleagues, for staying this long.

Now, I would like to guide as follows: 

The ministers responsible, especially the lead minister, I know you presented several times to the NRM caucus. That is a party arrangement. I request the Leader of the Opposition to organise the Opposition caucus so that the ministers come and present to the Opposition caucus, for purposes of bringing everyone on board. 

We do not want the PDM to look like an issue where one group has got more information than the other yet we are working together. We appropriate this money together and we are going to have Opposition leaders in some of the areas, where for example, the chairperson LC II, women council, youth council and the people with disabilities council is Opposition. We need you to fully come on board. 

Therefore, I request the Leader of the Opposition to arrange, whether it is the Shadow Cabinet – but the Opposition caucus would be better – so that the ministers appraise you. In a multi-party dispensation, this is how we work - as a team. The earlier you do this, the better. 

There, you can ask the hard questions and be able to interact for long. LOP, do you want to commit to that? However, do not put it at Kamwokya. (Laughter) We have our conference room here. 

MR NAMBESHE: No, we normally meet in the conference hall. I think that is a brilliant proposal you have made, Mr Speaker. We do welcome the minister but you know, if you invite them, they are fond of dishonouring those invitations – like the finance minister has always done. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they are coming. 

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, I expected Hon. Kagyigyi to respond to the concern of this retrospective legislation – you are now on the policy and regulations before you come up with an Act.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, maybe that is why we are on different sides of the House. (Laughter) The first instrument of governance is a policy. A policy may need a law, regulation or not. For example, when we said the policy is UPE, it started as a policy. It did not start as a law. So, the policy for the Government now is to target a parish. 

And, like my colleague said, this is already captured in the NDP III: Programme of Regional Development. 

Therefore, I do not think there is retrospective legislation. I am not convinced that we will need a law on the PDM; a law to do what? Do we need a law to serve the people? It is a question of strategy that we need to polish. I do not think there is any law we are offending. It is a question of the correct strategy to implement the policy. 

Actually, any law that is not derived from a clear policy will not create impact because you and I are voted because we have policies we sold. You sell a policy and then you decide - will I need a law or will I need administrative measures like a statutory instrument? Therefore, it depends on how you can implement it and the means you have. I think we are together. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. If there are any gaps, this is the platform. If there are any gaps, the Shadow Attorney-General can meet with the Attorney-General and harmonise such matters. However, it is very important for us to have that address by the ministers to the Opposition caucus to harmonise most of these issues. 

In case you need any help in facilitating this, LOP, please, let us do it as early as possible to bring everyone in the country on board. 

Number two, colleagues, I implore you, if this programme succeeds in your area, it will enable you to come back. I believe it is a programme, if well utilised, can even help us to address the issue of the attrition rate. 

Therefore, I encourage you to take it up as a programme; go and popularise it. Do not mind; the setbacks will be there - it is a new programme - but we have processes. This money comes to your constituencies, directly to the people - accessing it cheaply; your people have been borrowing at around 36 per cent per annum. They now can have an opportunity – however, little it is, it is an opportunity - to borrow at 6 per cent per annum, which is good. 

So, let us look at it. We need to keep refining, working very closely until we have a good programme, which will help our country. 

Colleagues, as you know, we have discussed around three statements; two reports and one statement. Therefore, we have to vote on two. That is the report from the committee. 

Now with the discussion we have had, I want to put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the status of the implementation of the Parish Development Model in the Financial Year 2021/2022, be adopted by this House, with amendments, as recommended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I see you are still fresh and enjoying the evening; some of you want us to be here.

I also want to put the question on the next report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the diversion of the Shs 17 million for the Parish Development Model funds in the Financial 2021/2022 to be adopted by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, colleagues. We have been here and it’s now 9.00 p.m. I think we have done justice. Those of you who remained here, you have benefited from a lot of information and clarification. When you go to the constituency, this is going to benefit you tremendously. Sometimes, we are forced to go this long. Otherwise, it is not our culture. 

Like I informed you, we have Bills, which we must sort out. Therefore, next week is going to be very busy. We have to sort out the seven Bills that the Government brought recently. 

We would also want to sort out the Excise Duty Bill so that the Government can start collecting this tax. Then also, the Local Content Bill needs to be sorted. Therefore, next week, we want to focus on Bills and ensure that indeed, they are out of the way plus other emerging issues that we shall have. 

With that, I request all of you, especially those on the committees of Finance, Legal, Defence and Trade, to work tirelessly this weekend, so that we finish these Bills. Whatever we do not process and finish in the committee, I can guarantee you, I will bring the Bill here on the Floor and we process it directly, without a committee report; there is no shortcut. 

We are most likely to have House on Monday. We shall be informing you but for now, I adjourn the House until Tuesday at 10.00 a.m., and the focus will only be the seven Bills that we must process. Thank you, colleagues.

(The House rose at 9.05 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 August 2022 at 10.00 a.m.) 
