	Tuesday, 2 August 2005

Parliament met at 10.39 a.m. in Parliament
House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I welcome you honourable members and again I urge you to be diligent with our work especially this time when we have a lot on our table, which we have to accomplish in a very short time. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR JOHN GARANG

10.43
MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Lt Gen. Dr John Garang, the first Vice-President of the Republic of Sudan.  This is moved under our Rules of Procedure, rule 40(b).  

“PARLIAMENT should note with deep sorrow the untimely demise of the late Lt Gen. Dr John Garang de Mabior in a helicopter crash, which occurred on the 30th of July 2005; 

AWARE that Lt Gen. Dr Garang was born on the 23rd June 1945 and has been the Chairman and Commander-in-Chief of the Sudan Peoples’ Liberation Movement and Army, and was on the 9th of July 2005 sworn in as the first Vice-President of Sudan and President of Southern Sudan under the new Constitution;  

AND that the late Lt Gen. Dr John Garang was trained in the Sudanese military and was involved in the liberation straggle since 1970 in the quest for a Sudan where religion and state are constitutionally separated and where freedom, liberty, equality and human rights are granted and respected;

AWARE also that Lt Gen. Dr John Garang has been a distinguished and consistent statesman, carrying the hopes and aspirations of the people of Southern Sudan, Sudan and the Great Lakes Region of Africa as a whole;

COGNISANT of the fact that through Lt Gen. Dr John Garang’s leadership, staunch respect for human rights and the right to self determination and sovereignty of his people, the people of Sudan, had began to reap the benefits of the 20 year long liberation struggle;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Motion is moved that this House do resolve as follows: 
(i)	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences and those of the people of Uganda to the peoples as well as the Government of Sudan upon the loss of Lt Gen. Dr John Garang.
(ii)	That it makes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and the contribution made by the late Lt Gen. Dr Garang to the peace process in Sudan, which culminated into the peace pact of 9 January 2005, and all his efforts to the Great Lakes region of Africa;
(iii)	And that it will support the Sudanese people in the effort to consolidate those achievements so far gained, and encourage the continuation of the peace process in Sudan and the Great Lakes Region of Africa.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we start contributing to this motion we have to realize that this is a very sad time for us and the whole of Africa. This is a motion to pay tribute to the fallen Lt Gen. Garang and, therefore, when you are making your contribution you should be relevant to the motion. Let us not bring in irrelevant matters. Let us not bring up local politics into this matter; this is to pay tribute to the late Garang.

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. As the Chairperson of the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs, on behalf of my colleagues, I rise to extend our condolences to the family of the late Lt Gen. Garang, the wife Rebecca, and the children.  

We also extend our condolences to the people of Sudan in general and the people of Southern Sudan in particular and the people of the Sudanese Peoples’ Liberation Army. As the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, I have had the opportunity together with the committee to relate to the issues and affairs of IGAD, which is a conference that combines seven countries that are in the horn of Africa. Uganda and Sudan are members and the President of this country has been its chairman for last year.  

I wish to put it on the table that we have been able to appreciate as a committee the issues and the concerns of the Sudanese Peoples’ Liberation Army and the cause for the fight, which has been on for the last 20 years, namely the fight for peace, equality and justice. We are able to be associated and sympathetic to those matters and issues as they relate to the people.  

Again, as a committee we have been able to relate directly to the Republic of Sudan under the Great Lakes Region Conference, which comprises 11 countries within the Great Lakes Region, which really aspire for peace and security, good governance and democracy, economic development and human rights, Sudan and Uganda have worked consistently to ensure that mainly the region of Northern Uganda and Southern Sudan are at peace.  

I wish to report that in the recently concluded ministerial meeting in Lusaka, one of the most important economic development programmes under the reconstruction development programmes was to extend the railway line from Pakwach through Nimule to Juba. This was seen as a sign of reconstructing this very important area, which is known to be very rich with a lot of minerals and oil. The peace in this area was acknowledged as the bedrock for the development and tranquillity of our people.  

I also had the opportunity as a Member of Parliament to appreciate the issues of the SPLA and Southern Sudan when people in my consistency of Lubaga raised a few concerns about some unbecoming behaviour of some of the people who were residents in the Lubaga area. One of my colleagues raised those concerns on the Floor of the House and this House instructed the Minister of Internal Affairs to go and investigate. We had very cordial meetings and that gave us an opportunity to appreciate and understand the issues as they pertain in Southern Sudan and be able to recognise that whilst we look at them as refugees but they are refugees for a cause.

I want to take this opportunity to extend our condolences to all those who have been affected by this death namely, the Great Lakes Region Conference, the IGAD and the peoples of Sudan still living within Uganda and those who may have gone back to Sudan.

In the same breath I wish to extend my condolences and that of our committee to the families of our officers particularly Col. Nyakairu, Capt. Kiyimba, Maj. Kiggundu and others who were part of the presidential crew. We have had the opportunity to relate and interact with them during the policy statement discussions when they came time and again to explain and defend the position of the transport of the presidency. I want to say that this country has lost a great crew.

Allow me on my own behalf, on behalf of my family and on behalf of the people of Kampala to extend our condolences. May their souls rest in eternal peace.

10.55
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker for according me the opportunity to pay tribute not only to a personal friend but also to a great freedom fighter, probably one of the great ever produced on the continent of Africa.

We are all grief stricken. We are suffering from a state of shock. Some of us who were at the airport on the tragic day - I was there in the morning and afternoon - to see or to hear later that our friend who had taken off did not reach his destination, it was not an easy evening or night. The following morning some people within the intelligence community and in the media wanted to confirm whether it was true that indeed our friend had not reached his destination. One of the people who contacted me in the early hours of Sunday happened to be the son of the captain of the vassal that was carrying our friend, that is Frank Nyakairu of the Daily Monitor. He asked, “Have you heard anything?” Obviously I had inkling but it was very hard to disclose to a son over the telephone that in civil aviation generally when people say, “We have lost contact with an aircraft”, generally it is tragic.

When you say you have lost contact it is very difficult, and if it has been for hours it is even more difficult. For that matter he was not an ordinary passenger but a newly installed and sworn in First Vice-President of a neighbouring country who had come to consult with our own leader, President Museveni, a long term friend.

The late Dr Garang was not just a soldier; he was an academic; he was a freedom fighter; he was a disciplinarian; he was human in that all of us who are human we are subject to flaws in our conduct of business. He did not have an easy job holding together fractious groups that were fighting for their rights in a neighbouring country Sudan based on ethnic background, race and other injustices, but he stuck to his guns.

For a man who was so highly educated to decide to serve his people in that capacity is no easy task. This is a man who had to make very hard decisions; he had the option of leading a sensationalist movement like he had been in before the Anyanya under Gen. Lagu who wanted to secede from the rest of Sudan. He fought hard to hold together all the groups that were fighting in this struggle to say, “Sudan belongs to all of us and it must be held together by all of us, no group has a right to secede from Sudan”.

Notwithstanding the charter they signed the other day to unify the country, they put in a clause that after six years they may have the option to opt out. But in the last three weeks prior to his death and since the signing of the agreement and being sworn in, he was working for a stronger and longer lasting, united Sudan. He was a federalist; he was a unionist; he did not believe in small units.  

As you are aware when we are at a funeral paying tribute we cannot be free from emotion, we pour out our hearts. The words may not be complementary, it may be hard, it may be revealing, but it is a tradition we cannot afford to discard on the account of diplomatic or political niceties. Some people have said this was a needless accident and it would not have happened if we had observed certain standards or procedure. Many people say history repeats itself and only fools do not learn from history. Every occasion no matter how tragic it is; we are one. We should learn from that tragic incident. For us to be totally oblivious to any contributory factors that might have led to a situation of that nature would be foolish. We should not ignore history. History is not for the archives but also to guide us in future.

As a Member of the Committee of Foreign Affairs, we have expressed from time to time the VIP transport by air. I have championed the cause of getting better transport. I am not at any rate trying to imply that if the equipment were ineffective it could have led to this tragic incidence, this is not right forum or right time for us to start finger pointing. But at the same time I think it is humorous for us as Members of Parliament not to point out certain things that must be observed, which concern the lives and the security of a head of state or a deputy head of state.  

I have from time to time - my colleagues will tell or can confirm with the Committee of Foreign Affairs - when State House came to ask for funding I said, “There are certain items we want to discuss in greater depth with people in charge of the transport by air of His Excellency the President and his guests.” Beautifully the crew of this vessel came. I regret to say one of the people is the late Capt. Nyakairu. Obviously it has been in the media that we asked whether they needed other equipment. They said, “No, we can work on what we have and spare the money.” I said, “Captain, it is cheaper for us to spend US $5 million to secure the transport for a head of state. It is more expensive to organise a budget for a replacement of another transport for a head of state. We have to weigh this matter carefully.”

I am not as I said implying that the equipment was defective but there are certain procedures, which I call upon my colleagues in the Cabinet that they must follow. In aviation it is a standard procedure that if you are flying by helicopter you must estimate the time -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, yesterday we were told that they are setting up a commission to investigate the circumstances under which this happened. We will get to know what happened. How do we follow it without facts as to what caused the accident?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said at this tragic moment we tend to be carried away by emotion especially if you know the person involved. I am not talking about any vice-president of a country. I am talking about a person I have known from 1982. This is a person I met in the United States at Fort Benin when he was being trained. I had gone there to negotiate for this country a military training course for our personnel, but I also ran into him. I was impressed by the way he talked about Africa in general. So I get carried away emotionally because I am talking about somebody I know.

THE SPEAKER: Restrain yourself then.         

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The fate of Sudan is intertwined with the fate of this country. Sudan is faced with a number of challenges, which also go across the border to affect us. My colleague the chairperson of our committee has talked about IGAD and other associations we have with Sudan. Sudan needs our help; we have to pray for it. Likewise we need Sudan for trade, for diplomatic relations and unity of Africa.

Sudan is beset with problems from all corners except probably from the North. In the Northwest they have Dafur, in the Southeast they have another problem bordering Eritrea and for us we have the Kony issue, which also goes across. Sudanese people ethnically are associated with our own people. We have the Madi in Sudan and the Madi in Moyo. 

The fate of Sudan cannot be isolated from the fate of Uganda. African unity will be meaningless unless all countries, which are independent and sovereign, remain sovereign not only in economic development but in political determination.

Militarily we need Sudan they are our neighbours. We are asking them to help us. We have known Garang not only as a friend, but some of us also went to school with him. We have known him at a very personal level. As I said this is not an ordinary occasion or wedding reception where we say all the platitudes about the newlyweds, but this is an occasion where we have come literally to pay tribute to see the safe passage of our former comrade to the heavenly world of the Almighty God. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.09
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Right from the very beginning of my brief address let me extend my deep condolences to the family of the late Lt Gen. Dr Garang and the Government of the Republic of Sudan.  

I am also saddened and touched by the demise of the Ugandan crew who were in the company of Dr Garang. Ugandans must equally be concerned and touched about the disappearance of those dear people.  

One thing I like about the Bible is that it tends to demystify the phenomenon of death. According to the Bible you should not be too worried because somewhere you will resurrect. But it is very difficult and it is a tussle to pass the same message as articulated by the Bible to Rebecca who lost a dear husband. I would like to join you in expressing my condolences to Rebecca Garang.

I was lucky to have known Dr Garang and I met him at Hotel Intercontinental in Nairobi two years ago when I participate in a seminar related to human rights in the continent of Africa. One thing I will never forget about Garang is that he knew what he wanted and what his people wanted. This is a very big challenge to all of us. It is a challenge to you and I. How many of us can express what the people we represent want? How prepared are we to die for the cause of the people we represent? Suppose we all shared that attribute what a better society we would be living in! That is why we must honour Dr Garang.

The example I have given is very important. For someone to die for the cause of his people is not a small thing. It is not a small thing for someone to insist on fighting for what he or she wants. If I were to characterise generally and briefly, how many African leaders were fitting in the footsteps of Garang? I have about four people to mention. One of them is the late Kwame Nkuruma. Kwame Nkuruma knew what the continent of Africa wanted more than what the people of Buganda wanted. It may be a shortcoming but it is a reality.  

Patrice Lumumba of Congo knew what the people wanted and he knew what he wanted that is why he died the way he died. What about Nelson Mandela of South Africa? He languished in jail for 27 years but he did not change an inch about the perception of the people of South Africa. He was prepared to die for them. How many of you can die for your people? This is a serious matter.  

In regard to the mayuuni scenario, when you are fighting a war and you are the captain, the captain should be the last person to perish. If you perish first and you are the captain then you are defeated. That is why I took cover to ensure I did not die. The last person in that line that I greatly honour, a person who knew what he wanted and what his people wanted, is the first President of the Republic of Uganda, the late Sir Edward Mutesa. Sir Edward Mutesa went into exile after Obote had bombarded the Lubiri. He had all the capacity to bring in mercenaries to fight for his people but on realising that many people in Buganda would die he chose to die in exile to ensure that the people of Buganda survived.  

In the same vein the late Garang after realising that as many as two million people had died in Sudan he ensured that he participated gloriously in the dialogue to cause peace. He did not talk for the sake of talking; he talked to ensure that the war in Southern Sudan stopped. Much as Dr Garang believed in the unity of the Sudan he never wanted the South to be marginalized. He was prepared to die to ensure the safety of Southern Sudan that is why he advocated for the autonomy and economic empowerment of Southern Sudan.

The people I represent will miss Dr Garang. They have asked me to articulate one concern. For the good of Uganda and Africa in particular, many people would like to know the mission, which he had brought the beloved Garang to Uganda. By seeking to know the cause of the mission they are not saying it is the mission that caused his death, but it is a public concern for people to know the mechanics of the flow of information.  

Dr Garang was proud of being a black man. How many of us can be proud of being what we are? He loved the black race. He did not believe that one being as dark skinned as he was should be subjected to a second-class citizenship in the Sudan. That is why he fought to ensure that he demystified that belief. 

It is true, as hon. Zziwa has said I was on the forefront to ensure that the Sudanese refugees without status leave. I gave them 60 days’ notice to leave Lubaga South but after examining the circumstances under which some of them were here and after receiving several appeals from Dr Garang I had to change my position -(Interruptions)- yes, I am the representative of the people in Lubaga South. In fact they got worried. Some of them wanted to commit suicide. I said, “Do not die I am here to ensure that you stay in Lubaga South.” So in the end I had to scrap the move, which was giving them notice to have vacated Lubaga South in 60 days.  

Finally, the death of Garang is a big challenge to Uganda. You should all know that you can die at any time. I should also know John Ken Lukyamuzi I can die any time but before I die, how prepared should I be before death and before God the Almighty? So this challenge goes to all of us especially you policy makers and the politicians. When you die you should leave a mark in the place where you have been so that others can benefit from that mark. Africa will always benefit from the mark of a man who struggled to emancipate Southern Sudan from the shackles of domination. He was a man of adventure; he was a man of conviction; he was a man of character. God bless that son of Africa. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.17
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and pay tribute to a Pan-Africanist, a person who believed in Pan-Africanism through the African Union and by fighting for the cause of the black race. 

Most importantly I want to thank the wife because many of us who listened to the news yesterday when chaos broke out in Sudan the appeal of the wife was the most powerful. The wife said Dr Garang could have died but his vision is the most important thing. She appealed to the people of Southern Sudan not to cause chaos in Sudan. I think this is a very powerful message from the late Garang’s wife. She said, “The only thing that will make me remember that my husband is not dead is the fact that the peace deal that is signed should stand and should be implemented.” This goes a long way to show that we have very powerful women in the continent of Africa. It also shows that actually it is not that behind every successful man there is a woman, but behind every successful man there is a powerful woman; a woman that is holding the great support that Dr Garang had garnered to move the vision forward.

I want to thank the people of Sudan. I also want to thank the SPLA for showing that Dr Garang did not individualise power. If the Garang we knew was the figure point of SPLA and did not build institutions, there would be a power vacuum. Now as we talk there is no power vacuum. Some hours ago they nominated the SPLA successor to John Garang and he is supposed to be the Vice-President of Sudan. I think it is very important to note that institution building is one of the great achievements of Dr Garang. This is a lesson that we should learn because many times in Africa people talk about personalities but in these circumstances I was very grateful that the man left a strong institution of the SPLA and this institution is functioning. This institution is moving forward with the agenda, with the vision and with the peace process.  

I should add that the death of Dr Garang is a blow not only to Sudan and Africa but also to us in Northern Uganda because all our hope for peace in Northern Uganda was on John Garang. He was so committed to ending war in Sudan and also ensuring that peace returns to Northern Uganda. He addressed a rally in Gulu and assured the people of Northern Uganda that he will leave no stone unturned to ensure that peace returns to Northern Uganda. For many of us who come from that region we are now stuck. We hope and appeal that his death will not derail the peace process in Southern Sudan and Northern Uganda. We pray that the legacy he has left continues. He has left a very big legacy.  

For many of you who watch all these news agencies all over the world you will realize that no African President’s death has ever attracted the kind of press coverage like that of Dr Garang. In all the news coverage from CNN, BBC, CBS - even the Press Digest this morning was talking about Dr Garang. The legacy this man has left is important and it goes a long way to make us examine ourselves about our own legacy. What legacy are we going to leave behind as politicians? What legacy are we going to leave as leaders and as people in high positions? That is a very important issue, which we have to learn.  

He was a freedom fighter and as the Ambassador of the United States described him, he was also a peacemaker and we hope that what he has started, the IGAD, which now is being chaired by our President, will ensure that the peace process in Sudan is not derailed. My appeal is to IGAD and the African Union to ensure that the vision and the agenda of Dr Garang is not derailed so that what he fought for, African union and liberation of the black race, is harnessed and not forgotten.  

I rest my case and also convey condolences to the families of the other people who perished in the plane crash. I thank you.

11.25
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support this motion. My condolences go to all the families but more especially to the family of John Garang and to the Government of Sudan and to the people of Southern Sudan.

When many of us learnt about the death of Dr Garang what came to mind basically was the challenge of leadership in Southern Sudan. We in Uganda here have enjoyed a large degree of self-governance and freedom. Our counterparts, our brothers in Southern Sudan have actually had no opportunity to enjoy this privilege. Right from the time of independence they never had this opportunity of self-governance and that sparked off what many people knew as the Anyanya struggle, the first Anyanya war, which eventually ended with the peace understanding between Khartoum and the leadership of Maj. Gen. Lagur.  

Unfortunately the peace deals stipulated that after ten years the Southern Sudanese were to examine themselves whether they could have self-rule. On the eve of the end of those ten years the regime in Khartoum imposed Sharia law and that signified to South Sudanese that the peace deal, which they signed ten years ago was being thrown into the dustbin and that brought in what we call the Anyanya II rebellion, which is basically the SPLA struggle. 

Col John Garang is credited because he was part of the Government forces and when he was sent to suppress an uprising by the Southern Sudanese against this new imposition, he felt he was with them and he associated with them. Eventually around 1983 he took up the mantle and the leadership of the SPLA and since then the war has been going on.

When the SPLA commander and leader, Lt Gen. John Garang perishes, it is a reminder of the leadership crisis. Some of us have been keenly following the events in Southern Sudan: internal wrangles, the different factions, and even as they were heading towards the peace deal it is a big problem. My prayer is that we stand as a country; I know this country has been sympathetic to the people of Southern Sudan for a long time, and we should continue with this solidarity because this is a very difficult moment for the southern Sudanese. 

For some of us who come from the North with friends across who always - even yesterday they were calling on satellite phones and telling us what the situation was like there. I think our government has a very big role to play to nurture good understanding first and foremost among the different factions in Southern Sudan so that the South-to-South dialogue, which has been going on, holds as a new leader gradually emerges. 

I would also appeal to the Government of Sudan not to meddle in the leadership in Southern Sudan at such a time because it can cause a big problem. It should allow the Southern Sudanese themselves to eventually overcome this difficult moment and allow a new leader to emerge who can offer this leadership to the Southern Sudanese because short of that, we are going to see a lot of problems.

Mr Speaker, I also want to take this opportunity to talk about the many interests in Southern Sudan. There are people interested in oil and with Garang’s death there could be a lot of influence peddling to see who should come and take over the leadership and how they will take advantage to exploit the resources. I know of various companies and governments, which have a lot of interest in Southern Sudan. At least for goodness sake we should give the Southern Sudanese a chance. 

Finally, my appeal goes to the Pan Africans and people around the world who sympathise with humanity that when we talk of apartheid being bad, we have been fighting apartheid in southern Africa but there is apartheid being practiced next door in Southern Sudan where the Africans in the South are regarded as second-class citizens. This is unfair and unacceptable. The world should really focus on the situation in Sudan where Garang was fighting for the unity of the whole of Sudan. He did not want to separate Sudan but stood and said Sudan should be a nation where they should co-exist. So, apartheid in Southern Sudan should be our pre-occupation. We should focus on it and not shy away because our people, our fellow African in Southern Sudan, are suffering. 

When we talk about the NEPAD arrangement we find that there is a lot of influence and lots of difficulties. There are likely to be a lot of difficulties in Sudan where two cultures clash. Our brothers and sisters in Southern Sudan also have a right to live as human beings. They have a right to co-exist with the rest of the people in Sudan and in any case Sudan was traditionally for the black Africans.

My condolences go to the family of John Garang, the Government of Sudan and the people of Southern Sudan, and to the Government of Uganda and the families of the members of the helicopter crew. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

11.31
MR JOHN AACHILA (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a time when we as Ugandans have to join our brothers and sisters in Southern Sudan during the fateful moment when our brother and dear friend, Lt Gen. John Garang is dead. We the people of Northeastern Uganda with a common boundary with the rest of the Ngitunga speaking group who live in Southern Sudan, Ethiopia and Kenya feel we have lost a son, a liberator, Pan Africanist and torchbearer of the marginalised and very disadvantaged persons of that region. 

When colonialism came to Africa it separated us indiscriminately and left us scattered in various states with a lot of difficulties to fight for a common destiny. Little did we know that on that fateful day of Saturday, 30 July 2005 when Garang left western Uganda, moved over the lands of Karamoja and passed the entry point of Pile, which is at the extreme Northeast of Kotido, now Kabong District, that the liberator and fighter would disappear!

At the time when the SPLA under the leadership of Garang and the Government of Sudan under the leadership of El-Bashir signed the agreement in Nairobi in January, the people of Karamoja rejoiced. We knew time had come for us as the common people along those borders of Uganda, Sudan and Kenya to have a triple approach to our problems, to our uniqueness, and champion the problem of security. Aware that this is a region, which is affected by insecurity, with porous borders, the absence of a government in Southern Sudan has been a disaster for Northern Uganda especially for Northeastern Uganda where rustling has gone to the highest peak. Southern Sudan was a free zone that was living out of the flow of small arms and ammunitions from Uganda. As such our lives in that region were at risk. So when the agreement was signed in Nairobi, the people of Karamoja and all the Ngitunga community were happy. 

When I talk of the Ngitunga, I refer to the Topasi and Jie of Sudan, the Dogiro of Ethiopia, the Turkana of Northwestern Kenya, the Karimojong and Dodoth of Uganda. These are clearly distinct indigenous groups that live and surround those regions and it is because of that that we felt the presence of Garang with the combined effort of the Kenya Government and the devotedness of the leadership in Uganda that the triple approach would be made to make sure that the disarmament exercise in that region would become a success. 

However, much as death has deprived us of a great man, we have not lost hope. With the nomination of Salva Kiir, the Vice-President of the then Southern Sudan who is expected to take over the Vice-Presidency in the Sudan, we hope that the people and Government of Sudan will respect and implement the agreement as agreed. We expect that the people of Uganda, Kenya and Africa as a whole will give a helping hand to Southern Sudan to enable them determine their own destiny and get out of this slavery and be liberated.

It was all hope and jubilation that trade and commerce would blossom in that area. It was our hope that the great North road would pass through Kotido and Kidepo to Southern Sudan. It was our hope that with all this concerted effort the people of that region would prosper; and it is our hope that with the Government of Uganda and this Parliament opening up for dual citizenship, the people would be free to interact and enjoy the resources of that region other than looking at the region in despair.

We have lost a great man. I would like to pay tribute to the late Garang and send our condolences to the people of the Tunga community; the families of John Garang, the combatant and liberator, Rebecca Garang and the children; of all our friends, our sons and daughters that we have lost in this tragedy. I would like to assure everybody that among this fraternity with goodwill and comradeship, we should help to carry the banner of John Garang. Mr Speaker, thank you.

11.39
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, for the last one and a-half years, I have been honoured and privileged to serve the cause of the African people on behalf of the Pan African Parliament as the head of the Pan African Parliamentary Peace Committee on the Sudan. It is one such big responsibility that I have held in my public life and I continue to serve as chairperson of that committee.

During the deliberations and my mission in the Sudan I have worked closely with three rebel movements. One of them is the Sudanese Liberation Movement, the second one is the Justice and Equality Movement and the third is the Sudanese Peoples’ Liberation Movement headed by the late Dr John Garang. I have worked with him quite closely and we have met three times. I would like to say, honourable colleagues that Sudan is a rainbow nation. It belongs to what colleagues are talking about, the black Africans, it also belongs to non-black Africans. 

And Sudan is a healing nation, it has made very many mistakes in its history and its people are trying to heal from the consequences of those mistakes. It is true the late John Garang has fought a just cause, but let us not scratch the wounds or else the gains, which the Sudanese people have made will be eroded. Sudan now needs help more than ever before and at this time when one of the leaders, one of the patriots of that country is no longer with them, let us assist them and let us not scratch wounds such that all the gains are lost. 

During my interactions with the late Dr John Garang I found him to be a very articulate, reasonable, intelligent and well educated man. At one time we were seated in Beggars Park in Pretoria and he was so much concerned about what my committee’s report would be. And I told him, “Look here, my committee will do a thorough, professional job.” We disagreed on many things and yet he never took offence of them and eventually when the report came out he disagreed with parts of it but congratulated my committee. And I think he was looking at the Sudan as a nation. This issue about the mistakes Northern Sudan had done to Southern Sudan were behind him. 

He was a true freedom fighter, somebody who was fighting for a cause, and that is the biggest lesson we must take. When you have fought and you have achieved, do not do anything that erodes that success. It can be a tragedy. There are so many freedom fighters that fight and succeed and when they succeed they forget about any legacy they are leaving behind. They are consumed with power.  They are consumed with revenge. I do not think that was Dr John Garang. 

So, on behalf of my committee and on behalf of the African Parliament and indeed the people who gave us the assignment originally this House, I would like to extend our sincere condolences to the family, but more importantly to the people of the Sudan as a country. Successes like those, which the late John Garang and President Bashir have achieved, can only be sustained if and only if institutions are in place. John Garang’s struggle was not a personal struggle. It was a just cause and I hope he has left behind institutions that can outlive him as an individual. I hope so. If Dr John Garang had personified this struggle and there are no institutions in place, then Sudan needs your prayers. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.45
MR FRED OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. There are three things that last: faith, hope and love and the late Dr Garang stood for all these. He had faith in what he was doing, he had hope even if it took him 20 years to achieve what he stood for and he loved what he stood for.  

Dr Garang was invited to Uganda to address a Pan African Symposium at Hotel Equatorial early this year and one of the things that he demystified was that there are neither “Arabs” nor “Blacks” but Sudanese people regardless of their colour and religion. He further said that despite the fact that Sudan means black and he stood to fight against the segregation of the black people of Southern Sudan; he was looking forward to a new Sudan of one people. I believe this is what we in Africa should emulate and look at Africa as one people in diversity.  

Dr Garang loved his country very much. One of the things done during that symposium was to trace the Garden of Eden, which he managed to convince us was in the Republic of Sudan and he had all his empirical data. And why was he doing this? Dr Garang wanted to demystify the many bad things that people in Africa and the world over believe that Sudan has. So he had to do that research to convince the whole world that the Garden of Eden, which we read about in the Bible where Adam and Eve lived, where the tree of knowledge of good and bad, where the tree of life was contained is actually in the Republic of Sudan.  

Dr Garang was also a great developer. The people of Northern Uganda will live to remember that he had a number of development programmes organised between Southern Sudan and in particular Northern Uganda. He wanted to have a railway network from Pakwach to Nimule, road linkages from Uganda to southern Sudan – tarmac roads and I believe that these dreams will come to pass. As I talk now trade is flourishing between Southern Sudan and Uganda with a number of Ugandans settled in Southern Sudan. It is, therefore, our role to ensure that the co-operation, coordination and understanding, that is now prevailing between Southern Sudan and Uganda continues even after his demise.

Mr Speaker, on Easter Sunday this year Dr Garang led a delegation of SPLM to Pretoria, South Africa where he stayed with 100 of his men in the same hotel; showing that despite him being the First Vice-President of the Sudan, he had a lot of love for his people. He wanted them to be recognised, to be settled in the new world to which he had exposed them after signing the peace deal. He was a man of faith, hope and love; he loved his people, loved Uganda and loved Sudan. We as Africans should emulate his example and pray that the peace pact that was signed on the 9th of January this year will not be disrupted with his death. May his soul and the souls of all those who died in this tragic accident rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

11.50
MR CHRISTOPHER MBALIBULHA (Busongora County, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. We are talking about the life of a revolutionary leader in the name of John Garang. On behalf of my people and on behalf of the Rwenzururu revolutionary leaders, I convey our condolences to the people of Southern Sudan, to the family of John Garang and to the families of all those Ugandans who died along with him.  

There is no doubt that Sudan has lost a liberator. Sudan and Africa as a whole has lost a freedom fighter, a man who fought for equality and justice for the African people. The people of Southern Sudan led by Garang fought a war of belonging, simply to belong to a country where they would enjoy their freedom and rights. They fought a war of recognition, a war of self-identity and self-determination, and nothing less.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in revolutionary theories, a man and a woman will choose to die for a revolutionary cause because in their judgment a cause is more important than their life. The people of Southern Sudan along with Garang were reduced to thinking that the cause for freedom and justice is more important than their lives and so fought for it. I am very glad that John Garang has died for this cause. This is my satisfaction. Men and women should stand up for a cause and Garang has died for a cause.

As I end, what lessons do we learn in Garang and the struggle for the people of Southern Sudan? We learn three things: 

One, that people will always take the challenge to fight for freedom. 

Two, that African Governments should respect all their citizens’ fundamental rights. 

Three, that people can surrender all their freedom and rights to states or governments but can never surrender their right to revolt against bad governments. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us curtail the time we use.

11.56
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise not because I have to say something but because I have something to say. We got the rumors of the death of Gen. John Garang when we were on our way back from the court martial in Acholi Bur. So the chairman of the Acholi Parliamentary Group has requested me to make this statement on their behalf.  

Ninety nine percent of our border in the North is with Sudan and so John Garang was seen as a person with great influence over the peace process in Northern Uganda. While in Gulu town people were shock stricken and mourning John Garang because of the greater implications he had to the peace process, as we reached Kampala last night I learnt from one of the books I was reading that the late Doug Hammersjold also died in a plane crash in 1961 in Congo. So when I correlate that, why is it that those who historically matter at a specific moment die at such a moment when people do not expect to have them dead? 

As I was listening to Focus on Africa and they were quoting Garang’s statements since 1983, one of the greatest statements he made when they were signing the peace pact is, “There will be no more bombs, and the cries and ululations of our parents will be shouting for peace and joy.” It is very unfortunate that John Garang has died at such a moment where he has left a leadership vacuum. 

I have personally been very close to members of the SPLA. The last time was at the sub-way restaurant near Parliament the day a car crashed the roundabout and fell inside; we were attending a wedding reception of one of the key persons in the Sudan movement called Deng, and the current caretaker commander of SPLA, Salva Kiir, was also present. Our prayers as this Parliament and as Members of Acholi Parliamentary Group is that the next two weeks are a very trying moment for the people of Sudan because just last night alone 24 people were killed in Khartoum because they were demonstrating against the death of one man, which indicates that he was playing a pivotal role in the revolution of Sudan.  

I also want to thank the President for having written an elaborate statement on the circumstances that led to Garang’s death, because as a leader of this nation it was appropriate to explain the air worthiness of that particular plane in order to make Uganda’s hands clean in the eyes of the international community. I do no want to pre-empt the commissions of inquiry but I think by any one standard it was an accident. Mr Speaker, I am talking with authority because those of us who have had the opportunity to board that President’s helicopter and see, you would not imagine yourself as the first citizen in the country and you would least expect to have any single problem. But it is very unfortunate that John Garang died.  

I also want us as this Parliament to also pay tribute to King Fahad. I do not want to it to appear in the media that, “Parliament mourns John Garang and ignores King Fahad.” Without –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, yesterday we were officially informed about the demise of King Fahad and a formal statement is supposed to be made by the Government, I think it will be made later today. It is not proper to mix Garang and King Fahad in the same motion, please. You will contribute on the other one.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Lastly, President Churchill once said, “History will not judge me harshly because I intend to write that history.” I urge all of us here not to just be heard talking about the late Garang and Sudan’s mourning but from the bottom of our hearts at our free time to offer a word of prayer for the family of the late John Garang. I cannot believe that Garang is dead, but death is not a joking matter. That is it and I wish him well until we meet him again. Thank you.

12.02
MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of my constituency and on my own behalf, I join my colleagues to extend my heartfelt condolences to the family of the late Lt Gen. Dr John Garang De Mabior, the SPLM, the people of Southern Sudan in particular, the people of Sudan in general, and all the people who cherish equality, love, harmony and peaceful co-existence.

Mr Speaker, in my other services to this country I also happened to meet Dr Garang and you could not really wish away his experience, especially on matters of Africa and the region. When hon. Awori and hon. Lukyamuzi talked they said he was not only a fighter but also an intellectual. They only could not know that in revolutionary language we call this committing intellectual suicide. You just have to forget all the comfort of an intellectual and live with your people, experience hunger, sickness and many other situations in order to liberate them.  

In the last few years our region has lost a number of leaders including President Habyarimana of Rwanda, Ntaryamira of Burundi, Laurent Kabila of the Democratic Republic of Congo, Andrew Kayira and now Dr Garang. All these died mysteriously and we keep wondering what is happening to our region. Three quarters of the President’s statement yesterday was demystifying the airworthiness of the ill-fated chopper. In philosophy, we call this begging the oppression, but not all is lost. The President underscored one important message namely that Dr Garang was one of the most visionary and incisive revolutionary thinkers and nationalists Africa has ever produced. However, the struggle for the dignity and progress of patriotic Africa is unstoppable in the same way the death of Samora Machel, Augustine Neto, Patrice Lumumba, Herbert Kistepo, Edward Mondrani, Martin Mwesiga, Valerian Rwaheru and others did not stop the defeat of reactionary and imperialist forces in Africa. The death of Dr Garang will not derail the struggle for the justice and dignity of the Sudanese people. 

I could not agree more with the President because this teaches us that liberation movements and liberation struggles go beyond and above individuals. I would like to believe that the Sudanese People’s Liberation Movement will not disappear with the demise of Dr Garang like that of UNITA after the demise of Jonas Savimbi. An armed struggle is not an easy experience and as I have already underscored, for a person holding a PhD to lead the peasants and motivate them for over 20 years was not a simple sacrifice. Therefore, I am appealing to our leaders and the citizenry in this region, that this struggle is not lost just because Dr Garang is dead. I would have said many other things but with your caution, I would like to stop here and thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak.

12.07
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I extend condolences to the families of our own professionals who perished in that accident. We would like the families to know that we are with them at this very difficult time and that we feel the loss of such a high caliber of people in our army and nation. 

Dr John Garang epitomised the hope for a new Sudan, he called for self-determination for Southern Sudan. He hoped for a Sudan that was based on democratic principles, characterised by consultative process in determining its destiny and where justice would prevail. During his inaugural speech Dr Garang said this: “Congratulations for the dawn of peace. Today is Sudanese day.” It is my hope that even though Dr John Garang has died, these words shall continue to echo in the minds of the people of Sudan, in Africa and the world at large. We will always remember that it is just the dawn of peace and the day is yet to come. We have to work for it.  

Dr John Garang envisioned a very peaceful Eastern Sudan, particularly the Darfur region. He hoped that there would be an end to conflict and not only in Eastern Sudan but the rest of Africa. He envisioned a situation where there would be respect for human rights for all regardless of religion, sex and race. Therefore, in paying tribute to the late Dr John Garang I would like to urge the Government of Uganda to continue to make a commitment to this struggle. 

I have many times spoken on behalf of the refugees. We have so many refugees of them from Southern Sudan in this country. I have always asked when we shall pass the Refugee Bill, which is before this House. I am glad that the mover of this motion is also the chairperson of the committee that is presiding over this Bill. In this very difficult moment I call upon all of you to make a stronger commitment to the many refugees who feel the greatest loss this afternoon. The best we can do is to assure them of our commitment by giving them our framework.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much hon. Alaso. I want to assure you and the honourable members that the Committee on the Presidential and Foreign Affairs has embarked on discussing the Refugee Bill. The members were very anxious about the issues of the refugees and that is why they undertook to go and visit the resettlement camps in both Western and Southern Uganda. We are sure that with the hectic legislative programmes out of the way, that is the first item we are going to deal with. Very soon we shall bring the report before this House.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That Bill has been with this Parliament for more than two years. That is why when we are making a commitment to people for whom Dr John Garang lived, we should hasten the process. It is a very difficult time for the many Sudanese refugees in this country. The life of Dr John Garang was tied to these thousands of refugees who are scattered all over the refugee camps. Even the IDPs in Northern Uganda, as has already been alluded to by the previous speakers, felt there was hope to have their problems resolved.

I would like to send my condolences to the refugees, the people of Sudan and particularly southern Sudan. I urge them to stay true to the cause for which Dr Garang lived. Those of us who have had the opportunity to see Dr Garang struggle will always remember him for the many lessons he taught us. We learn from him the attitude we should all have to a national reconciliation programme. When you have divisions and a painful past behind you, the best is to forge a national reconciliation programme, which normally yields good dividends.

I also want to encourage Sudan’s neighbours, including Uganda, to accept the people who will come for refuge. It is a pity that the people who have been close to Dr Garang had been overshadowed. All we knew about SPLA was Dr Garang and I believe that it will be very difficult to know who will succeed him and how easily they will be accepted.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.15
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion to pay tribute to the late, His Excellency Dr Lt Gen. Garang, the longest freedom bush fighter and the leader of the Sudanese People’s Liberation Army.  

I extend my condolences to the Government of Sudan and particularly the people of Southern Sudan, his family and the families of our people who perished in the crash.

Talking about people who have passed away is not my habit. I would like to take Dr John Garang as an exception. He fought for the freedom of the black Southern Sudanese and this cause was justified. I had an opportunity to meet the late Garang during my previous profession. I studied about the revolution in Southern Sudan. In him I saw a Pan Africanist, a strategist, a peace loving and unifying character.

As a Pan African, unlike many other people, he was very selfless and while he led the revolution he focused on the entire continent. That is why he eventually stood in for Sudan as a Republic, a united Sudan. When a strategist is fighting for freedom, the need to survive is very important. When communists supported revolutionaries in Africa, he used them. When they crumbled in Europe, he became a capitalist. He did all this without diverting from the cause of his fight.   

As a peace-loving person, he accepted to become part of the government he has fought, for the peace of Sudan and the entire people of Africa. As a unifier, Dr Garang lived an egalitarian life without compromising his leadership and authority. That is why he has left a very big vacuum.  

Mr Speaker, this is a very difficult moment. He has died at a time when we all need him. I want to take this opportunity to urge the Government of Sudan to support the peace initiative to respect the agreement. The international community should continue to support the people of Southern Sudan so that the cause for which they fought is not in vain.

Lastly, I would like to thank take this opportunity to thank our President. It is always important to thank people when they are still live. He has supported all revolutions in the struggle for freedom that have justified causes. I will urge Ugandans to tirelessly rally behind him. We should realise that once a fire is set in the neighborhood, it will most likely affect us. We must support him and our people in Southern Sudan so that they are free from conflicts and oppression. In my culture, if you had a close friend you would cut each other’s naval and share blood. When you had food, your friend would not go hungry. I was so comforted when I heard that he crashed in the presidential helicopter, which had recently been upgraded to withstand all the hazards.

I know Col Nyakairu to be one of our best pilots. All the people who were there were the best crew the President had. I am, therefore, very happy and I thank him for doing all that a man should for a brother. He gave his best but the hand of fate chose to come. We must, therefore, accept it. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.22
MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you very much Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. A great American historical, William Paine, wrote, “These are the times that try men’s souls.” If he had written today he would have said, “These times that try men’s and women’s souls.” 

John Garang, as hon. Reagan Okumu said, was sent as a government officer to quell a mutiny in the south from 500 fighters who had refused to obey the orders. They were to be shipped up North. It took him 21 years to come back to Khartoum and 21 days in the office of First Vice-President of Sudan to do that. Each one of the days as Vice-President symbolises one whole year of a painful struggle in the South, amidst bullets and difficult situations in the jungle.  

Mr Speaker, the equation of Dr Garang’s life is very interesting. He was born in 1945, during which year the UN made the declaration to end the Second World War. This was when it was decreed that the world should never again be subjected to such brutal wars. Dr Garang’s death has occurred in a year when a peace accord has been signed. Therefore, his death certificate, just as his birth certificate is on a peace accord.  

Dr Garang joins a long list of people who gave all their hearts for their people who are subjected to suffering. He joins people like Sir William Wilberforce who fought for the abolition of slavery in the United Kingdom. We remember that it took Sir Wilberforce 46 years to have the final Act of Emancipation of Slaves passed in the House of Commons. Sir Wilberforce died the night the Act of Emancipation was passed. He had exhausted the purpose of his life and it was no longer necessary for him to live on. The good news is that there was no slavery after his death.

Other prominent people in that category include Dr Martin Luther King Jr, who fought against segregation in the US, made statements quoted everyday by people fighting oppression of all kinds. Dr Luther King took the final and fatal bullet. After his death there were constitutional amendments in the United States, changes in the laws and abolition of segregation. It is our hope that in Dr Garang’s death the final bullet has been shot and nobody else should die and suffer in Southern Sudan. He has paid the ultimate price. His walking stick has all along been his gun, steadily pointed at the aggressors against the Southern Sudanese. His own people occasionally rioted against him just as his own enemies had guns pointed at him. However, he maintained his steady and justified cause, a cause that would finally see his people through.

Mr Speaker, if you were to trace the political ideology of the SPLA or even of Dr Garang himself, you would get confused. Dr Garang pushed a Marxist philosophy but at the same time he was strongly supported by Christian fundamentalist in the USA. One wonders how he was able to bring all these people together. It is strange for the Christian fundamentalist group to support a Marxist. However, Dr Garang was able put this entire thing together and push a fight that has finally seen his people through.

Just like Frankz Fanon and Cher Guevara wrote, we should not mourn generals for the hour of mourning will come when they are no more generals to pick up their guns to fight. In the life of Dr Garang there were generals that were prepared to pick up the guns this time through peace to move forward and deal with the situation. In his death, therefore, is renewal for the people of Sudan and the destiny of the people who are close to us. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.29
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in sending my condolences to the Government of Sudan, the widow and members of SPLA/M upon the premature death of their leader, the late Lt Gen. Dr John Garang. 

In a special way I send condolences to our President who has lost a friend and a long time colleague in arms. The relationship between the two cannot be overstated. He deserves a word of condolences most especially because they had just had a meeting and he was travelling in the presidential chopper. 

Mr Speaker, I cannot claim to have known him at a personal level but I can claim to have been his personal admirer due to his outstanding qualities and performance. He was a man of many attributes, which he put to good use for the common good of his people and Africa in general. I have attended many conferences addressed by Dr Garang. You could clearly see him exhibiting a deep analysis of Africa’s problems. The commitment was extraordinary. He championed the cause for a new Sudan as a first priority because he looked at a new Sudan where everyone would be equal before the law. However, as a fall back position, he looked at Southern Sudan as an independent country with its own attributes. The late Garang can be seen as an intellectual playing his part, a freedom fighter as is clearly illustrated by his achievements. 

He was also a Pan Africanist. There are very many conferences and other gatherings organised by the Pan African Movement to which he was always invited as guest speaker. He was very inspiring in his delivery of the cause of African liberation. Besides, he was the embodiment of the aspirations and future of the Southern Sudanese. If you talked about Southern Sudan without mentioning Garang, the equation would never be complete. He always featured in matters to do with Southern Sudan. 

He was also a long-standing allay and friend of Uganda. The numerous visits he made here and the close relationship that he enjoyed with President Museveni is a clear testimony that he was one of our own. It is painful that he lost his life while on consultation with our country. If I am not mistaken, it must have been his first outing in his official capacity as the first Vice-President, which makes it even more painful. 

I thank the widow for inspiring and calling upon all the Sudanese to be calm during this difficult moment and to ensure that they uphold Garang’s vision. She said, “Garang the person has died, but the vision and mission should be carried forward.” That was a very strong statement from the widow and we should take heart and work towards ensuring that the vision is kept on until it is realised.

My word of encouragement to the SPLA/M is that the leader has gone, but he has laid a good foundation for their struggle. Their allies, including Uganda, will always be on their side in the quest for total liberation. Therefore, my plea to them is to keep together and keep the candle burning so that the achievements so far registered are not lost with the death of Garang. A lot has been achieved in the peace process. The peace agreement was signed between the Government and SPLM as an organisation. Garang the individual may be away but the organisation remains. They should harmonise their interests, come up with a leader and push on with the struggle.

The regional initiatives, which have been championed by the regional governments where our President has played a leading role as Chairman of IGAD should come in handy now to see that things work out the way Garang would have advised. The best way to pay tribute to Garang is to ensure that what he fought for is not lost at his demise. May his soul rest in eternal peace.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, we should conclude in the next 25 minutes.

12.36
MR PETER LOKERIS (Chekwii County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. Allow me to pay tribute to the late gallant son of Africa, Lt Gen. Dr John Garang. I send my condolences on behalf of the people of Karamoja to the family, the Government and people of the entire Republic of Sudan, especially Southern Sudan.

Losing a great friend and a visitor can be very devastating. He came here, went for a tour and died. It is very devastating to us and to the entire people of Southern Sudan. Yesterday I was seeing gloomy faces, as people were in groups very sorrowful in this country. It was fresh since His Excellency saw him off as he left Rwakitura for Entebbe.

Mr Speaker, part of Southern Sudan lies in the North of Karamoja. We have lived with people of Southern Sudan amicably. We love and depend on each other. In the 1970s the Southern Sudanese under LAGU crossed and left the Khartoum Government because of marginalisation. Some of the people of Southern Sudan resettled as refugees in Karamoja region. Indeed in the new district of Nakapiripirit we live with these people amicably as brothers and sisters. After the closure of that war they returned to their homes, leaving others behind with us to date. Some of these have become Ugandans.

In the 1980s His Excellency, Lt Gen. Garang started a protracted war, which in a new political dispensation resulted in his ascent to First Vice-President of the Republic of Sudan. We were overjoyed and comforted when we heard the news of his office but alas! Fate has befallen Africa, Sudan, Uganda and all immediate neighbours. Fate has fallen at a time we needed Garang most. We hope God will guide us to choose another leader to bring unity among mankind. God may have called him deliberately to let others continue with his vision. We hope with God’s guidance we shall be able to over come all these tribulations. May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

12.40
MR AGARD DIDI (West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give members a small background. In 1954/1955 the Torit rebellion started before Sudan got independence and since Sudan had been at war, Dr Garang left Sudan in 1962 to join the war, that is the Anyanya war. He rose to the rank of adjutant of the then Anyanya leader, Joseph Lagur, who incidentally is a Madi like myself. So, Dr Garang has been in the struggle for over 40 years akin to the Biblical Moses who led the Israelites for that long.  

As you know, during the partition of Africa many African tribes were cut across, for example in the North the Acholi, the Madi, the Kakwa, the Lugbara, the Alur are found both in Sudan and Uganda or in Congo. Likewise, the Samia and the Teso in the East. When I went to university in Dar-es-Salaam, Dr Garang also came to the university. He came with another gentleman called Celestino Taban, who is my cousin, because my tribe is cut and in fact my clan is divided. Those of you who are familiar - where the current lower Church is built is actually my clan area. I have known Dr Garang since then.  

Dr Garang has promoted the Southern dialogue and President Museveni has been supporting him. We have also assisted him in this regard. It is in that connection that we work very closely with him. When on Saturday I heard that he was going out I went to the airport and indeed saw him off. What surprises me is what the papers say that the plane left at 6.30 p.m., when it left before 5.00 p.m. In fact he asked me to take a ride with him and come back but I had a prior commitment so I did not go. Since then I have been able to find out that the Sudanese are really mourning.

Like you have all said, Dr Garang was a very strong man, a statesman and a very intelligent man. I do not want to say more than that but I want to support the call by his wife, Madam Rebecca Garang, that the best we can do is to treasure his memory. Also the statement by Commander Salva Kiir Mayardit, who is the new commander – incidentally Mayardit had always been the commander of the SPLM but probably the Minister of Defence will say more on that. The man who is now the leader is not new to the leadership and indeed before his death he had been appointed the Vice-President and he did assure all Sudanese and friends of the Sudanese that he will carry on with the noble work of Dr Garang.  

I want to join all Ugandans in praying to God to lay the soul of Dr Garang in eternal peace.

12.44
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the great life and leadership of Dr John Garang. I have known him for a very long time and I have worked with him for more than 19 years at very close quarters. I, therefore, feel a personal loss by someone who was a great leader, as everyone has said in every respect.  

I had the honour, at the height of the threat of radical fundamentalism from Sudan against the region, to chair the joint operational command of the frontline states of Eritrea, Ethiopia and Uganda and the SPLA, which we worked with very closely. We worked with him in planning all possible offensives, military and diplomatic, and I can attest to the fact that John Garang was not only a great leader in the military field on the frontline, but he was a great and a consummate diplomat. That is why he was able to work out an agreement with many political forces in Sudan in the formation of the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), which was headed by Mr Milligan, the head of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) of Sudan. 

Later on he reached an agreement with Al Hassan Tourabi, who was the leader of the Islamic radical fundamentalism in Sudan when they met in Geneva in Europe and of course the greatest achievement is his diplomacy that helped bring about the comprehensive peace agreement, which brought about peace in Sudan.  

But as hon. Agard Didi said, Dr John Garang had been in the struggle for a very long time and like the Biblical Moses, he had led his people through a bitter, costly and long struggle. They had crossed the greatest obstacle and really they had more or less reached the promised land. It is a pity that he will not be able to live with his people in the promised land. 

Truly, Dr Garang was a revolutionary who fought against oppression not only in Sudan but also all over. His vision was one of freedom for the people not only of Sudan but also of Africa as a whole. He was a great Pan Africanist. As someone said earlier, the temptation for the Sudanese in the South to fight for a free Southern Sudan, free of control by the North, was great indeed. One of the greatest divisions that occurred in the SPLA/M was on that issue when Dr Viak Marshall and Dr Amar Kur entered an agreement in 1992 with Khartoum Frankfurt, an agreement that promised freedom or independence for Southern Sudan. Garang rejected it. We supported Garang for many reasons because we believed his cause but we also saw in him the leader that could liberate his people and liberate Africa. I am happy that more or less he had achieved his objective of uniting the Southern Sudanese people and uniting Sudan at the same time. 

Truly, he was a revolutionary of unequaled proportions. Once he believed in the cause he would do all that he was able to do to champion that cause. Therefore, I was saddened to learn of his departure from this earth. 

I was in Nkikizi when this happened. In fact I did not know that this had happened until Rebecca called me and told me that he had not arrived in New Site. So, I was engaged in trying to find out what had happened until finally we discovered from others who reached the site that the aircraft had crushed that Saturday. I have heard many people, may be not in this House today but in the media and newspapers on the radio, raising doubts. Some have even gone to the extent of making direct accusations against the President. I heard someone who said, “How could the President give Garang a plane he himself had stopped using?” I would like to inform this House that that Saturday the President used that plane to fly from Rwakitura to Mbarara and the plane flew back to pick Dr Garang to take him home. The President yesterday in the statement gave an idea about the state of this aircraft. I just wanted to tell you the reason it was overhauled - because I saw a lot of write up in the papers today. 

The reason it was overhauled was because overhaul was due, due to time and calendar. The life of an aircraft is measured in terms of time, the number of hours it flies or the length of time it has been – even if it is not flying - it has been there. In this case the overhaul of this helicopter time and the calendar conceded and there was need to overhaul it. This aircraft was manufactured in 1996 by the Kazan Helicopter Company. These are the original producers or manufacturers of that aircraft and it was delivered to Uganda in early March 1997. We decided to take this advantage of overhaul to upgrade it and in addition to what the President said yesterday in his statement, I want to add that there was the following new equipment on board of that aircraft. 

The weather radar, which the President talked about yesterday, was actually a new weather radar and it has the capacity to detect or to give the information about the weather of an area of more than 100 kilometers. It has this Advanced Moving Map system - those of you who have travelled in some of these modern aircrafts actually the screen shows you where you came from, how far the journey has advanced, and your destination. It clearly shows you where you are going and where you are coming from and this had been fitted on this aircraft for the first time. 

In navigation equipment, it had dual equipment. It had the regional Kazan or Eastern European equipment, which was fitted new but in order to be sure that the navigation of this aircraft was not free of error entirely - but we are sure that if one went wrong there would be a backup - we had fitted Western navigation equipment. The equipment was bought from the West.  

It had a radio altimeter, which measures the height of the aircraft from the ground, the night flood and search light, which the President talked about. I want to add that this has a very wide angle, actually about 90 degrees on the left and slightly less than 90 degrees on the right because it is obscured on the right by the wheel. Therefore, it was able to fly even at night. Those who were there when President Clinton came, Mrs Clinton wanted to see Kampala by night so she requested that she and her husband fly over Kampala in their helicopter and this was a request of course we received in advance. We did look at what would happen, would President Museveni remain on the ground to receive President Clinton and see him off in his helicopter then Clinton comes to town alone? We, therefore, examined the usage of our own presidential helicopter and we found that it could fly at night and actually it did fly at night. They flew two Americans and one Ugandan to the airstrip and it arrived at night as you may recollect. They came in at night. Therefore, it had the capacity to fly at night and it was fitted with modern communication equipment not only between the aircraft and the air authorities but even with anyone because they had satellite, they had fax; you could talk to them directly from the ground. 

The plane went for overhaul in January this year and it was returned on 14 July 2005. Prior to its return we sent an inspection team, which went to carry out an inspection to ensure that what was supposed to be done in overhaul was done. 

The entire crew had gone for a refresher course from 14 January to 12 February in Kazan to be familiar with the new equipment and how they can operate this aircraft. There is no doubt, therefore, that we had done everything possible to make this aircraft as safe as it could be for our President. It is a great pity that it had that accident. 

The President has appointed a team to look into it. We shall know exactly what happened because the investigation of aircrafts and causes of accidents is well advanced in the world of aviation and I am sure that at the end of the day we will know the cause.

Allow me to give you the list of passengers. The delegation of Vice-President Dr John Garang included Lt Col Mayini, Lt Col Amati Marwar, Lt Aboki Obur, Lt Juma Mair and Lt Majok Deng Kanyi. Including Dr Garang, they were six. 

The Ugandan crew were led by Col Peter Nyakairu and included the Flight Engineer, Maj. Patrick Kiggundu, the co-pilot, Capt. Kiyimba, the jet officer, Lt Johnson Munanura, the signaler, Corp. Kiiza Hassan, the stewardess, Ms Lillian Kabeije Mugasi and the protocol officer who was accompanying Dr John Garang, Mr Sam Bakowa. All these perished unfortunately in this accident and I wish on behalf of the Ministry of Defence and on my own behalf to send my condolences to the families of all those who died in this crash. It is, therefore, with great sadness that I say farewell to my good friend who was a remarkable person in the struggle for freedom in Africa, a shinning light and inspiration. He touched so many. We have lost a very special person in our lives but his work and memory will live on in the hearts of all.

1.02
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to say a few words about the late Dr John Garang whom I have known for about 19 years. The Government has already made a statement and hon. Mbabazi has also given details so I want to restrict myself to my personal statement about the death of Dr Garang and the Ugandans. My heart and those of my people go to the wife, the family and the people of southern Sudan and SPLA/M in particular.  

I had an opportunity to meet him the last time he was here but one for about over one hour and I was happy to hear his vision about the new Sudan. I know he fought for justice and the dignity of the Southern Sudanese people who had been marginalized by the Arab North. I know that there is no timely death but I think there are some more untimely deaths than others and I think his was very untimely. He was very committed to Pan Africanism in his thinking and practice. He was very intelligent and very humane. He developed relationships with all types of people. 

In my work in this Government, those who were under me and I developed a personal relationship with him and he kept that relationship. If there was any tribulation in your life, political or otherwise, he made an effort to look you up and sympathize and I found that very important for a leader to remember his friends at all times. So, I really miss him and I hope as his wife said, his vision will continue. I support and I am happy that his wife was courageous enough to afford to make such a statement when she had just lost a husband.

I have to make one other comment about the statements made by leaders especially in the opposition. I would like in particular to talk about my friend hon. Ruzindana who cast doubt about the innocence of leaders of this country in view of this death. This is really unfortunate. In comparison, I would like to personally salute Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu –(Applause)- who dispelled any possibility of the leadership having a hand in this tragedy of Dr Garang. When I compare Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu and hon. Ruzindana, I find my friend hon. Ruzindana lacking in terms of leadership.  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Absolutely, say it.

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: Yes, there must be times when Ugandans can unite regardless of political differences –(Hear, hear and Applause) And the death of Garang should be such a time because Ugandans all over – I have been listening to BBC messages and I was happy all Ugandans were standing by the Southern Sudanese and the SPLA. I just thought I should make that statement. Otherwise, I join everybody in mourning the death of that gallant son of Africa, Dr John Garang. We also sympathize with the families of the other people who were with him, including Col Nyakairu, and the rest of the group. 

1.07
MR HILLARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kotido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. I came back from the North last evening and the atmosphere in Northern Uganda, particularly in the Acholi sub-region now, is of mourning. It is of mourning these gallant sons of Africa because the people of Northern Uganda, particularly Acholi sub-region had hinged their very high hopes on Dr Garang to end this LRA insurgency in the North. Therefore, his loss to our people in the North has been tragic. And I would like on behalf of our people in the North, particularly the Acholi sub-region, to express our deep sorrow to the family of Dr Garang, to the people of Southern Sudan and to all the friends and people who held Dr Garang dearly for the various causes, which he stood.

Dr John Garang actually stood for the dignity of the black people of Africa. He fought against the enslavement and dehumanisation of the black race, which was not only occurring in Southern Sudan but across all Western Africa up to Mauritania where up to date the black African race is being enslaved and oppressed and dehumanized. Right from Darfur up to Mauritania along the border, the interaction zones between the black Africans and the Arab people in Northern Africa are in conflict.  

I fully support the statement made by Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi. In fact that is the major point I want to labour on, that opportunism in politics has to have a limit. (Applause) We as the people of Uganda have to know exactly what can hurt us as a nation, distinguish it from our usual blubber mouth politics going on here, a lot of intrigue that goes on internally not joking for power position in politics; we have to distinguish that from what can threaten the lives of our people in Uganda and what can threaten the lives of Africans. We have to be Pan Africans and we have to be Ugandans.

First of all, we have to love our country and love our people and also be Pan Africans and love our other African brothers in such a way that what comes from our mouth, we must weigh it against those parameters. Unfortunately, some of our leaders seem to be very way behind, as Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi stated. I strongly support that position and I would wish that the leaders in this country would have to make a distinction.

I would like to end by calling upon all Ugandans to unite behind the peace process in Southern Sudan and also to unite together for the causes of Pan Africanism because the world is not only Uganda. We are just a small unit here and the world actually is a struggle. We have to struggle for survival as a black race and as Ugandans against all the forces that actually are also fighting to take advantage of whatever scenarios. I know that given the close relationship that our leadership particularly our President had with the late Dr Garang, it must be really an agony for the leaders. When our ordinary people in Northern Uganda are in a gloomy state, they are really – there is a lot of sorrow down there and I would like to once more reiterate our position and send our heartfelt condolences to the family of John Garang and the people of Southern Sudan.  

1.14
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I would like to convey my condolences upon this most untimely death of the freedom fighter Garang together with all those others who perished with him in the helicopter. This is a time when all Ugandans should be united in grief to ensure that we stand together at this time as a nation and as a people for this most untimely death of a great African and a great leader of the people of Southern Sudan. His death is most untimely because he had just reached the pinnacle of hope for freedom and peace for the suffering people of Southern Sudan.  

Therefore, all of us should look not at the small things that will definitely unite us but we should send a very clear message as a nation that we are still with the people of Southern Sudan and that the death in this crash is most regretted by all the people of Uganda.

When I was in Government as a Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, 1987 to 1989, the struggle for Southern Sudan had already commenced some four years earlier. There is no doubt, therefore, that in my official capacity I had this brief interaction with leaders of Sudanese People’s Liberation Army, especially Garang and even after I ceased to be a minister, I continued to have some contact though not directly with Garang. You must be aware that a lot of these Southern Sudanese were refugees in Uganda. They studied in Uganda and benefited from our resources and some of them, like the spokesman of the SPLA, Dr Samson Nkwanje, were our schoolmates. He was a classmate of Hilary Onek together with the Vice-President at Kisubi. He was one year behind us. 

Immediately I heard of this death I sent him a text message on my phone. We communicate. Some of us have maintained this contact with the people of Southern Sudan and, therefore, there is also a blood relationship between us the people of the North and Southern Sudan. Many times when I used to go to Sudan I would meet some ministers from the Shuruk tribe who speak Luo like me, who speak Langi like me and I would just communicate to them directly. There are a lot of Acholis directly who are on the other side of the border and, therefore, the struggle of Southern Sudan for the last 15 years - I first saw Sudanese refugees in my father’s home in Lira as far back as 1956/58 and some of them stayed in the mission next door to us. Some of them who could not get jobs in offices and so on became communal workers with the people. Some of them were teachers, some of them got married in our area, they went with our sisters and daughters back to Sudan after this struggle. 

After the first Anyanya struggle, some of them taught - I know of one who was a headmaster in my own constituency in Otuke East, he started Olum Secondary School, he was a teacher there, got married there and when I went to Sudan in 1987 I even met him. There is this close relationship at the political level. 

My message is that Uganda must continue to support the struggle of Southern Sudan for total freedom and peace. I am very proud that all Governments in Uganda since independence have supported the struggle of the people of Southern Sudan and I want to go on record that if there is anything I agree with President Museveni on, it is on the struggle of the people of Southern Sudan and I will join him on this. I may disagree with him on other issues but when it comes to the issue of Southern Sudan, we are allies. We must ensure that the suffering people of Southern Sudan who are being segregated against for reasons not - how can you segregate against somebody because of religion and race? Therefore, you fellow Ugandans must be united at this time. We cannot be divided on petty issues of here and there. 

Dr Garang was a great son of Africa and I want to join you and call upon Ugandans, I call upon Africa, the Presidents of Africa, the burial of Garang must as far as possible be seen as a centre of unity of all Africans. I am very happy that the United Nations represented by Kofi Annan was present in Khartoum at the signing of this peace accord. They must ensure that this peace accord succeeds globally. Southern Sudan is a huge area, about five times the size of Uganda and, therefore, we cannot allow people who are still divisive and racists who still think that if you do not support his religion, he cannot be part of you.

I conclude my remarks by saying that the death of Garang should not destroy the great step that has been achieved. I heard the words of his wife and I do pray that wives of leaders should be like Rebecca Garang. I was literally weeping when I heard the sad news but when I heard the words of Rebecca Garang, “Please let us not lose the vision of my husband. My husband has died but the vision remains. Let us not be divided.” This sort of thing was so great and I picked courage and I do hope that the wives of politicians should pick this great message from Rebecca Garang.

1.23
MRS MARY OKURUT (Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you Mr Speaker. Usually, when a great person like Garang dies, we writers break out in verse because he is above prose. Before I read this poem I just want to give one remark - and protect me from hon. Theodore Sekikuubo. I just want to add my voice to those of others who have spoken and say that when we lose somebody, when there is a human tragedy, it should surpass all other differences. I have already met my brother Mugisha Muntu in the canteen and I thanked him for having risen above pertinence and I condemned other people. So this is my tribute.

Oh Gen John Garang, what shall we not say 
In tribute to a soldier so great on such a day
No, we can’t narrow a life as notable as yours
In just BUT a few stanzas of poetry and prose
For you have lived for a cause far bigger than yourself
And you always put the service of your people above yourself sacrificing your time, your talent and training
So that your people could stand tall and walk proud

How are the mighty fallen, in the midst of peace!
Surmounting the bad times, only to perish in the good ones
How sad the voices ring and how dull the bells toll
At the passing of an icon of freedom and human dignity

Alas, the tragedy of carrying a pot from the well
Only for it to crash, breaking when you reach the doorstep

Sad is the tragedy of toiling through the wilderness, only to die at the edge of the Promised Land
But yet this is your tale, Oh, Gen. Garang; you that gave your all, so your people could be free
You have been a symbol of hope for a troubled people, a beacon of promise of a future and a hope
An ever-present champion of the rights of the oppressed;
You have walked the way that other greats before you did
You follow Samora Machel, Eduardo Mondlane;
and Patrice Lumumba.
For you have upheld the cause of African liberation and sustained the struggle to set and keep Africa free.

Though now you are gone, your work shall always continue 
To bring peace where war did reign
And restore hope like showers of welcome rain_
Never again shall the people for whose cause you died,
Suffer under the shackles of slavery_
Never again shall their children be taken away from them
As they look on in misery_
For you have done the deal and sealed their peasant fate;
To live their lives happily ever after

General Garang, now lying still and never to raise again,
To you be these humble thanks and words of gratitude
For you have fought the good fight and kept the faith
You have run the race and stayed on course

Now off you go to the Judge most fair
To receive the prize for which you paid the price
I can hear the sound of angels singing,
A joyful welcome at the golden gates
I hear the voice of the Judge of all,
Saying well done, good and faithful servant,
Come nigh here and enjoy your rest.

May your soul rest in eternal peace.

1.26
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Kutesa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion and would like to thank the mover of this motion, hon. Zziwa who is the Chairperson of the Foreign Affairs Committee. I think it is very befitting not only in her capacity as our chairperson but also as a Member of Parliament in her own right that she moved this motion.

I want to make a statement regarding how the Government is approaching and conducting the arrangements for the burial of Dr John Garang and the Ugandans who died with him. But before I do that, let me also make a few comments about Dr John Garang. 

I do not claim to have known him for a long time. Actually apart from meeting him occasionally in the company of others, I had only had deep discussions with him for the last two years. The first time I had such a discussion was in New Site in Southern Sudan with a delegation led by our National Political Commissar, which a number of colleagues and I were party to. This was the period he was involved in deep negotiations on the Comprehensive Agreement that was subsequently signed in Naivasha. In that meeting he spoke with great passion and conviction about the struggle that he had led and more so about the future Sudan that he wanted established and the new political dispensation that he foresaw bringing equality, justice and dignity to all Sudanese.

He seemed to bear no remorse or hatred even against the people he had fought against for so long. Rather, he was full of ambitious plans of integrating Sudan, making the system just in terms of sharing of resources and also raising its profile as a member of the international community. All this was very impressive especially his plan as regards Uganda and the region after the Comprehensive Agreement was secured. I am sure it was very exhilarating for all of us who attended that meeting and for those who knew him longer to see the Comprehensive Peace Agreement signed and to watch him on television as he was being sworn in as the First Vice-President of the Republic of Sudan and also President of Southern Sudan.  

Less than a month ago I had the privilege of flying with him to Kasese and then driving with him to Fort-Portal and back from a meeting with His Excellency the President soon after he had been sworn in. Again he spoke very passionately about the future and you could see that he had comprehensive and down to earth plans for the Southern Sudan and the whole of Sudan. 

His appeal went beyond Southern Sudan to Darfur and other regions like the Nuba mountains where there was still trouble and he hoped to be party to the solution in those regions. He spoke about infrastructure, business opportunities, investment and trade between Uganda, Sudan and the entire region and you could see from all he said that he was not only a gallant soldier but also a visionary with a plan after acquiring power.  

Mr Speaker, the President made a statement, which was read to us by the Vice President yesterday. I want to inform this House that the Cabinet met this morning and set up a sub-committee of cabinet to handle all preparations and arrangements relating to the events that will take place beginning today. As you know, the Government has ordered a period of mourning for three days and all flags are flying at half-mast throughout the country. 

Prayers have been organized and we are arranging the venue and what form they will take. There is a vigil that is taking place at Lugogo Indoor Stadium that has been organised and attended by Sudanese refugees and activists of Southern Sudan with the assistance of the Government. Members are welcome to attend that vigil over this period. 

This morning I received the credentials of the new Southern Sudanese Ambassador on behalf of the President, to enable him to begin work because he could not do so without having his credentials accepted. Now we can work jointly with the Sudanese Government, the SPLA and the family of the deceased to deal with the events that will begin today until the final one.  

The committee is chaired by the Second Deputy Prime Minister and is composed of the Ministries of Defence, in charge of the Presidency, Internal Affairs, Works, Foreign Affairs, Finance, Health and Information. We agreed to include the Ministry of Information so that all official statements can continue to be co-ordinated. Government will continue to inform the public about which functions will be taking place and when and this committee will, through my ministry, draft these statements.

I want to thank all colleagues who have come together and helped us. We have also formed a technical committee that is working on these events from respective ministries at the level of the permanent secretary. It has been said, and I agree, that we should all support the peace process that has been taking place and that we should encourage all the parties to continue with the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. In that regard, His Excellency the President who is chairman of IGAD will be calling an extra ordinary summit on the 20th of this month so that the regional members can re-dedicate themselves to this peace process and its implementation.  

Mr Speaker, I thought I should make this statement and inform this House and the country that this committee of ministers chaired by the Second Deputy Prime Minister will be informing the country on what is happening not only with regard to the burial of Dr Garang but also those of the Ugandans who were killed in this tragic crash. Our hearts go out to their families and relatives and we know that they all died in active service of our country. They will be remembered and we shall announce all the arrangements relating to their burial. I thank you. (Applause)

1.36
MRS BETTY AKECH (Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would not have wanted to speak after the minister but on behalf of the people of Gulu, the Acholi of Northern Uganda and all other tribes that fall between Northern Uganda and Southern Sudan, I would like to support the motion and send my personal condolences and those from the people of Gulu. Since yesterday they have been in shock and are continuing to ring me to find out whether it is true that Dr Garang is dead. We confirmed to them that the great son of Africa died in a plane crash.

I am saying this because just this year Dr John Garang was in Gulu with His Excellency President Museveni and because the people had heard about him but many had not seen him, he drew a mammoth crowd. People walked from as far as Didia to come and listen to him. Of course a number of people had mixed feelings about him but when they saw and heard him, they all went back saying that, “This is truly a great son of Africa.”  

He reassured the people of Northern Uganda and the Acholi in particular that since he had taken over leadership in Southern Sudan, he would try his best to ensure that the peace that prevailed in Southern Sudan would spill over to Northern Uganda. He also assured the people that they would relate very closely in a number of areas such as the culture, which is shared across the border, and development especially infrastructure and trade. 

The people of Northern Uganda had already started this relationship. We were about to send cultural and religious leaders to meet the people of Southern Sudan in an attempt to strengthen the relationship and bring permanent peace to both sides. I thought that this is something that we should put on record. We have appreciated what has been done and will continue to pray that the new leadership of SPLA/M will follow up on John Garang’s dreams and vision.

I met Dr John Garang a few times and saw in him a good and able leader, a quiet listener, somebody who responded positively to what people said, somebody who had a love for Africa and somebody who thought that Africans, just like any other race, deserve equal treatment in Africa and in this world. I also saw in him a person who had the character and ability to unify the SPLA/M. Of course they had their problems and therefore required a person with the ability and character of Dr John Garang to help them come together and negotiate the peace process.  

On behalf of the people of Northern Uganda and on by own behalf, I pray that Commander Salva Kiir who has taken over will continue to implement the Comprehensive Agreement and work closely with our leadership as Dr John Garang did. I also pray that he will ensure that the vision of a free Africa, which was the vision of John Garang and of our President who was his true friend, is carried forward. May the souls of Dr John Garang, his comrades and our sons and daughter of Uganda rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, could you simply say a one minute’s condolence for purposes of record so that we can conclude this?  I think this is how we should carry on from here.

1.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say a word of condolence upon the death of Dr John Garang. A lot has been said and I will not repeat it but suffice to put it on record that I also knew him a little bit. Before I came to this House and while I was still working with the Foreign Service, I was among other things a special envoy to the Sudan Peace Talks in Nairobi and I thought I should also share with you one thing that I saw in Dr John Garang.  

The document they were negotiating called, “The declaration of principles” contained about six issues and Garang stood out as a very principled man. I want to point out that all sides in the negotiating team first wanted to give priority to a unified Sudan but as negotiations went on, I could see other forces, which wanted quick solutions for instance that the southerners should form their own state. 

However, Dr John Garang stuck to his guns. He said, “I will give one Sudan a chance,” and that is the principle he stuck to up to the end of the negotiations. I thought I should thank him for being a very principled man. I send my condolences to his family and all the members of his negotiation team, which was led by Mr Salva Kiir, who is now his successor as Vice-President. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Capt. Mike Mukula): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I have two brief submissions. I join others to support the motion and I want to say one or two things about the statements that have been made in regard to this accident. I would like to thank the hon. Minister of Defence for his elaborate explanation on the type of equipment, the MI-172 that we had.  

As a professional pilot I want to say that aviation is the most regulated industry in the world. There are 12,000 MI-172 that have been manufactured globally in two factories. This particular helicopter was manufactured in Kazan and there are over 2,000 helicopters that have been exported and are flying. This particular MI-172 that we had was one of the best and well equipped aircrafts of all the MI-172 in the world. 

I want to say that Col Nyakairu had the longest experience in flying helicopters in Uganda. He had 30 years experience and was one of the most experienced African pilots. I have known Col. Nyakairu and I want to say very clearly and on behalf of the pilots in this country that an accident is an accident. If the Colombia Shuttle NASA aircraft worth US $2 billion and coming from outer space can crash, then what about a helicopter? US $2 billion, state of the art equipment! It was an accident and it happened.  

I would not want us to politicise this accident and it is a shame and very unfortunate that some people have tried to politicise even the obvious. I would like to say that we should allow the due process of the investigation into the accident, which is going to be carried out, to take its course. Let the report come out and then we will be able to articulate issues based on facts and not speculation.  

I want to conclude by saying that there was once a great freedom fighter and Pan-Africanist. He went to attack an island and he had a very strong group of excellent fighters. They came in with their boats and docked. The commander told these young fighters to destroy the boats. They looked at him and asked, “Sir, how shall we go back?” This visionary African freedom fighter looked at his fighters and said, “We came here. Either we win or they lose. There will be no surrender and there will be no retreat.” Garang was such a great freedom fighter. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

1.51
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. John Garang is dead and it is a shock. It is very sad and we feel a sense of loss and more so a fear of what will happen now that Garang is no more. Garang had a vision and he fought for it. He fought for human dignity, justice and freedom. However, allow me to think aloud and say that Garang is a hero but there are many unsung heroes who died for the cause of freedom. 

I have in mind Dunstan Wai who was a great African, Sudanese and a graduate of Nyakasura who worked with the World Bank and closely with Garang. I know as a fact that during the planning and in the strategies in anticipation of a free Sudan, Dunstan was at the forefront. He worked so hard but two months ago, before he could also arrive to the promised land, he died. It is saddening that so many of the people who nurtured ideas like reform policies, capacity building and the dignity of Southern Sudan have not arrived. Equally saddening are the deaths of our Ugandan colleagues like Nyakairu and the rest of his group. 

Mr Speaker, Garang is dead and we have paid tribute to him. However, we are left behind and if Garang was to resurrect in future, how would we be judged to be worthy of the praises we have given him? The greatest challenge for all of us is that the vision and ideas he fought for should continue so that if he were to resurrect, he would find that he did not die in vain. This is the challenge all of us must bear and this is the greatest tribute we can give to Garang. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

1.55
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I support the motion and I would like to convey our condolences to Dr Garang’s family, the relatives of the people who died and of course His Excellency the President who worked very closely with the late Garang. I am happy to point out that during this occasion no Member of Parliament has made an irresponsible statement –(Applause)- we have been united. However, some people outside this Parliament have made irresponsible statements and we have condemned those statements. 

My plea to those people like hon. Ruzindana is that they should apologize. If they apologize to God, to this country and to the relatives of the deceased I think it will make a difference because to err is human. When you have made a mistake I think you should apologize. Garang has disproved the widely held view that academicians cannot make good practical leaders. He was a very strong academician and he has done a good job because he was a good listener and he enjoyed teamwork. 

Some people have said that sometimes he was autocratic but can one avoid being autocratic when handling difficult issues? He used his brain to master the social and political terrain and to solve the problems in Southern Sudan. Let me also say that he was a facilitator of national integration. National integration is a very wide concept but let me illustrate the point I am trying to make. 

Sudan, like many developing areas, has lacked territorial integration that is establishing central authority over subordinate units or areas. For example the North had failed to establish authority over Southern Sudan. They also have the problem of elite-mass gap and need to reduce the gap between the elite and the masses. There are also problems of culture because people have different cultures and religions yet they have to come together. All these issues compounded the problem of national integration in Sudan. 

Worse still when oil was discovered in Southern Sudan, they had international “vultures” descending on the population thus compounding the problems of international integration. The late Garang, however, was a facilitator of national integration and never sought for the cessation of Southern Sudan. He wanted a system of government that would give space to Southern Sudan while relating to the North. 

Let me also point out that he assisted us in encircling Kony because previously Kony used to get sanctuary in Sudan. He gave notice to Kony and said he would assist us in encircling and paralysing him. Finally, I must say that the late fought a good battle. May the Almighty sustain the bereaved. 

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the members who have supported this motion and to thank the august House for paying tribute to the late Dr John Garang de Mabior who was born on June 23, 1945. 

He has been a Sudanese political leader, was born in Wagule village in Bolo Apana region and was a member of the Dinka ethnic group. He was educated in Gulune College where he received a BA degree and later joined the Sudanese military ranks where he rose to the rank of Lt Colonel. 

In 1983, he staged a military coup under his battalion 105 and fought the Islamic dominance of the Sudan Government. His group gained backing from Libya and Ethiopia and he was able to gain a stronghold throughout Southern Sudan. He refused to participate in the 1985 Interim Government and in the 1986 elections and thus he remained a rebel leader. 

He has died as the First Vice-President of the Republic of Sudan and the President of the new Southern Sudan. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I thank you for your contributions. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Lt Gen. Dr John Garang de Mabior, First Vice-President of the Republic of Sudan. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much. I think that you have really concentrated on this work and you need some rest. We have come to the end of today’s business but again I want to appeal to you to be diligent with your work. Apart from these interventions that have come up, which we never plan for, this week we should have handled and completed Bill No.3 and Bill No.2 because I am worried about the Budget.  

The Budget is the lifeblood of Government activities so if we do not deal with it we will have a problem. Please, come in big numbers tomorrow so that we can clear some of the business we have. Since tomorrow is a Wednesday and is therefore a Cabinet day, I adjourn the House until tomorrow, 2.30 p.m. prompt. 

(The House rose at 2.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 August 2005 at 2.30 p.m.)


