

Thursday, 18 August 2016

Parliament met at 2.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. First, I would like to read to you a letter from the Inspector General of Government (IGG) for your attention. It is dated, 18 August 2016. “The Inspectorate General of Government online declaration system was launched on 16 August 2016 by the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament.” I reported that to you. “We received names, email addresses and phone numbers of new Members of Parliament, and subsequently sent them invitations to declare using the IGG online declaration system. However, out of the 198 invitations that were sent, only 20 Members of Parliament have submitted. That is about 10 per cent.” The IGG requested me to remind Members to fill the form and submit using the online declaration. The deadline for submission is 31 August 2016.

Since the launch, the same has been instituted at the Ministry of ICT headquarters to help Members of Parliament. You could go there but this will end tomorrow, 19 August 2016. Please find a way of filling the declaration form. For those who have iPads and computers, please submit so that you are not caught by the Inspector General of Government.

Secondly, the first one hour of today’s sitting will be used for Private Members’ Business as per our Rules of Procedure. 

2.30
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance and I have two issues. On Monday, 15 August 2016, there was a lot of rain and wind that affected the people of Kashongi County, particularly in the parishes of Rwanyangwe, Byanamira and Kigando. On that day, five villages of Rwanyangwe were affected, mainly their banana, coffee and cassava plantations. Five houses fell down and one woman sustained serious injuries and she is admitted. On the same day, seven villages in Byanamira lost a lot of food and cash crops. Also, the seven villages of Kigando had their cash and food crops affected.

Madam Speaker, it is on this note that I request the Government of Uganda, especially the Minister of Disaster Prepardness to avail relief aid to the people of Kashongi who lost their food and cash crops and houses.

Another area of national importance is on health. Two weeks ago, I drove to check on my voters who were admitted at Mbarara Hospital. When I reached the hospital, I discovered that there was shortage of drugs, manpower and other resources. Two days after I visited the hospital, the two patients I had visited passed on. May their souls rest in eternal peace. 

Madam Speaker, Kashongi County has two health centres. Kitura sub-county that became a sub-county in 2001 has a health centre II, which should have been upgraded to a health centre III because it became a sub-county in 2001. 

Kashongi County Health Centre III has seven medical staff out of the required number of 19. In 2014, an OPD building was constructed at Kashongi health centre III but unfortunately, because of poor supervision during construction, the building has already got cracks and the walls are almost collapsing. I call upon the Government that there is need for supervision when it comes to Government projects. 

Madam Speaker, Kashongi Health Centre III should have been upgraded to a health centre IV because we are now a constituency. I, therefore, call upon this august House to help and upgrade Kashongi health centre III into a health centre IV. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

2.35
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance I am raising is to do with the continued sale of counterfeit products on our markets. In December 2014, an investigation done by Interpol, Uganda National Bureau of Standards and several brand owners in Kampala Metropolitan area confirmed that most products on Kampala markets were counterfeit.

Surprisingly, most products, which were discovered and proved to be substandard in 2014, are still on the market today. Last week, some television stations like NTV, NBS, UBC and WBS run stories of fake electric bulbs that were on sale. Many things we use are counterfeits. For example, the cosmetics we use such as Caro Light, Mekako, electronics, seeds, agricultural chemicals, alcohol products, beverages like quencher, fruit juices; Kimbo, biscuits, baby powder, medicines, construction materials, vehicle spare parts, computers, phones,  among others. All these were found to be fake in 2014 and most of them are still on market, even today. 

Madam Speaker, these products are all over the country and we are buying and consuming them. This poses a health risk to us the consumers. During campaigns from August last year up to February this year, in my constituency; Bugangaizi East, we used to have a very good alcoholic drink called Nzuli. We used to taste it during campaigns. When I went back after our swearing-in, I was told that, that drink was banned because it was unhealthy. I had consumed some bottles with some other people in Bugangaizi East. 

Therefore, I am wondering why Uganda is a dumping place for these fake products. Why is UNBS doing post-mortem reports? UNICEF comes in when danger has already happened. Why can’t it be empowered to control all this?

Madam Speaker, in the current law, when a person is found selling substandard goods, they pay a fine of between Shs 3,000 to Shs 7,000. One can even pay Shs 10000 and not ask for the change in case he/she is arrested or found selling these substandard products here in Uganda. We need to be protected from businessmen who are greedy and profit oriented, and who do not care about the future of our country or our health. Madam Speaker, I request this august House to do something in as far as this issue is concerned. I submit.

2.39
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

There is a place in my constituency called Tisai. It is an island, which seems Uganda has forgotten about. When I joined Parliament, I was given mileage, which did not cover that place, meaning that even Parliament was not aware that Tisai was part of my constituency.

For your information, Tisai is an area, which occupies a third of the landmark of the largest sub-county in my place. This island has a lot of people who that we always go to and convince to vote for us. After voting, we leave them there. They do not have a health centre, not even a health centre I. They do not have a road or school.

Even animals in the game park have doctors to attend to them. When we complain about poor service delivery, I wonder what people in Tisai are saying, because they would prefer to be given poor service delivery as they look for better services. 

Madam Speaker, I am also of the view that you kindly request the Prime Minister to visit the island and see for himself because these people are always genuine when we convince them to vote but we neglect them as soon as the elections are concluded. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils from St Agnes Girls’ Boarding School, Nagalama, Nakifuma County represented by hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko and hon. Peace Kusasira. (Applause) You are welcome.

2.42
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public importance, that was partially raised yesterday on the Floor by a colleague representing the Ik; about the zebra crossing. 

However, this one is particularly on the accident-prone road called Parliament Avenue. Members who have offices in Development House face difficulties in accessing their offices. I must appreciate plans by the Parliamentary Commission to construct a flyover above this road. However, this may take a bit of time or even ages. It is my considered view that the Commission also recommends stop-gap measures. This is a narrow road that has two-way traffic, and our motorists and cyclists drive recklessly; they have no regard for other road users. One time, a Woman Member of Parliament took almost 10 minutes to cross until I offered to help her to cross the road.

Madam Speaker, Occupational Safety and Health Act provides for employers to provide an environment, which is free from any hazards. Members of Parliament are employees of this institution and need special attention to be given to them just like other arms of Government - for instance, to access State House, there are barriers that you have to go through and this is a stop-gap measure. 

Similarly, we could have either traffic policemen to regulate the flow of traffic or humps to compel motorists to slow down or barriers like those on the Nakasero road access to the State House. Therefore, I request that something is done and soon. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I will answer that later.

2.45
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadari East County, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance to do with natural disasters in my constituency of Budadiri East.

On 12 August, 2016, heavy rains devastated an area in Budadiri East and the epicentre of these disasters was Bugitima sub-county where the rains led to numerous landslides that destroyed crops and also caused the death of one human being.

In summary, 20 cattle, 50 goats and a number of chickens were killed. One hundred bee hives belonging to a model farmer were also destroyed. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to pray as follows:

That NAADS provides the community with some onion seedlings. The community that I am talking about grows onions on a large scale but most of these onions were destroyed.

Under the restocking programme either in the Office of the Prime Minister or the agriculture ministry, we pray that the animals that were lost are restocked.

We request the Ministry of Works and Transport to assist us with culverts so that we can fix them on the bridges that were destroyed. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.48
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance. Yesterday, my people in Loroo and Karita sub-counties in my constituency informed me of their concerns because in one and a half months, they have lost 110 cattle to disease.

Amudat District and the whole Karamoja region is renowned for cattle keeping. Most people keep cattle as security and as a sign of wealth. When people are losing their cattle like this, we cannot reach middle income status by 2020.

Madam Speaker, I call upon the agriculture ministry to do the following to save the situation: one, build animal laboratories in Amudat District in order to test animal blood and enable correct diagnosis of diseases which will enhance the use of correct drugs. Two, build a cattle crush or dip to reduce the tick burden -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR KIPTERIT: Most of these diseases are caused by ticks. We also ask for tsetse fly traps because there are many tsetse flies in that area; we ask for a modern demonstration farm so that local cattle keepers can learn from it. Finally, we pray for improvement of our local breeds by crossbreeding to improve animal production. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.50
MR MICHAEL TUSIIME (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to street children and abuse of drugs.

Aware that the Ninth Parliament enacted a Narcotics Drug and Psychotropic Substance Control Act, 2015 purposely to strengthen the control of abuse of drugs such as marijuana and khat and to provide tougher punishments that are deterrent in nature for both users and traffickers.

Madam Speaker, direct reference is given to my constituency where there is growth in the numbers of street children. The consumption of these drugs has endangered the public because of acts of violence exhibited by drug consumers. These acts of violence include but are not limited to snatching of hand bags and causing bodily harm to pedestrians.

I wish to call upon Government to put these laws into action, carry out enforcement and help to rehabilitate some of these drug users and also counter local production, importation and consumption of these drugs.

I further request Government to assist the Police to build capacity to enforce and implement this Act that was enacted by the Ninth Parliament. I thank you.

2.52
MR OJARA OKIN (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to rise up on an issue of national importance.

The matter that I am going to present is related to a previous issue raised last week on the Floor by hon. Beatrice Anywar on the deteriorating security situation in Kitgum District.

On Friday, 12 August, I was in Chua West County constituency with my colleague, hon. Margaret Lamwaka, for her thanksgiving prayer. While there, I found out that on 3rd August, a soldier belonging to 401 UPDF military brigade who was guarding a water point in Pajimo, Akwang sub-county was attacked by unknown young men, beaten up and his gun taken; fortunately, the soldier was not killed.

The Brigade Commander, Lt Col Sam Rwamutwe, in an attempt to look for the stolen gun, effected the arrest of some suspects. Two issues emerged out of these arrests: one, on the night of the 12thAugust, seven soldiers were deployed at night to go and arrest one of the suspects, George Petina. The suspect was arrested but during the arrest, the other family members panicked since the arrest was effected in the night and they did not know who was executing the arrest. Five of the family members, including the father of the suspect, decided to follow the suspect to ascertain who was carrying out the arrest.

One of the seven soldiers opened fire on these five civilians who were following their arrested relative and one 23 year-old man called David Oryema was shot at and his jaw was shattered. He is now nursing his wounds in Kitgum Hospital. His brother, Kenneth Lubanga, was shot on his forehead and succumbed to the bullet wound.

Madam Speaker, this is serious violation of human rights and it is a matter that has to be seriously investigated, especially the illegal detention of some of the suspects that are still in the barracks up to now being tortured and the shooting and killing of an innocent boy and his compensation. Those who were exercising illegal authority over this matter should be brought to book and face the arm of the law. I rest my case.

2.56
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding Uganda’s national football team; the Uganda Cranes.

As we may be aware, we last qualified and played in the African Cup of nations in 1978. Mathematically, that is 38 years of waiting. On 4 September, 2016, which is less than 20 days from today, we are set to face Comoros national football team in the 2017 Africa Cup of Nation’s last group game at Namboole, in Kampala.

Our national football team, up to now, has not received any support from the Government of the Republic of Uganda. This is the only golden opportunity that we may have, with our last match being played at home, to qualify for the Africa Cup of Nations. May I, therefore, seek clarification from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Minister of Education and Sports on what we have in store for Uganda’s national football team in terms of preparation for the 4 September 2016?

Most of our national football players are foreign-based. They must travel back, train together and eventually face Comoros national football team. What do we have if, less than 20 days to the match, we have not yet supported our national football team - the Uganda Cranes?

2.58
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Recently, churches in my constituency, and most especially Catholic Church, have encountered a very serious problem; where they are being raided and broken into by unknown people. Last month, St Jude Catholic Church in Malaba was vandalised: the Altar shattered, the Statue of Mother Mary thrown down, the hosts eaten and the wine drunk by unknown people. 

On 9th July, Kwata Catholic Church was also raided by the same group of people that are unknown to date. Again the Statue of Mother Mary was vandalised and the hosts and wine taken.

On 10th August, Oriyol Catholic Church was vandalised by a group that is still unknown and also disorganised everything as they did to the other churches I have mentioned. Yesterday, another church was raided and the same thing happened. 

Madam Speaker, I represent a constituency that is along the border with Kenya and this constituency has porous borders. This has turned out to be a very serious issue, so much that these days on a Sunday, when Christians go to church, they start asking themselves whether they are going to a church that has been vandalised like has happened every Saturday and Sunday.

I am asking security to take this issue very seriously, because you never know who is doing this. To make matters worse, it is only the Catholic Church –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR ANGURA: By the Statue of Mother Mary being vandalised, that is a very serious problem because you never know who is doing this and their intentions. This issue has raised a lot of concern and the district is trying to make follow up but no arrests have been made. 

I ask this august House to consider this as a very serious issue and ensure that security does what is expected of them; to restore order and sanity in this area. Thank you very much.

3.01
MR APOLLO YERI (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of this House to a matter of public interest in my area.

There is an issue of eviction of Government-aided schools whose premises are being taken by land grabbers. Government of Uganda and parents have invested a lot in the development of education services in Tororo Municipality. However, this effort and development is going to be lost to land grabbers who are going to evict our school from their current site.

This school is Rock High School and it became a government-aided school in the 1960s. It is the biggest mixed day and boarding school with both ‘O’ and ‘A’ levels. The student population is about 3,000 with 156 teachers. Both Government and parents have worked very hard to develop this school by putting up classrooms and laboratories.

As we talk, there is a notice by one, Mr Bakama Ali Emma of Post Office Box 1924, Kampala who has given the school 14 days’ notice. 

There is another primary school called Rock View Primary School. I know that some of you studied in this school. They are also facing the same eviction. There is another school called Salvation Army Children School, which is the oldest orphan and homeless children’s school -

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR YERI: In conclusion, what is the Ministry of Education and Sports doing to save the school? How is the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development going to handle this issue? In regard to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and specifically the Privatisation Unit, what does the law on possession of departed Asian properties say in relation to properties that have never been claimed? Are Asians allowed to claim this property at any time? 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this document on the Table requesting for investigations and subsequent action to be taken by the three ministries that I have mentioned.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Honourable members, Government has 25 minutes in which to answer so you will know how to share the time. However, let me answer the question raised by hon. Nambeshe. 

First of all, the Commission is aware that our Members are sitting on that side. We had requested KCCA to install a zebra crossing but they installed what they call a pedestrian crossing, which is different from a zebra crossing. We are still waiting for the upgrade to a zebra crossing. 

However, on a long-term level, we asked the Government, last year, to handover to us the Prisons Service department across the road and the Ministry of Lands so that they can become part of the precincts of Parliament but this has not been done. Therefore, the road still remains a public road and we cannot stop traffic from moving there. 

However, now that the Government has heard from you and not just the Commission, I hope that they can be able to do what we needed: to get those properties to become part of Parliament. We would then close the road so that Members would be able to move any time without boda bodas and traffic on that road. That is our problem, hon. Nambeshe. I now ask the Government to respond.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The interventions you are making are very good, but from the numbers I see in the House, is it necessary to close those roads? You can imagine that these chairs are now empty yet for a few days, they were full. I am getting worried because it is just two months down the road and the House is empty. Isn’t it procedurally right -

THE SPEAKER: Where were you yesterday? (Laughter)

3.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are ministers here who will answer specific questions, but I wish to use this opportunity to throw more light on the request to take over the building across. As Government, we took it seriously but as you may be aware, that building hosts the Prisons Service, the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development, and they had just installed some gadgets. 

Therefore, since Government has the responsibility of looking for offices for the Uganda Prisons Service and the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development, we could not evict them without prior arrangements of where they will go. Government is looking around to make sure that the Uganda Prisons Service and the Ministry of Lands are shifted to an appropriate place as we settle Parliament. Therefore, Government is doing something and we regret the inconveniences caused.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Two questions were asked regarding the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. One was from hon. Denis Obua who asked, “What does the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have in store for our team?” If we could know what they need from the store, we would work with the Ministry of Education and Sports to ensure that they are facilitated to participate in those activities.

The second question was on the property of the Custodian Board. Yes, there is a law that governs this and we have a board in place. Anybody who wants to re-possess the property follows a laid down procedure. Therefore, I encourage hon. Ofwono to advise likewise. We will take the documents that he has laid on the Table and he should advise the relevant people to follow the set procedure. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. I know why you asked me where I was yesterday; it is  because you had assigned me to do some work. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has raised an issue. Amin compensated all Indians and there is a record of those compensated. This means that all the assets that were left by the Indians belong to the Government of Uganda. Who are these people who are still issuing re-possession permits when we know very well that Amin, the President then, paid them?

Madam Speaker, the record was laid here before Parliament, I think during the Seventh or Eighth Parliament. It is in Bank of Uganda and if the minister has a problem, we can get him a copy.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I do not have any problem and I do not understand the question of hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I think it is important that he settles in the House before we have a debate on this. This is because we have replied the question that was asked by hon. Ofwono.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you know very well that you gave us TVs in our offices and one can watch the parliamentary proceedings. I came here because I saw that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was about to speak, so, I am very conversant with the question. 

My colleague asked about the process of re-possession and I am saying that these Indians were compensated by the then Government of Idi Amin. Therefore, these people have nothing. Is hon. Bahati in order to tell me to settle down when I have already settled down? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati is your friend. I think he just wants to talk about you. Can we have the Minister of Health?

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the issues raised by the honourable member about health concerns in his district. I request him to give us time to investigate the issue so that we make a comprehensive statement to the Floor of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are two areas: the lack of a health centre in Tisai Island and the Kashongi issue concerning a health centre III. We look forward to your answer.

DR MORIKU: Thank you. We shall cater for all that.

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, a number of issues have come up regarding the consequences of the long awaited rains that have resulted into storms ravaging different parts of the country. 

I would like to inform the House that a number of constituencies have reported this challenge to us and we are compiling all the information that we have received, including this issue that the colleague has raised within Sironko. We will take appropriate action and inform Parliament of what we have done. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of State for Animal Industry is here. Can you, please, talk about the animal diseases, hon. Joy Kabatsi?

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The disease killing most of our cows comes from ticks. The investigations carried out reveal that the acaricides in the country are 100 per cent okay. However, the problem lies with the way we mix them when we are spraying our cows. 

The farmers need to be assisted and we have now resorted to employing extension workers in helping them to do everything possible to ensure that the ticks are killed. There are four types of acaricides imported into the country.  However, I need to warn those who have cows that one of them carries the molecule called Dual Dip. If you use it, it means that you will be left with two other acaricides and you need to be assisted by a veterinary doctor to ensure that you use these drugs properly. 

What has been suggested is that we need to zone our areas. In areas where cattle are reared, the cattle keepers have to work with us Parliamentarians. We have to zone those areas so that we know what acaricide is being used in a particular area. Do not over use it and do not let the blood shots give you any type of acaricide. 

Zone your areas and know what type of acaricide your farmers are using for six months. Do not let your farmers change acaricides each week because we only have four types of acaricides. If the four types are misused, the ticks will then develop resistance. 

There are about 30 farms in Kiruhura whereby the ticks have developed resistance to the acaricides. We are going to zone them and make good use of our veterinary doctors. They have checked the cattle and we now have one blood shot that can work for them. Therefore, we are already working to help them do away with these ticks. 

The honourable from Amuru was asking - in 94 districts, we have trained one technician per district, who will carry out artificial insemination. We have to change these animals through artificial insemination so that when we get to the market, the animals will do whatever we want. 

Whatever cows will be given in the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) will be in-calf; those are cows that will deliver good quality breeds. Members of Parliament, I beg that you make sure that what your people get is good product; in-calf cows.

The technicians area already trained; our Entebbe nitrogen factory, had been down for some time, it is now working. For the last two weeks, it has been operational. The technicians are also already trained and our nitrogen in the factory is now working. 

Those who have money can buy semen for their cows; we are going to get down with semen to those who have cows and want to shift. We are encouraging people to do this because we have had a success story as far as milk is concerned. We also have new abattoir and we are now encouraging people to start farming so as to get animals for beef as opposed to milk ones. Any assistance you will need, please, get to any of us in the ministry and we shall try to do our best. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Internal Affairs available for his statement? Can we require the Minister of Internal Affairs to come back to us on these three questions?

3.22
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for being prepared and indeed, she has spoken off-cuff. (Laughter) How I wish the Prime Minister could also pick a queue from the stamina and ability of the minister –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Ssekikubo in order to insinuate that the Prime Minister does not have stamina? Is he in order to assume that he has to borrow stamina from the junior staff without substantiating where and when he measured the stamina of the Prime Minister? 

Is he, therefore, in order to misuse the rare chance you have given him to come up and thank a minister who has presented a statement? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, unless you can inform this House how the Prime Minister has failed, you will have to withdraw what you have said. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I was speaking in terms of being able to field a question and give a substantive response. We have gone on record here on the Hansard and said that we need to give the Prime Minister ample time prior to the answering of questions. 

However, I am now saying that since we are under the Commonwealth parliamentary system where prime ministers field questions and give answers, it is in that light that I was - 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member. I am satisfied that the Prime Minister has always been ready and has always answered the questions. Please, withdraw your statement. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister has stamina. (Laughter)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE UGANDA BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICE

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, at the Fourteenth Sitting of the First Meeting of the First Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, which was held on the 11 August 2016, hon. Tonny Muhindo raised a concern over the limited blood collection and storage centres in Kasese, and requested that collection and storage centres be extended to more health facilities, including private ones.

I am here to present a comprehensive statement on Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, in regard to the concern that was raised. The Uganda Blood Transfusion Services is semi-autonomous; centrally coordinated in the Ministry of Health but the ministry is responsible for all blood transfusion activities for the entire country.

The Uganda Transfusion Services operates within the framework of the National Health Policy and a Health Strategic Plan. The Uganda Transfusion Services, through its vision and mission – Madam Speaker, this is my maiden statement and for that matter (Laughter) - I request that I complete the statement uninterrupted.

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to make her maiden statement first. (Applause) 

DR MORIKU: Through the vision and mission, it is mandated to make available adequate quantity of safe blood and blood components for the clinical management of patients that require blood transfusion at all health facilities. That is the mandate of Uganda Blood Transfusion Services.

In terms of geographical coverage, the services have grown from supplying blood within Kampala; that was centrally within the radius of 100 kilometres from 1989. It has now spread to seven regional blood banks. We have it in Arua, Gulu, Mbale, Nakasero, Masaka, Mbarara and Fort portal.

Each regional blood bank has the capacity to collect, store, process and distribute blood to hospitals within their geographical location.

The blood banks are supported by other eight centres that collect and distribute blood and we have them in Angalu, Lira, Soroti, Jinja, Hoima, Kitovu, Kabale and Rukungiri. These centres do collect blood, they store it under cold chain, send samples to regional blood banks so that the samples are tested and are ready for distribution in the hospitals around; the aim is to bring the services nearer to the people within the respective hospitals.

In terms of funding, Uganda Blood Transfusion Services receives funding from the Government of Uganda, for which we are indeed very grateful. This funding has supported infrastructure development, mobilisation for blood donation, blood donor recruitment and blood collection, blood testing for HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis B and C, including blood grouping, as well as monitoring, evaluation and training for support for the staff.

However, we have challenges and one of the key challenges is meeting national demand for blood, against the few centres we have. The centre is constrained to expand blood collection capacity to meet the increased national demand. This requires additional resources for human resource and finance so that we can increase the collection from the 22 centres to 25 teams.

According to World Health Organisation, a country’s blood requirement should at least be one per cent of the total population. With a Ugandan population of 34 million, we are so far able to collect 240,000 units annually, as opposed to what is required of 340,000 units of blood annually.

Madam Speaker, the second challenge is about infrastructure. Much as we have received funding from the Government of Uganda, the transfusion in terms of infrastructure is still inadequate, with some of the centres operating from few borrowed rooms within the regional hospitals and such cases are in areas like Arua, Masaka and Moroto.

According to the health sector strategic plan of Ministry of Health, each regional referral hospital was earmarked to have a regional blood bank but out of the 13 regional hospitals, we only have built purpose structure for five regional hospitals. We only have five regional blood banks. It leaves us with a deficit of eight regional blood banks that need to be constructed.

As a result, to construct a purpose built regional blood bank, it requires Shs 7.68 billion. Unfortunately, the money we have been receiving for capital development is only Shs 370 million. With all the background I have given comprehensively about the Ugandan Blood Transfusion Services, I would want to categorically state this very clearly that the Ministry of Health is not in position to extend the services of blood collection and storage to other health facilities, including private ones, given the constraints that we have.

However, if we go to the statistics that we have, out of the total blood we collect, 50 per cent transfusion goes to children under five due to severe malaria, 30 per cent goes to women because of pregnancy related complications. For that matter, I would like to appeal to all of us to embrace health promotion and prevention. If we are able to prevent most of the diseases that we have like malaria that requires blood transfusion, we will be able to save our people from blood transfusion. Thank you colleagues, for your patience. (Applause)

3.35
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo East County, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for coming up with this statement, as a response to the issue that I presented to the House. It has been clearly presented by the honourable minister. The Ministry of Health is doing all it can to ensure that there is enough blood for the people. However, it is also clear that we have gaps and it is these gaps that made me present the issue because Ugandans, and Bukonzo East in particular as I reported, are dying.

We are speaking about blood that is the only source of life. If any of us was invited to any function of draining your blood, I am sure no one would show up. We are talking about children, women and men who are dying. 

It is very important that the honourable minister gave consideration for more bleeding, storage and distribution facilities. I would beg that on top of the statement that the minister has given, having categorically presented the challenges, there would be respective prayers for additional funding to the Ministry of Health but also allow the private facilities that are ready to offer the unavailable funds so that we have blood available in these health facilities.

I would like to wind up by requesting that the minister consider this. It is not about politics, buildings but lives of the people in the country. Thank you.

3.37
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya East County, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for her statement although she shot herself in the foot when she said that each regional blood bank has the capacity to collect, store, process and distribute blood to hospitals in the geographical area.

One time my brother had an accident in Namutumba and got internal bleeding. He was rushed to Iganga and because of my name, the doctors were ready to help me; they operated on him but there was no blood.

They gave me an ambulance to rush to Jinja where there was blood in plenty but there were no personnel to give out the blood. Therefore, you will realise that it is not about blood being there but sometimes administrative weaknesses. People were there crying for blood but there was nobody to give out blood because the person in charge was in Kampala. By the time he arrived, some people had died though luckily, my brother survived.

I would like the minister to know that sometimes it is not about blood being in the hospital but some administrative issues like personnel not being at their desks. Thank you.

3.39
MR NATHAN NANDALA MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri West County, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also going to ask maiden questions. (Laughter) The minister said she wanted protection because it was a maiden speech. What is wrong with that?

Madam Speaker, I would like to first thank the Minister of Health for coming up with a statement like that one. However, if you asked Members here - I have heard one saying that he went to Jinja to get blood; blood is not grown like tomatoes or maize; it is donated. Among you, how many have ever donated blood? You can see that we are very few. (Laughter) That means the majority want blood without donating. Therefore, you should not ask why blood is not there when you are not giving blood - (Interruption)

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information, because hon. Nandala mentioned that Members should develop the attitude of donating blood. I want to inform this House that not all blood you donate is useful. Therefore, that needs to be clarified - (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you senior colleague for giving way. It is not that most of us do not want to donate blood. I was almost arrested by police when I was mobilised by Dr Kiiza Besigye to go to the Constitutional Square and donate blood.

They chased us from the City Square and the then minister rose up and said that Uganda has enough blood; and it did not need ours. Some of us want to donate but fear police arrests. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you can see it has generated maiden information. Given that these are my colleagues who are starting to speak, can I allow them to speak. I have allowed this one too.

THE SPEAKER: Are you taking over my work?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, she has sat down. Madam Speaker, we must be ready to donate blood. Having donated blood, I have also been in hospitals. For example, I was in Soroti Hospital. There was no blood because the equipment that is supposed to keep blood was non-functional. If a whole hospital cannot function what about Bwala health centre where I come from, will it function?

Government must invest more in facilities that keep this blood. Honourable minister, since you have just given a maiden speech, how many of these regional hospitals and health centres have functioning equipment that keeps blood?

Thirdly, decentralisation of blood; accidents do not only occur in towns. They even occur in villages. What plan do you have for putting blood even up to health centres II? 

I was in Kibaale recently –(Interjections)– You see, I hate people who just laugh. If you go to Kagadi, Kibale, it is as if they are not in Uganda. The roads there-we might have to bring UNRA to take them over. There was a woman in labour in a place called Rwakashabire; but to take her to Kagadi Hospital, you had to pay Shs 15, 000 for a motorcycle. The place where this woman was trying to deliver, they were using traditional birth attendants and she was over bleeding. Therefore, you cannot assume that blood should only be in regional hospitals; it must be everywhere. What plan do you have, honourable minister, of decentralising blood in health centres because there are problems in villages? 

Finally, we have discovered that blood is very precious. Why should Government give free blood to private clinics which charge money - we know everybody who goes to a private clinic has cash, instead of leaving this blood in Government clinics.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, the question you are asking was answered; that is the question hon. Muhindo had asked. It is because you were watching proceedings in your office, that is the problem. (Laughter)

3.46
MS JUDITH BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. Concerning the blood banks and collection, I would like to bring it to your attention that Buikwe District does not fall in Jinja or in Mukono. So, in cases of blood issues, Buikwe together with our sister districts like Kalangala, Buvuma, we all have to go to Jinja which is very far. 

I pray that the minister would find a way to give us a central blood bank, which would serve that region as Jinja and Kampala are very far. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.47
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement she made and I would like to bring to the concern of this House one incidence that happened in my district.

We had a blood donation week but the complaint that I received from the residents was that when they go to the hospitals, they are charged money for blood transfusion. 

I do not know whether the minister is aware of this but she must do an investigation to help Ugandans because the reason Ugandans do not donate blood is because they give it free and they are charged money when they are sick. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.48
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I am Shadow Minister Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Allow me to thank the minister, because of all the ministries the most important one is health. To me health is wealth because if you are not healthy, then the other work cannot take place.

Honourable minister, my concern in your report is where you said that unfortunately you are receiving only Shs 350 million for capital development. You have been receiving only that amount of money for the last five years, which is not adequate to construct a regional blood bank. Are you saying the problem is the budget constraint so that this House can look into that, or you are saying it is not necessary? That is my first question.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I interacted with the minister and she said she was in Gulu; there is a regional blood bank in Gulu. Unfortunately, my daughter was admitted in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital from the 4th to the 8th August and she needed a blood transfusion. They said there was no blood and nothing was done within that period. 

The second issue that comes with that admission that I wanted to raise to the Speaker last week, which I think is appropriate for you to answer now, is that Gulu Regional Hospital has a private wing, and in the private wing, within these four or five days of the admission, the bill was Shs 678,500.

When I called the hospital administrator to ask why the bill was that big, that is when my daughter was released from the hospital without paying it. What about the other people who are being admitted and are not of my status?

Are there private doctors in these private hospitals? Are they using a private laboratory to do the investigations? Are they using private drugs that they are securing and where is that money being collected and taken to? Is it coming to the Government or going to the pocket of individuals? Thank you.

3.51
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for that eloquent presentation.
 
Everything else can wait but not health because with health, you are dealing with lives. I would like to bring it to your attention; sadly, every day in my constituency, on the average we are burying about six individuals. You know what that means to a Member of Parliament. Our business is on the people; we lose when people die.

Madam Speaker, my other degrees are in health. I picked interest as to why people had started to die at that rate. I found out that we have only one hospital that is Bwera Hospital and it is literally non-functional.

I used my first salary at Parliament to repair the ultrasound scan in that hospital and also the x-ray. Just yesterday, I wrote a note and brought this to the attention of the Minister of Health and I said in Bwera Hospital, we do not have an ultrasound scan; we do not have an x-ray -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sorry when you ask a question in response to what she has said, it must relate to what she had said. Now you are in ultrasound, x-ray, outpatients - no.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise guidance and now when it comes to blood, I border with hon. Muhindo. The stores are not there; the facilities are not there; the people that are supposed to -(Member timed out.)

3.54
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement and also for correctly recognising that prevention will help in addressing the issue of the shortages of blood. 

When we were growing up, we were told that when you feed your cows very well, you can have much milk from the cow. I correctly see that Uganda requires 340,000 litres of blood.

I am wondering since many of the diseases that have been cited by the minister in the statement especially Hepatitis B can be prevented through vaccination; and records show that three out of 10 people in northern Uganda normally test positive for Hepatitis B. Even if we mobilise people to come and donate blood, if the people are not healthy, we cannot reach that target that the minister is mentioning.

My prayer to the ministry is that let us translate our words into action; we have been crying in this House and even in this sessions of Parliament about the vaccination of our communities against Hepatitis B. We were told that the ministry does not have money or has a budget shortfall. Can we now go back to the basics and say, “if we really need healthy blood, we also need people to be healthy.”

Secondly, you cannot draw blood when people are hungry. Blood is made from food that we eat. We know very well that the drought that we have been talking about in this House has affected many of our people. In the north, people are hungry. How do we go and draw blood from people who are hungry? I think we need to feed them so that these people can give us enough blood.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I invite the minister to answer. However, I would like to remind the Members about Rule 37 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It reads, “Questions may be asked of ministers relating to public affairs with which they are officially connected, proceedings pending in Parliament or any matter of administration for which those ministers are responsible”. The minister has been asked about money in the private clinics; she cannot know. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to state this clearly that the question that was put forward was expanding centres for collection and storage of blood. The ministry was not asked about blood donation. We were not asked about Hepatitis B in relations to blood and others. Madam Speaker, allow me to answer what we were requested to present. 

Concerning the issue of Kasese, we will need to pick keen interest and find out what is in Kasese. For now, I cannot promise that the ministry will extend centres. We just need to find out exactly what the problem is in Kasese. Otherwise, I would like to say that we want to consolidate these eight regional centres so that once they are consolidated, we probably get the district hospitals to draw blood from the regional centres and take it to district hospitals. From the district hospitals, blood should be taken to health centres IV and health centres III.

I agree with my colleagues about the administrative issue. Sometimes it might not be because of lack of blood, but administrative issues. That is one thing which we can look at. If it is Jinja Hospital, specifically, we will go to Jinja and see how we can address that issue.

My brother has raised an issue about functionality of some of the equipment we have. I would like to state that most of our facilities have got the refrigerators that we use for blood storage.

Concerning the bringing of the services closer to the health facilities, we still have centres that collect and distribute blood. We will go along with those centres.

Madam Speaker, that table you see about the financial year in the statement I have presented, shows clearly the funding gaps that we have. It shows the actual needs of the blood service versus the approved budget and the deficit that is in existence. I do not want to take a lot of time but this shows clearly that expanding more regional blood centres or collection points will need money. Of course, there is already a deficit as of now. Members, you will agree with me that the reason we are not constructing more blood banks is not that we do not have the money or the capital is little but we have budgetary constraints.

There was an issue about charging money –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, when listening to the minister, it occurs that probably the problem is much bigger. Blood is just one leg in the health sector. I raise this because I sat here listening. On Tuesday this week, death occurred at the Law Development Centre. A student was knocked down on Sir Apollo Kaggwa Road. After reading, he went to the road to pick something with colleagues. He was rushed to Mulago at 11.00 p.m. but he died at 5.00 a.m. without receiving blood or even having anybody at the casualty wing to attend to him.

When we have blood alone, it may not address the bigger picture of the health sector of this country. Wouldn’t it be prudent, therefore, that an opportunity is availed to the minister to prepare a comprehensive statement about the health sector in this country? Probably, by the effort of this Parliament – of course, together with Government – we can find a way forward. If we do not do this, achieving Prosperity-for-All as well as middle income status by 2020 shall remain a pipe dream. 

I think we are asking too much from the minister – to demand answers that she herself appears unprepared for. May I propose that an opportunity is availed to this House where all Members can bring in views from the various parts of the country? If the devil is amidst us right here at the national referral hospital, then you can imagine what is happening in the countryside.

Wouldn’t we be procedurally right to allow the minister and her team to come up with an extended and comprehensive statement about the health sector in this country so that we as people’s representatives can put our heads together and find the way forward. Otherwise, we are just scratching one aspect of blood transfusion but the problem is much bigger. It is just the tip of the iceberg.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether what you want is not what is contained in the policy statement. I do not know whether you want an account of how many aspirins or syringes we have. I do not know. Is that what you want? I do not know how big it is.

MR SSEKIKUBO: With your permission, Madam Speaker, I would like this Parliament to be given a wider statement on the functionality of the health sector and the provision of health services in this country. That way, we would then be able to have the link between the personnel and facilities up-down with a view of finding the way forward for the patient who is on the death bed or casualty wing or patients in the villages – patients right from health centres II up to the national referral hospital.

That way we shall be debating from a informed position –(Interruption)

MR OUMA: I agree with my colleague that the problem that should be investigated is bigger. I was with hon. Walyomu in Jinja Hospital last month. He had a patient and I moved with him inside where we met a boy of a round 12 years with a broken leg. He had been taken to Jinja from 5.30 p.m. and it was approaching 9.30 p.m. and no attention had been given to him.

When we asked the parents, they said, “People come, pass and go”. We took our time. When we knocked and saw the doctor, the first reaction was almost an abuse to us – “Get out of my face” even after introducing ourselves. And I kept wondering why a young boy was languishing when people who are maybe known to someone, were seeing the doctor.

Madam Speaker, the issue is bigger and it needs a very thorough interrogation so that we can find out how doctors behave towards patients. We also probably need to come up with a Bill to protect the patients. How are the patients protected when they go to see the doctors? That is the concern I wanted to address. 

MR SSEKIKUBO:  Madam Speaker, I think that would be a worthwhile effort by this Parliament so that we do our part rather than trying to scratch on the blood transfusion alone. Suppose the blood is there, where are the facilities? How about those who are transfusing or administering this blood to the patient? Madam Speaker - (Interruption)

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of setting up more blood banks and transfusion cannot cure the problem. The actual problem is the functionality of the institution.

Madam Speaker, all over the country, Ugandans are complaining. For one to get blood, they must pay money. And until that problem is solved, even when we set up many blood banks, the perpetrators will continue saying they do not have blood because they want money from Ugandans.

Honourable minister, we should carry out an investigation into the infrastructure of these institutions. That is the information I want to give.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am trying to design the parameters of the state of health. It is different from the state of economy because we know what it is in our rules of procedure. I am just trying to think how big is it going to be? What are the key areas we want to be addressed to, which the minister should come with?

MS EGUNYU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to seek clarification from the minister. We all need these services at all levels. Whether health centres II or III, the fact is that we need those services. I actually thought this problem was because of financial constraints; that maybe Government does not have money to manage health center IIs and IIIs. 

However, from the minister’s statement, it is clearly that money is not the problem; the problem is budgetary constraints. May I, therefore, know the difference between the two? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you tell me what that comprehensive statement would include because I would like to know how big or small it is going to be and what exactly we would like to address? Is it the buildings? Is it the accompanying infrastructure? Is it the personnel or it is the supply of drugs? Where do you want us to stop?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, you are on the right track. Taking from what colleagues have been raising here – for instance hon. Genensio Tumuramye raised a point about Kashongi Health Centre III, which has only seven out of the required 19 personnel. That shows that indeed there is need to look at personnel; and in looking at these personnel focus on how they are motivated.

Secondly, Government is grappling with senior consultants in our hospitals. However, when you consider it with the remuneration of doctors, you realize there is no way you can attract doctors who have fled to Nairobi, South Africa, who are at Case Clinic and those at other high-end private hospitals - you cannot call them to offer their services to Mulago. Therefore, we should look at the personnel.

Thirdly, let us look at the facilities, like drugs in hospitals. We have a health centre III in Lwemiyaga. However, when they are delivering the drugs, you see huge boxes but inside them are only papers. There are no tablets, no injectables and completely nothing yet they continue saying that they are waiting to receive drugs. So, the drug chain should be looked at right from the National Medical Stores – (Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of blood transfusion is very crucial. Daily we are losing lives –(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have addressed the issue of drug transfusion. He has requested for a state of health statement and that is what we are addressing now. Leave the blood issue because we have finished it. Tell us how we do it? That is what we are asking.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. I second what he has raised. However, if we bring every aspect, it will be too broad. I, therefore, wish to propose that we narrow it to facilities, how operational they are the issue of human resource and the drugs so that we can do some assessment. Thank you.

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to what has been raised, I would like to also suggest that when the minister comes to make a presentation, she should not forget the issue of preventive healthcare. This is because whatever quantities of medicines we will get, there will always be a demand for medicines and blood in the health centres. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to request for a list of the drugs that are given to the respective health centres II and III. This is because you will realise that some of the drugs may not be at the health centres III and yet this is where most people go for treatment. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I think this statement should indeed be broad because it will help me know what I have always wanted to know. 

Madam Speaker, I feel that this statement should also encompass issues of policy shift because recently, we were told that Government is going to shift away from health centres II to focus on health centres III. In my constituency, I have about four health centres II, so I would like to know when you are making this statement on the status of health in this country and what your projection is on upgrading those health centres II to health centres III. Also, in the subcounties that do not have facilities, it would be good if Government informed us when the health centres III will be constructed there. 

Madam Speaker, this is a policy matter, which I would want to come out clearly in the statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know; it seems everybody has something to include in the statement. We have a budget session where the heads of the committees discuss all these things. However, now you want a report on the state of health separate from what the health committee presents. I do not know how big it is going to be; it is really a problem.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At the risk of sounding controversial, I actually, like you, would like to understand what the value of this statement would be. 

The minister today has outlined the challenges in just one sector. There is no money in the budget to construct blood related facilities yet every year we receive a policy statement from the Ministry of Health. If you open it and looked at the funding gaps, you would know why we have problems wherever they are.

If the hon. Ssekikubo and others want a statement, maybe it would explain whether a solution has been found. The minister is a minister of Government and Government is supposed to give people hope but she is telling Parliament that there is no money. Every year, they are supposed to collect 340,000 units of blood but they are collecting only 240,000 units. She further says that the storage facilities in the regional referral hospitals are not there and that those who are responsible for blood are just borrowing rooms.

I think we need to admit that we are in a crisis. Government should not come here to lament like all of us are doing. The other day, we received the State of the Nation Address and the President said Uganda is a supermarket because we are always donating money out; he was literally crying! The minister is also literally crying. 

So, the hon. Ssekikubo should help us understand this beyond what is listed in the policy statement. The policy statement is also just another lamentation. Let us go home when we are happy sometimes. Are we inviting more lamentations from Government when we actually know that this is kisanja hakuna muchezo?

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am constrained to raise a point of order against my senior brother. He said that during the State of the Nation Address, the President was literally crying before the nation. The President of the country, the Chief Executive of the country! What I know is that the President made a statement to guide the nation. He told us what was going on so that we can guide the population.

Is hon. Ssemujju in order to say that the President was literally crying when the nation was watching?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the President and the country were very happy; so, he is out of order. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the colleagues who have raised the issues regarding the state of our health. However, the issues that are being raised can be better handled if the Committee on Health, which plays an oversight role, goes to the field, writes a report and presents it to the House so that we debate from a point of information.

Otherwise, I know that the Ministry of Health presented a policy statement. We know what we have presented, although maybe some things are not going right. However, these can be better handled by the Committee of Health, which is well facilitated by the Parliamentary Commission. They should go out, identify these problems and present a report to the House so that we can debate from a point of information. 

To require a minister to say how many hospitals or health centres there are and their distribution - We really have a gap and it can be bridged by the Committee on Health. I still would like to suggest that this issue goes to the committee before the House can debate it. I beg to suggest.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to encourage hon. Ssekikubo to take up that proposal. I would also like to remind the Members that in the Ninth Parliament, the Committee on Science and Technology took a countrywide tour of the technical institutions in this country and brought a report here. That is why today, we have the Ministry of Science and Technology.  Therefore, hon. Ssekikubo, let us allow the committee to do that.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I agree with you and the minister because our debates here should not be in vain. However, we come up with this so that we can tell Government that whereas they are doing well in many respects, the moment they do not sort out the health sector, the country cannot be sorted out. Therefore, I agree with you and I request, Madam Speaker, that you direct the appropriate committee to take up the matter and then Government can be called to put its hut in order and we find a way forward.

MR BUKENYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to reassure the Members of Parliament that we are aware of these issues and we have already notified the Office of the Speaker. We are going to start countrywide tours and we shall be able to present our findings to this Parliament for debate. You should rest assured; we are working on those issues.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The committee is directed to do as they have been planning and come back with the report as quickly as possible.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 31 MAY 2016

(Debate Continued)

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, yesterday you were supposed to inform us about the remittance of funds to local governments. I do not know whether you have an answer yet. There was an issue raised here that some local governments have not received money.

4.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, if I am given five minutes, I can get that information to the House.

4.24
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the honourable Members of Parliament for the interest they have shown in the State of the Nation Address, which the President made to the House on 31 May 2016. The depth and breadth of the debate and discussions that have followed since the address was made are a firm demonstration of the serious nature of the content therein.

As we conclude this debate, I wish to draw the attention of honourable members to some of the issues that were raised by the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition in her response to the State of the Nation Address. First, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for her response and also for acknowledging that despite some challenges, President Museveni and the Government of the National Resistance Movement have made tremendous strides in the development of our country. (Applause)

The Leader of the Opposition, however, falsely stated that democracy is not some grand idea delivered to us by self-styled freedom fighters. Madam Speaker, this is not only erroneous but also misleading. The National Resistance Movement and the National Resistance Army and freedom fighters in Uganda are the very reason we are in this august House today. (Applause) They are the reason as to why Uganda is what it is today. It is because of their sacrifice that Uganda has made tremendous development.

This country witnessed instability, bad governance, coup d’états, arbitrary arrests, extrajudicial killings, gross human rights abuses and many other things. For the last 30 years, however, the National Resistance Movement and its government under the leadership of President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni has reversed this trend and restored the dignity of our people. (Applause)

If I may digress a little, Madam Speaker; to talk of the liberation struggle against bad regimes in Uganda as if it is fiction is really a distortion of the facts. I am extremely happy that some of those who presented themselves to liberate the country are physically with us here in this very House. I am glad that Maj. Gen. Pecos Kuteesa is available as a good example. (Applause) Those who do not know him, there he stands. I am also glad that he has also documented this struggle. The very fact that 27 armed young people attacked Kabamba on 6th February is well known. Therefore, any attempt to talk of fictitious and/or self-imposed freedom fighters is, in my view, misguided.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the Leader of the Opposition was presenting, we allowed her to speak without interruption. This is the Leader of Government Business; let him speak without interruption.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for that protection and wise ruling. This Parliament and the Executive are a result of the democratization process brought by the National Resistance Movement. In appreciation of this, the people of Uganda, in February this year, responded by electing President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the NRM Government with 60 per cent of the votes and about 300 Members of Parliament, all elected in support of the Movement. This is clear evidence that the people of Uganda are still solidly in support of Government and the Movement. (Applause)

How could the Leader of the Opposition say that it is frightening to reduce democracy by equating it to mere representation of different groups in Parliament? I would like to inform this august House and the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition that these groups are not only in Parliament but they are in every elective position in Uganda.

The presence of marginalized groups in Parliament and other levels of leadership is a key element of building democracy and removing distortions of the past. It is clear from the assertion of the Leader of the Opposition that these marginalised groups do not matter, according to that statement. I, therefore, would like to advise these groups as well as those who support these groups to seriously take note of this view by the Leader of the Opposition. 

Furthermore, the Leader of the Opposition made a sweeping statement that our democracy is on indictment and in an intensive care unit on account of some election petitions. Election petitions are normal in a democratic process. The law that this august House put in place is such that if one has a problem with elections, they can go to courts of law. More importantly, a number of these petitions are linked to fraud in the electoral process. The President was very clear on this matter during the State of the Nation Address; he identified the mistake of careerists introducing the issue of money in electioneering. He made a pledge to deal with this problem, which will be part of our efforts to strengthen democracy.

Madam Speaker, I thank the Leader of the Opposition for acknowledging that the numerous reforms, which were undertaken by the NRM Government under President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni since 1986, helped our country achieve sustainable economic growth over the past several years. As the President noted, our economy has tremendously expanded from $4 billion dollars in 1986 to $27 billion in 2014, and the economy continues to grow on a sustained basis and the prospects for accelerated growth are very bright.

The NRM Government has come up with, and will continue to introduce, measures to ensure that the expanding economy benefits all Ugandans. Government is aware of the challenges in the economy and the President, in his address, made specific reference to a number of these challenges, spelling out Government interventions as well. Let me assure this august House and the country at large that the NRM Government has set 23 strategic priorities that are mainly focussed on strengthening economic competitiveness and growing the economy.

The leadership of the NRM under President Museveni has put into place the legal regime meant to fight the scourge of corruption in the country. In addition, the NRM Government is demonstrating action in a number of high-profile investigations and prosecutions of public officials involved in corruption. There are many cases to demonstrate this; these include investigations into the pensions scam, the Katosi scam, the OPM scam and the scam concerning the bicycles for LCs, among other cases. I have just given a few cases to illustrate what Government is doing.

Madam Speaker, our major challenge has been capacity to investigate. We have made a commitment to strengthen the capacity of investigating agencies and this is happening right now. I must salute Parliament for appropriating funding for these agencies. 

Madam Speaker, I am happy to note that the Leader of the Opposition has pledged to rally the Opposition to work with Government to make corruption in Uganda a risky business by building more active partnerships with anti-corruption civil society organisations. This is indeed a very commendable position she has taken. Combating corruption is not a partisan issue because it affects all of us. We, therefore, must work together to expunge corruption from among the political leaders, the public servants and the general public; fighting corruption is fighting for a common good.

The NRM Government has heavily invested in increasing access to service delivery in health, education, agriculture, water, rural roads, rural electrification and many other programmes. Many Ugandans today have access to most essential social services. The challenge that we are now addressing is the quality of service delivery to our people. 

We extensively discussed this matter last month at the national leadership retreat at Kyankwanzi. We agreed on a number of measures to remove all the major bottlenecks to quality service delivery.
Ugandans should expect significantly improved service delivery by Government in this “kisanja hakuna mchezo”. This is not sloganeering; we mean business. (Applause)

Uganda is secure, peaceful and a key player in regional peace and security efforts. I salute the Leader of the Opposition for applauding President Museveni for his accomplishments in building a strong national defence force, stabilising and securing the country. We pledge to strengthen the engagement between the Executive and Parliament on issues of peace and security.

I take note of the areas prioritised by the Leader of the Opposition. The President has prioritised a number of related legislations on which work has already commenced. As Leader of Government Business in Parliament, I will engage with the Speaker to ensure that emerging issues, including those from the Opposition, are given due consideration. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition and all the Members of this august House who contributed to this debate for their varied but valued responses to the President’s State of the Nation Address. Government has taken note of the specific demands and concerns raised during this debate. As part of Government’s implementation processes, I am directing the respective ministers to give due attention to these issues. As the Leader of Government Business in Parliament, I will follow this up with the concerned sectors, and Government will periodically keep you updated on the progress. Madam Speaker, I thank you and beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. I do not know whether the sector ministers will have something to add. 

Hon. Anthony Okello was away with my permission but there is something that he wished to raise with the agriculture minister. Please, use a few minutes.

4.42
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As we conclude this debate, I would like to thank you for creating this exception and allowing me the opportunity to raise this matter on the fisheries subsector. This is a matter that may be very instrumental to this sector.

Like the President has observed, it is really regrettable that attempts to regulate fishing practices and manage and conserve the lakes were frustrated. As a result, it has created serious economic and social imbalances.

Madam Speaker, I wish to note that for a long time now, the fishermen and traders have been living in pathetic conditions, arising out of torture that has been orchestrated by authorised officers appointed to enforce the Fish Act of Uganda. It is unfortunate to note that matters of enforcement have always been done by people who are not necessarily technical people in the area of fisheries. As a result, there has been a lot of beating, molestation, shooting and death.

In my constituency, which is predominantly a fishing area, the enforcement effort is now characterised by unfavourable public opinion and conflict among stakeholders, including very many issues to do with corruption and increased illegality and use of force under minimal technical supervision. I have noted what the President stated in his address about the illegal fishing officers who have become the fish poachers. I would like to state that the President was just spot-on – (Interruption)

MR OUMA: My constituency, Bukooli Islands County, is entirely in the water and makes –

THE SPEAKER: It is an island constituency.

MR OUMA: Yes, that one. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that I share the same sentiments with my colleague. On 11 August 2015, His Excellency, the President of Uganda, directed the Ministry of Agriculture, the local government ministry and the Inspector General of Police to suspend all the activities of the fisheries officers because they had become a menace. One of the reasons why His Excellency did this was because these officers were extorting money and mistreating the fishermen. 

I want to report to this august House that at the beginning of this month, the same fisheries officers extorted money from the fishermen and those who did not move according to their wishes were arraigned in prisons. Around 50 people are in Buyinja Prison because they failed to give them money. 

I want this august House, Madam Speaker, to cause the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries to inform this House whether the directive His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni made on 11 August 2015 has been rescinded. The President did also direct that these officers who are practicing illegal fishing and extorting money from people should be prosecuted. The Minister of Agriculture should tell us how many of these officers have been arrested and prosecuted before the courts.

Let also the Minister of Agriculture inform us -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now smuggling. Hon. Anthony Okello, please complete.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I beg to allow only one Member to give information. Thank you.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, hon. Anthony Okello. I also come from a constituency called Bulamogi County where part of the economic activities arise from fishing. 

I am interested in finding out from the Minister of State for Fisheries whether by statutory instrument the ministry cannot regulate the importation and sell of illegal fishing gear. This is because the illegal nets, which are used to deplete fish stock in the lakes, are sold openly. In fact, when they arrest people, these people ask us why these nets are imported and sold openly to them and then after that they are arrested. So, can’t the ministry, using a statutory instrument, ban the sale of this illegal fishing gear? Thank you.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for the information you have given. As I conclude, I wish to applaud His Excellency the President for the various interventions he has suggested in the State of the Nation Address, which I think if applied properly can bring sanity to the methodology currently being used in enforcement. However, I also hasten to add that the strategy proposed should be applied in a way that protects and promotes human rights.

Further, it has always been my desire that we have an audit of this sector. This is because we have lost a lot of money and people have been put in place to do enforcement but we are not seeing results. So, if we could audit this sector, especially on the aspect of legal compliance and also trying to establish the extent to which the intervention of the taskforce has yielded results, I think it would be good for us. It is only then that the people appointed as authorised officers can be persons of integrity and high calibre, who possess details to supervise and coordinate activities of enforcement. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know where the Minister of Finance is; he was supposed to give us an update on the remittances to the local governments but he seems not to be here.

4.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL HUSBANDRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Honourable members, the fish industry is in trouble and it is a big task but we are working hard on it.

Members suggested that we should create an authority and we started working on it. However, just the day before yesterday when we met the President, he was not in favour of creating a fish authority. So, Members, we are working around the clock to put things right on our lakes - the fishing gear and everything you are talking about. We are aware of these and the minister is going to come and give a full statement on how we are going to move forward on this. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the minister. Indeed, what you have stated is okay, however, there is need for an authority.

As we talk, there are foreigners who have imported tractors, which are getting sand from the lake - go to Luzira - and yet these are areas where fish breeds. So, if the sand is being excavated from the middle of the lake, it means that our fish in Uganda is going to decrease. That is why sand is becoming expensive in spite the fact that we still have sand along the shores in our districts, for example, Kalungu in places like Lukaya and Lwera.

Therefore, the concerns about fish in Uganda should not be handled lightly. I have seen Members applauding because the President refused the creation of an authority. However, we must dig deeper and find out how much income fish brings and what type of fish we have in terms of quality vis-à-vis the fish from other countries outside Africa or even within Africa. The issue of fish is not just about fishing but the quality that goes to the international market. That is where Uganda beats other parts of the world.

Some of you take flights, go and see what happens at Entebbe. Go and see your friends; they are exporting dry fish and it is very marketable. They export Tilapia and Nile Perch. However, look at a situation where people have imported tractors - I do not know the name of many of those machines but let me call them tractors for my safety because I do not claim to know good English. I just sought clarification and I am finishing. This House should take interest in the issue of preserving our fish –(Interjection)- Am I allowed to give way for information?

THE SPEAKER: You even smuggled your way to the microphone.

MR SSEWUNGU: I smuggled my way here and the Speaker was very good to me. As I conclude, I call upon Members to carry out some research. We used to see Nile Perch and the biggest would be bigger than a wheelbarrow, but these days it is not even bigger than my head. (Laughter) That is the clarification that I need. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: We would be interested to know whether those people who are mining sand are investors. Did someone get an investment licence to come and mine sand? This is a serious matter! What are they doing in our waters? Do they have a licence to be there?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I can give you this information, and at an appropriate time I can give you very good information with evidence. These are the so-called investors.

You see, our country has no limit on what type of investors they bring in. I have heard a minister talking about investing in rolex making - hon. Geoffrey Kiwanda, my good friend - but now you are going to find rolex investors taking up that business. It is just because while we have the laws, they are not followed. These people are investors and they are bringing in expensive machines and are now selling that kind of sand very expensively. We must take care.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we continue, I think we should direct the Minister of Agriculture to come and explain to us who is in that water. Are they investors? More importantly, we want to know whether they paid the $100,000 which they are supposed to deposit as investors in this country.

4.55
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto East County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am glad that the Minister of Agriculture was also once the Chairman LCV for Masaka District, before that district was split. He is, therefore, well aware about what is happening in Lwera.

Madam Speaker, as one drives from Masaka to Kampala, they will notice that the entire Lwera area has been encroached on by the so-called investors. Recently, in Mazigo, one of the wetlands, the Vice-President launched a project which is going to be manned by the Chinese and they called it an industrial park. The environmental impact assessment has not been given to anybody, and these are the problems we are facing. When it rained, the whole road was cut off –(Interjection) 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, hon. Ssempijja knows very well that just next to him, they have a setup called “China City”. At first I thought it is was real city with buildings and so on but it is a sand city. They are digging up the whole place and one may think they are constructing fish ponds but they are just scooping sand and that is why it is referred to as “China Sand City.”

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, my humble request is that we should not take this as a simple matter. Let it be investigated further because I know that there are some individuals who are benefiting from this at the expense of ordinary Ugandans. 

The Minister of Agriculture should give us more information because it is –(Interjection)– I would not want to say that he is involved, but I know that he knows a lot about it. (Member timed out)

4.57
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi West County, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to say that the issue of sand-mining is an obvious fact that cannot be disputed. It is all over the place, especially in the wetlands which are the breeding grounds of the fish. Actually, these people have very high-level technology and they are digging deep and creating other lakes out of sand mines, an activity that is scaring away fish. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to inform Members that we cannot keep creating authorities - an authority on fish, goats, cows! I think the President is right; what is the justification for creating these authorities? Are we failing as ministries and/or departments of Government? Why are we calling for the creation of authorities on everything? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before the minister comes up, I want to say something about that authority. At the end of the Eighth Parliament, we amended the Fish Act and in that law, there is a provision for creating an authority. It is in the Act; people are not just dreaming about it.

4.59
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just unlucky that I was born in Lukaya near Lwera where sand has been scooped all the time. I found the activity there and I am likely to leave it there. 

Madam Speaker, the only problem is that construction has of recent gone up and the sand, which used to be collected from Entebbe area around Kasanje and Mukono, is finished and now people have resorted to Lwera. The only thing, which we have acted upon and which is within our mandate as Ministry of Agriculture, Animal industry and Fisheries, is scooping sand from the lake itself. For that one, we have instituted enforcement to stop it. However, scooping sand from those other areas does not fall within our mandate but is also an obvious case. Thank you.

Madam Speaker, if people want to be satisfied, I will tell you that all these buildings that you see coming up use sand and it is not within the mandate of the Ministry of Agriculture to stop the use of sand in construction. That is what I said.

THE SPEAKER: No, I would like to know if it is the Chinese who are selling that sand to Ugandans. Do Chinese come here to sell sand to Ugandans? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: China city belongs to a Ugandan, a son of Masaka. He only used the word “China” but he is not Chinese. (Laughter) The Chinese who are scooping sand are in Mpigi District in Mawokota, which is represented by others, not Ssempijja. However, the sand they are scooping is exported; that is what I hear. It is sieved and exported to be used in the glass industry, a thing we do not do locally here.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a few weeks ago, I heard the President say that certain jobs should be ring-fenced for Ugandans. Who is implementing that? A Chinese comes here to get free sand, exports it and gets money and yet we have unemployment here! (Laughter)

MS KABANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday I brought up that issue and I want to inform our Minister of Agriculture, hon. Ssempijja. I am giving you information because you come from Masaka and you see whatever takes place there every day. 

The Chinese – and there are many companies, not one, within Lwera – have heavy duty machines and they are excavating our sand and taking it away. What I asked yesterday was: where are they taking that sand while we, Ugandans, are just looking on? I think this must be investigated. 

I also questioned the way in which these investors are given licences. They need to be assessed such that we get the real investors. Otherwise, for the so-called investors who have come to take free land, we shall not just look on as Ugandans. Thank you.

5.05
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, now that the ministers are responding to the queries raised by Members as they debated the State of the Nation Address, I think it would be a good opportunity for me to put this House on notice; the President made a statement that certain jobs and departments should be protected for Ugandans and the Speaker raised a question, which I also want to formally raise: Can we be told specifically which minister or ministry is following up this presidential directive? 

That was a heavily loaded patriotic statement. In Egypt, to employ one non-Egyptian, you must employ 11 Egyptians because the ratio is 1 to 11. So you have to make up your mind as to whether you are employing a foreigner or an Egyptian. However, in Uganda, there is no ratio.

Madam Speaker, other than putting the House on notice to bring a motion for the minister to tell us the practical measures they have taken to implement the President’s directive, can we be told which ministry specifically is going to follow up this matter raised by the President? If the Government cannot help us, then we shall use the local people to make life hard for the non-Ugandans. There is also that option. Therefore, can we be told precisely which ministry is following up this presidential directive, Madam Speaker?  

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform this august House that even those investors in Lwera have got land titles issued by the Masaka District Land Board and Kalungu District Land Board. Recently, at my law firm, I received some Chinese clients and they requested me to file an application to those aforesaid land boards, seeking to have registrable interest in parts of the Lwera wetland. 

As a matter of fact - and this particularly goes to my friend, the honourable Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - the Chinese we see in Lwera have land titles. Therefore, they are registered proprietors of prohibited pieces of land in this country. That is the information I would like to give. 

5.07
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to supplement what hon. Mugoya and hon. Odonga Otto have said, as well as the honourable minister. 

Madam Speaker, this calls for the ministers of this country to have inter-ministerial meetings. It seems the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Local Government are not on the same page. How can somebody have a land title in a wetland? 

We are talking as Parliament about the issue of destruction of the biodiversity of this country. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries says he does not have the power to stop anybody from mining sand in the water. What about our fish? Are you not concerned about the fish in the waters? 

I think this is unethical and we feel that – (Interjection) - With your powers, you are a full minister and if it is not the Minister for Agriculture then the Minister of State for Fisheries should take charge so that our fish are protected so that we can export them. The President is lamenting about us importing more other than exporting; why are we destroying our fish? 

Madam Speaker, this query also goes to the Minister of Energy and Minerals and if she is not here, I urge the Prime Minister to take this up. I do not know whether the representatives of Busia are here but if you went to Busia, you will find that the investors are putting the people there on a time bomb. The local population as well as those mining minerals, especially gold, are also involved in this. It is hot underground and anything can happen any time. 

As much as we are inviting investors into this country, let us regulate them. Otherwise, we are not going to achieve what we want to. Thank you so much.

5.09
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Lately, it seems the Chinese investors have become very powerful people in the country. Along the Kampala-Jinja Road, they have reclaimed all the wetlands. They are so powerful that I am afraid that even our ministers may not be able to handle them. 

Recently, the Minister of Labour, Gender and Social Development inspected one Chinese factory. No sooner had he left than the labourers who had spoken to him were dismissed and nothing was done thereafter. We are now talking about the Chinese sand city and the honourable minister for agriculture said that this is a city which belongs to a Ugandan he did not name. I wonder who the mayor might be. 

It should also be noted that some Ugandans nowadays are used by these Chinese to register companies and disguise that they belong to them. I witnessed one who imported about 500 vehicles into Kampala and claimed that they were his. However, behind him, there were Chinese who had gone into the taxi business while this “big person” was pretending to be the owner of the taxis. That is how Ugandans transact business lately. 

It is also saddening to see that the Minister of Agriculture cannot draw a relation between the wetlands surrounding Lake Victoria and the lake itself. He has just told Parliament that he is only interested in those people mining sand from the lake but does not care about those mining sand in the wetlands. He does not know that this wetland at Lwera is part of Lake Victoria and it is even in his constituency.

Madam Speaker, I got information that the people mining sand in the lake registered a transport company here. They came to Uganda to invest in water transport and they informed the country that they were going to bring vessels for transport on the lake, which made us so happy. We thought that we had got an investor in that direction because we have a problem with transport on our lakes. However, instead of transporting passengers across the lake, they have resorted to mining sand, and recently one of their ships even caught fire. 

Where is the police in all this? I know that the Ministry of Water and Environment has environmental police; where are they? Where is Government? Where are the people who are charged with ensuring that we protect our lake? It is so saddening that a Ugandan fisherman with a canoe is arrested and tortured for fishing fries and yet there is a businessman mining sand from our lakes. 

The chairperson of Wakiso has been making a lot of noise about this business by the Chinese but he has not been assisted. I, therefore, would like to request you, Madam Speaker, to task one of our committees to investigate this matter. (Applause) 

It is also high time we tasked our engineers to find an alternative to sand. We cannot just go on saying that we shall deplete all the wetlands in search of sand; we shall never stop building. How is it done in other areas? How is it done in other countries? Some of this sand is being exported to other countries, including Kenya. One of the lakes around Katosi area in Mukono was depleted and now these people have moved to Masaka. I do not know where else they will be moving to. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Mbwatekamwa takes the Floor, I would like to draw the attention of the House to Article 244 of the Constitution on minerals and petroleum; it reads, “(1) Subject to article 26 of this Constitution, the entire property in, and the control of, all minerals and petroleum in, on or under, any land or waters in Uganda are vested in the Government on behalf of the Republic of Uganda.” Therefore, Government, you are the custodians of the sand, the minerals and the petroleum. 

Article 244(5) says, “For the purposes of this article, ‘mineral’ does not include clay, murrum, sand or any stone commonly used for building or similar purposes.” 

In clause 6 of the same article, we are told, “Parliament may regulate the exploitation of any substance excluded from the definition of mineral under this article when exploited for commercial purposes.” 

They are extracting and stealing it. This is a commercial purpose and we are just watching. I do not know who to task on this issue, the Attorney-General or the Minister of Water and Environment. This is a bonanza; this is the only country where you can do anything. 

5.15
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One white man once told me that poor Africans invented fire and stopped there. Indeed, to some extent it is true. If the so-called investors can come to our country to excavate sand, what will our peasants do?  For a long time, this has been a business for peasants and they have been ferrying a lorry of sand at Shs 200,000. Imagine a peasant getting Shs 200,000; isn’t it good money? Why are we giving it to the so-called foreign investors?

I think the minister concerned should tell us the meaning of the word “investment”. I was not aware that our peasants were investors. If people can come here to invest in sand excavation, it means that Uganda is very rich because we have had investors who have been excavating sand for some time. 

I was surprised when the minister told us that he actually does not know what we are doing with this sand. I thought if someone were to invest in sand, they should be aware of what the sand is used for. I, therefore, request, Madam Speaker, through your guidance and wisdom, that you help us set up a select committee to investigate this. It is shameful!

Lastly, why is it easy for a foreigner to get a land title yet for us natives, it is very difficult to get a land title for your private land or even public land. How is it possible then for these people to get land titles and to even take our sand and wetlands? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.18
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to give some information with respect to the lamentation that has been given to this House. We are going to continue lamenting as long as we do not give a way forward. What is the solution? We should give constructive criticism and I think this is what I am imploring the Members to do.

With respect to the issue of employing foreigners, there are best practices. I would like to say that in other countries like Canada, for example, in order to employ a foreigner or a Ugandan, you must have advertised that position and you must show evidence that you cannot get a local person or a citizen of the country who can do that work before you employ a foreigner. After you have done that, the human resources of Canada collects the information. At the end of the year, a list of areas is put up highlighting areas where they can actually employ foreigners. 

This is part of the reason why when the Minister of State for Labour was talking about exporting labour, people were complaining as to why we are exporting maids. That is what they dictate that they can import. We need to do something like that if we are to avoid that kind of lamenting. I just wanted to address the issue of employing foreigners. Thank you. 

5.20
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the House to the issue of the vessel that is on the lake harvesting sand. It is true that this vessel is on the lake day and night. It was actually reported in the media, in the New Vision, when it caught fire. However, the public was advised to go slow; there was somebody who was interested in it and he said, “These are our investors”.

Madam Speaker, I am a fisheries biologist and I can tell you that if you want fish to disappear from the lake at the fastest possible rate, then disturb their breeding grounds. That is why we are experiencing this problem of fish disappearing. The fish we are harvesting was donated to us by the Israelites in 1945. The Government has never even bothered to re-stock that lake.

We have a problem of factories closing every day because we are running out of fish in the lake. It is very alarming! We really need to move very quickly if we want to save our lakes –(Interruption)

MR GONAHASA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been burning with this idea of fishing the traditional way. I worked with the Ministry of Local Government and I was on a committee which worked on the Agricultural Technology and Agribusiness Advisory Services (ATAAS) projects and non ATAAS projects. One of the areas we thought about was the establishment of aquaculture parks. 

The trouble I have always seen in this country is that we have very good policies but we make them and shelve them and forget about them. I am interested in ensuring that we have more fish than our factories can absorb. We have identified 84 areas in this country where we can do aquaculture on a big scale. What we are doing now is cage fishing, which is very nice, but it is more like hobby fishing. If we are going to go commercial in fish farming, we have to embrace the aquaculture park approach, and the policy documents are there. 

Whether we have an authority or not, I think we need to start implementing many of these policies because the lake fish is depleted. I started talking about aquaculture when I was a young person in 1984 with the Canadian university of Auburn. This knowledge is there. Can we get away from fish farming in small ponds and cages? There are big ways we can do this. We have the capacity to produce 5,000 tonnes of fish per aquaculture park out of the 84 parks that have been identified. 

There have been issues of environmental –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, is that information or are you making a substantial submission?

MR GONAHASA: It is information. There is a lot of potential but we are lamenting – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Gonahasa, fishing is important but we are addressing the issue of the investors who are mining sand illegally.

MR GONAHASA: Madam Speaker, I would like to disagree because we started on fisheries and we ended up on –

THE SPEAKER: You do not disagree with the Speaker. We would like to get direction on what to do with the so-called investors.

MR EITUNGANANE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. I think this august House has to really move quickly – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You donated a lot of your time.

5.25
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue that I would like to raise is not about fishing and mining of sand. I would like to raise an issue regarding the sanctity of this House, the constitutionality and also the statement and position Members of Parliament have agreed to work on.

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister made a very important statement on the Floor of this Parliament. As you are aware, when we came here we swore to defend, protect and preserve the Constitution. The Prime Minister made a statement that in 1980 immediately after the elections, some people attacked a Government garrison, killed soldiers and took off with guns. That statement was made on the Floor of Parliament. If it was made elsewhere, it would be ok. 

This reflects very badly on the sanctity and the vows that we have made to the country. It encourages other people to go to war and attack a Government garrison. I think this statement should be expunged from the Hansard because we have to preserve constitutionality. We might need the Attorney-General to guide us on the legality of the statement made by the Prime Minister. I find it difficult, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, is it a fact of history? Are you going to rewrite history? Did it or didn’t it happen?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. It is a fact of our history that 27 people were so annoyed that they went and attacked Kabamba Barracks and ran away with so many guns and ammunition, after losing an election. Some of the people that carried out that mission progressed until they took over power. That is a fact of our history. 

Is hon. Okot Ogong in order to try to erase a fact that actually existed and those who did it are proud that they did it? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not distort history; let us speak it as it is.

5.28
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is about policy. I pray that we revisit our investment policy. The trend when attracting our investors is that they have been individually sourced. 

If you compare the global trend on sustainable development especially on environmental management, China and India rank at the bottom and yet these are our lead investors in this country. I am worried that these investors are going to lead us into hell.

I had a chance to visit Hyderabad and I vowed to never go back to India even if you gave me a free ticket. There is chaos in some of these cities. Are we really bringing these investors for the betterment or the bigger picture of Uganda?

The other issue is enforcement. When these investors come under that arrangement, they create a scenario of blackmail. They establish other investments on the side; one company can have 10 other businesses and the issue of enforcement becomes difficult because they claim they are connected - connected in the sense of blackmail. Thank you very much.

5.31
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members for their contribution, especially concerning the issue of the fishing industry in this country. 

Madam Speaker, you well know that our water bodies do not have clear borders. We have challenges in this country, but even when we set up policies governing our water bodies and the fishing in this land, our brothers beyond may not be able to have the right policies.

I am raising this because I come from Buliisa District where we have Lake Albert and we have had serious problems with our neighbours the other side. When we try to use the right fishing gear in our lakes, our neighbours cross over and use the wrong gear. As a result, we have serious depletion of fish in our lakes.

We do not only have depletion but we have also lost one of the best species that we used to have, which was not anywhere else in the country. I am requesting this House to put in place a committee, which will be able to interest itself in going to the water bodies, especially Lake Albert, and seeing what actually happens at night along the lakes.

Let us be in charge of trying to evaluate what kind of fishing gear people use. Are they adding value to our fishing industry? Look at the silver fish that is being got vis-à-vis the Nile Perch we used to have and compare the cost with what we have now. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.32
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring up this issue because Members have said much, but no one mentioned it; we asked for the definition of the word “investor”. We made a mistake the first time when we misunderstood the word “investor” to mean a foreign investor. Most Ugandans think that an investor must be foreign, but Ugandans are also investors. These foreign investors come here to do the same jobs we have been doing. 

Last week, we went to National Livestock Research Resource Centre (NaLIRRI) and we discovered that there was an investor from China who was coming to start producing fertilisers. However, during the time for the environmental impact assessment, that investor eluded NaLIRRI. The investor instead consulted other neighbours and left NaLIRRI out, because he knew that NaLIRRI was more scientific than the other neighbours were. 

At the moment, NaLIRRI is planning to get another place. Actually, they would like Parliament to look for another place for them because they cannot work with that industry. Their laboratories will not work very well and the animals they breed will not do well like they have been doing. We are, therefore, facing a very big problem. (Member timed out.)

5.34
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Madam Speaker, as we discuss excavation of sand from our lakes, there is also an important issue that I wish to bring to the attention of this House. 

As some people are excavating sand from some lakes of this country, other people are doing it in reverse order. I want to cite an example; if you traverse Lake Kyoga, you will see people taking lorries of soil and tree branches and dumping them in the lake. I would like to suggest that instead of constituting a committee to go and investigate that, we use the Committee on Natural Resource. Let us assign them the responsibility of investigating the matter and coming up with a report to this House so that we discuss it and resolve this as a House. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.35
MS JUDITH BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the House to the issue concerning fish and sand. These two go hand in hand. We have grown up eating fish as a source of our proteins and if we say that we are going to encourage people to excavate sand, it means you are going to kill the fish. 

In my constituency, we have about nine landing sites but daily, people accuse each other of propelling the tilapia to disappear from Kiyindi Landing Site. It is my humble request that we put strict regulations concerning sand excavation because that is the breeding site for the fish, and fish is food and at the same time an export for this nation. I thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Minister of Education to sit at the back forgetting that she is a minister, when there is a lot of space at the Frontbench reserved for them.

THE SPEAKER: We welcome the Minister of State for Primary Education. 

5.37
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Kitagwenda County has a part of Lake George and I would like to speak on two things. One is on protection of the fish in the lake. Madam Speaker, I am sure that we have sufficient legislation on the protection of fish and our waters. I think the bigger problem is with the enforcement especially of the Fish Act.

While I was serving as RDC in Serere, we had great challenges enforcing the Fish Act on Lake Kyoga by stopping illegal fishing. Government used to send an enforcement team that was not paid and they ended up being part of the people fishing illegally and benefitting from the illegal fishing. With so many complaints, this team was put aside but Government has not put in place another team to oversee the enforcement of the Fish Act on the lake.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, there is the issue of illegal fishing gear. Fishermen with illegal fishing gear were arrested but many of these illegal fishing nets were coming from Kenya. The fishermen would tell us that they crossed through the border under the watch of Government and ended up in the hands of the fishermen in the villages. Therefore, arresting a fisherman who is the final consumer of the illegal fishing gear, much as it is illegal, was not proper. This is because the Government would watch the nets from the time they entered into the country –(Interruption)  

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much. I would like to inform you that Uganda National Bureau of Standards does not have a standard for the fishing nets. They cannot, for instance, prohibit the importation of some of these nets you are talking about. That is the reason I asked the minister whether by statutory instrument the ministry cannot regulate these illegal fishing gear. Thank you.

MR AGABA: Thank you, honourable colleague, but I disagree with you. The Fish Act specifies the size of nets that should be used for fishing and the illegal nets that cannot be used. The point is about its enforcement. 

Finally, about the depletion of our water bodies especially the wetlands, I have been following the debate in the House and it appears we are more concerned about foreigners who are mining the sand in the lake and wetlands and it would be okay if it were the Ugandans doing it -

THE SPEAKER: Which Ugandans are exporting sand?

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture volunteered information that he is aware that the owner of the China City is a Ugandan and this Parliament has been discussing China City exporting sand. I am rising to clarify - (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been in this House, I began this debate and the honourable minister came in to say something. In all his submissions, there is nowhere that the honourable minister stated anybody from China exporting sand. The minister said that the owner of this company named it China City but he is a Ugandan. 

Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to mislead us that have been following properly, yet he is seated on the front row next to the Parliamentary Mace. 

THE SPEAKER: No; he had not heard properly. Please, conclude.

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. In conclusion, whether Chinese, Indian or Ugandan, if they are depleting our wetlands or the sand, they must be treated equally and they are all illegal. Thank you very much.

5.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to appreciate this debate that has ensued over a number of issues especially fish and sand. It clearly demonstrates that the House is united and concerned about these issues. In my view, that is one way of getting solutions. 

Secondly, this emphasises the importance of a more aggressive implementation on the part of Government and more vigilance on our part as representatives of the people and cooperation; we need each other in order to get the best results in this enforcement. 

There was a debate about export of sand. Hon. Amelia Kyambadde is the minister responsible for trade and if I make an error, she will be able to correct me. Madam Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, we do not export raw materials in terms of minerals - if we can take sand as a mineral - but we export minerals that have had value added to them.

There was a public debate, as you know, when we stopped the export of iron ore and a number of other minerals in order to ensure that we get the best value for our wealth and minerals. I am not aware of anybody being authorised to export soil or sand. If this were to be the case, I would expect value addition before any type of export. However, as I said, let us dig a little more.

I recommend and I accept the proposal made that the responsible committee of Parliament, the Committee on Natural Resources, investigates this issue so that we can have a data basis on which to make a decision on this matter.

The other issue that came up was the issue of foreigners coming in and disappearing, posing as investors and the like. It just means we should tighten a little more. It is true that we want investors but we want genuine investors not quack investors. Therefore, the question of employing people who should not be here is a matter squarely under the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Directorate of Immigration. If there is a hitch in that matter, the responsible ministry will take the necessary measures.

On the question of aquaculture raised by the shadow Minister of Agriculture, yes this is the order of the day. You hear of Southeast Asia being a great exporter of fish, but a lot of it is fish got through aquaculture, including tilapia which they apparently got from Uganda. Therefore, the potential for aquaculture is very high.

Hon. Okot Ogong has already left, but he raised a point about what I said. I entirely agree with you, Madam Speaker; let us not distort our history. Our history is our history. Some of it is good and some of it is bad. Let us put it on the table as it is and then with that factual and honest position, we can spring up and ensure that the mistakes of the past are avoided –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Prime Minister, for giving way. Indeed, we are very proud of the 27 young men who went and fought Obote’s government. They gave themselves the name of the “National Resistance Movement”. Would you now advise other Ugandans to be as brave as those young men when they baptise themselves as “resistance movement” or “defiance movement”? Is it a good part of history to repeat, that we encourage our young people to take up arms against Government whenever they have lost elections either rightly or wrongly?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, everyone knows that there was a problem and there was a popular solution. It is through that popular solution that Uganda is now stable and making progress, and Parliament is freely discussing issues. (Applause) The tribute we can pay to those gallant sons and daughters of Uganda is to ensure that the cause they fought for is thoroughly propagated and firmly embraced by all of us, including hon. Nambooze.

There is a whisper that many years ago, we lost some Ugandans at Namugongo and because of their sacrifice, religion was spread not only in Uganda but also in many other parts of the world. Incidentally, His Holiness the Pope and very many pilgrims have just been with us to celebrate the lives of these martyrs. That is very true. I thank hon. Nambooze for raising this matter but I call on her to be a firm supporter of the cause for liberation of this country, so that we can all move together. 

I support the proposal that the conclusion of this debate should be that the responsible committee of Parliament examines this issue of sand – the way it is being handled – so that our natural assets can be better managed and better preserved. The responsible organisations such as NEMA and others can be called to the committee to give expert advice, so that we have a firm and correct basis of moving forward and managing our natural resources. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members. We task the Committee on Natural Resources to examine the issues raised here and report back. I think they do not have very many Bills; they should be able to get time to do that. If you could report by the second part of this session, it could help us. That will be in October.

Honourable members, you are aware that we are part of the East African Community and Parliament has parliamentary games every December. Therefore, we are going to start training. On Monday, 22 August at 7.00 a.m., let us assemble at Lugogo KCCA grounds for football practice. Please, come with your gear. I do not know when the netball practice will start but when they do, we shall let you know.

House adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 August 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 