10033Wednesday, 30 August 2023I know most of the time the children are at school and the teachers do the parenting. Now the children are back home, the parents should take responsibility and make sure better parenting is done to avoid issues of drugs, homosexuality, those things that are in society.And as we prepare for children to go back to school, I also want to urge the executive to strengthen on the issue of regulation on school fees. We have talked about issues of school fees in this House because there are schools that are exploiting parents. Government, we need the regulations so that our parents are not exploited. We need to harmonise the issue of the school fees. How can we be funding the Government schools and they are the ones charging the highest amount of money? Last week we witnessed a spike in the fuel pumps. Fuel has gone Shs 5,500 shillings, that is so high we need an explanation from executive on how they are planning to address this issue because you know what is in the economy. We do not have money.Yesterday, I referred to the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry to do an inquiry on the alleged financial solicitation involving cooperatives.I have noted that the press reported very wrong things and I expected that you are there listening to what is being said. I am so disappointed that you write what you think and not what you hear. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 23RD SITTING - FIRST MEETINGParliament met at 1.59 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Annet Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I want to welcome the Members that have the discipline of keeping time . (Applause)Once you keep time you can even go to heaven, you can get everything in life because time is a very important aspect in life.During this sitting today, we will receive what the ministers undertook yesterday. It is unfortunate that the ministers are not here. The minister for state of Foreign Affairs had undertaken to lay the treaties on the Table, but he is not here.The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Hon. Sarah Mateke not Hon. Opendi.Honourable members, I am aware that students and pupils have gotten holidays. In order for us to protect the foundation of our family values, I would like to urge parents out there to actively shape the behaviour, character and aspiration of these children by doing effective parenting.10034THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRThe institution being investigated is the trade ministry and the issue being investigated upon is the issue of cooperatives.Cooperatives belong to the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. We are not investigating the Committee on Trade; it is just a one plus one.Why do you report what you think you want to report? Report what you hear and what is being said, do not report anything just because you feel you want to say that we are investigating our Committee on Trade.Honourable members, you recall on 27 July 2023 we passed a resolution regarding the utilisation of the Shs 1 billion, which was earmarked for each local government.The resolution that was passed by this House replaced the guidelines that were brought by Ministry of Works and Transport. But it has come to my knowledge that most local governments are refusing to implement the resolution of this House, that they had already put money using the guidelines that were previously passed. I wonder who passed those guidelines previously, much as they were passed by Cabinet, they had to come to the House. And I want to warn the accounting officers out there in the local governments that if we find anybody implementing the use of that money using the guidelines that were issued by Ministry of Works, we will take action.  (Applause)The guidelines that were passed by this House are the ones that should be used and they are final. The money must go directly to the local governments.Honourable members, thank you, once more for coming and I want to remind you that we mark whoever is in the House and honourable Professor, I want the list of all the chairpersons and vice chairpersons who do not attend Plenary. Have you heard of it?Thank you. There is a procedural matter.2.09MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your timely communication to the august House this afternoon. You have brought a new - I will call it a notch in this Parliament where you keep time. You are in the House sometimes at 1.59p.m. thank you for that spirit for time keeping.However, with the exception of the Government Chief Whip, Hon. Bahati and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here, the other ministers have permanently, stubbornly refused to keep - they are perennial late comers. we have 81 ministers -THE SPEAKER:  Are they late comers or they never come?MR SILWANY:  Sometimes, but some of them never come at all and They are making the work of the Government Chief Whip -THE SPEAKER:  There is information here.MR SILWANY:  I will take the information, since he is from Bugiri. (Laughter)  That is on a lighter note.MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, the MP for Bukooli Central in Bugiri District. The information I would like to give is that on top of either not coming or coming late, when they appear, Madam Speaker, and they are done with their business, they walk out.MR SILWANY: Thank you, Hon. Asuman Basalirwa. Madam Speaker, it has just become – it is as if the ministers just sit, agree and say that “we shall not go to Parliament”. It is high time we took tough decisions. The work of the Government Chief Whip is becoming very difficult. You find him in the corridors, making phone calls and telling the honourable ministers that they are supposed to be in the House, yet the Order Paper is sent way before we start the House.10035THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023Madam Speaker, you have raised a very pertinent matter on the issue of school fees. The Minister of Education and Sports is supposed to be here to – (Interjection) - I am coming.Therefore, the procedural matter that I am raising - because there is a matter concerning the Ministry of Education and Sports. You have also raised an issue concerning the works ministry and these are all ministers who are supposed to respond.Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to continue with Parliament, when ministers are perennially absent and never come to this House? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to take a decision at this momentous epoch to invoke – (Laughter) - our powers in Parliament and stand for Ugandans?  THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, can we hear from you? You are the one who is supposed to whip all your ministers. I do not know whether they know that we sit on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.2.21THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, first of all, we are all aware that when the House sat yesterday, we had a reasonable number of ministers. That is a fact. I would also like to state on record that, as Cabinet, we have set what I would call “our minimum standards”.One, we have agreed that at every sitting of Parliament, at least 30 per cent of ministers should be represented – a ministry should, at least, be represented. We have gone ahead to even lay on the Floor of Parliament, the rota for every ministry for Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.My office makes calls. Even today, I can confirm that, from the Ministry of Education and Sports, Hon. Ogwang and Hon. Dr Muyingo confirmed their attendance. From the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Hon. John Mulimba confirmed his attendance – and the list is long.Madam Speaker, I believe that this House is run by rules. I would suggest that in the circumstances – just like in the field of sports – when you commit a foul, you are given a verbal warning; when you commit another foul, you are given a yellow card; and when you commit the third foul, you are red-carded. (Applause)  This House works on rules. So, let us invoke the rules and have all Members, whether a Member of Parliament or Member of Cabinet, attend parliamentary sittings. I beg to submit. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Government Chief Whip, can I have a list of the ministers who are supposed to attend Wednesday’s sitting? I need that list.Honourable minister for education, we want the regulations on school fees. Schools are going to open and most of the Government schools and the private schools are charging very high fees, which is disadvantageous to our parents. Most students cannot even go to school because of the exploitation by the schools.Can we have the regulations on the Floor tomorrow? We have been singing about the regulations.2.16THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, before my good friend, Hon. Peter Ogwang, comes to make a response, I am sure he is in the know of Section 3 and Section 57 of the Education Act. They give the minister all the latitude to regulate school fees, but they are limited to government-aided schools.We are talking about the ever skyrocketing tuition fees, but the culprits are majorly the privately-owned schools.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe, it is unfortunate that you do not have a school; some of us have schools. The schools that charge high fees are Government schools that we even appropriate money for. 10036THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRMR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, you are right – both of them. However, I am wondering about the errant ones because you have issued warnings. I have been following this issue. The errant school proprietors, including those that manage Government schools, have ignored all these warnings. What are you going to rely on, especially for private proprietors –(Interruption)THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for raising the issue of school fees. It has been over a year – one-and-a-half years – since I presented a motion on school fees and it was before the Committee on Education and Sports. (Applause)  We do not know what is happening. They brought a report here, which the House rejected. So, what is happening in this committee?Therefore, Madam Speaker, would it not be procedurally right for you to direct the committee, which is charged with the responsibility of doing work on behalf of this House - that is, the Committee on Education and Sports - to conclude that motion so that we can effectively discuss and come up with resolutions to support the Government in doing its work? The regulations alone were issued, saying school fees should not be charged beyond a certain amount, but it was defied. So, if the Committee on Education and Sports had processed that –THE SPEAKER: Were the regulations brought to the House?MS OPENDI: No, they were not. They only went to the media.THE SPEAKER: That is what I am saying. I want the regulations in the House; this House should approve them. As we wait for the report from the committee, can we have the regulations tomorrow? MS OPENDI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the Committee on Education and Sports had better pull up its socks.THE SPEAKER: Like what Hon. Nambeshe is saying, we have the law to that effect. We need to operationalise the law and that is why we need the regulations. So, we will wait for the report on school fees from the committee, but that does not stop us from asking for the regulations. We need the regulations tomorrow. The Government Chief Whip, we need a report from the Ministry of Works and Transport as well as a report from the Ministry of Local Government on the issue of the Shs 1 billion and the guidelines for the local governments. We also need a report on the issue of fuel. Those are the things that should appear on the Order Paper tomorrow.1. The regulations on school fees;2. The issue of fuel; and3. The report from the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Local Government – honourable members, are you all reacting to my communication? Yes, Hon. Maurice Kibalya.2.20MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have guided that the Whip brings the regulations from the Ministry of Local Government about –THE SPEAKER: He whips the minister. MR KIBALYA: He whips the Minister of Local Government. Last week when the Deputy Speaker was presiding, the Whip and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister promised that on Tuesday, which was yesterday, those regulations were going to be tabled.THE SPEAKER: Which regulations? MR KIBALYA:  The regulations from the Ministry of Local Government about the Shs 10037THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 20231 billion. They were supposed to have tabled them yesterday because the issue was raised last week. When the Clerk sent the resolution, when we went to Kamuli, they said they cannot act on those. They preferred ones from the minister. So, we are wondering what is going to happen and I pray the Whip answers. Secondly, about fuel, last season the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development left very fast and said he had appropriated Shs 4 billion; Shs 2 billion for last season and Shs 2 billion for this season about the seeds. The season has ended, fuel prices are increasing and peasants have nothing to do. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has equally not yet given us the seeds for this season yet he accepted that Shs 4 billion had been earmarked; Shs 2 billion last season and Shs 2 billion this season. So, could we know where the seeds for this season are? Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Yes, Doctor?2.22DR ELISA RUTAHIGWA (NRM, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add information about school fees. Last time we talked about only secondary schools, but there are tertiary institutions; I want to give an example of Mbale College of Health Sciences, where they admit students for clinical courses, and the admission is clearly indicating “admission on Government sponsorship.” The fees range from Shs 2.5 million to Shs 2.8 million, which must be paid before you report. Even to pick an admission letter, you must pay; the student I have here as an example, had to pay Shs 600,000 to pick the admission letter. Other requirements include brooms, Jik, soap, among others and you wonder the purpose of the money. These institutions all over the country especially in health and nursing schools, students are admitted on Government sponsorship, but they pay a lot of fees.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the regulations we need are for school fees, irrespective of nursery, primary or technical; all the schools. Honourable members, we have a tight Order Paper. Yes?MR AFIDRA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is in regard to your communication and your ruling on the four issues. Would it not be procedurally right that we move on and wait for the submission by the minister tomorrow so that these issues can then be discussed? Thank you.THE SPEAKER: He is very correct. I raised the issues and I have made an order that, please come tomorrow and make a presentation to that effect. We shall not have anything else on the Order Paper apart from the issues of school fees; let us sort it then. We want a report on fuel prices and the Shs 1 billion - I can see the Minister of State for Local Government, but she must come and present tomorrow, on issues of local government, together with the Ministry of Works and Transport. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we want a report about our seeds - Hon. Musasizi, please come tomorrow and make a presentation with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, showing how you have funded it because the community needs the seeds. Next item.LAYING OF PAPERSTREATIES RATIFIED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA PURSUANT TO RULE 40 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE (Text expunged.)THE SPEAKER:  We expunge from the record that it has been laid, we will have it laid tomorrow.10038THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF STADIA AND HIGH ALTITUDE CENTRES IN UGANDA THE SPEAKER:  We had an item on our girls in Saudi Arabia.  We had an agreement - she is laying the telephone. (Laughter)2.41THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Sarah Mateke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You wanted the agreement, but I have not come with it. I just prepared a statement like you had requested yesterday -THE SPEAKER:  We want the agreement.MS MATEKE:  But if you want the agreement, allow me to Table it tomorrow because I thought that it was the statement from what Hon. Nsereko raised.THE SPEAKER:  No, you can come with the statement backing up the agreement. We want the agreement so that we know the terms of employment for our girls and boys.MR SILWANY:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. The 11th Parliament has passed the most Bills; I think since the inception of the Parliament of Uganda. I thank you and honourable members.However, the Government is very reluctant to bring the regulations. Of all the Bills that we have passed, very few regulations have come if not one.  Could we also seek clarification and get information from the Prime Minister?THE SPEAKER:  We had that issue yesterday. That is the benefit of being in the House throughout. We did not speak in Lusoga or Ateso; it was in English. We had that issue yesterday on the Floor.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF STADIA AND HIGH ALTITUDE CENTRES IN UGANDA THE SPEAKER:   Honourable members, for proper context, the inception of the high altitude training ground was started in 2010 and 2012 with a request from a renowned athlete.A decade later, the construction of the facility is yet to be concluded. Pursuant to Rule 52 of the Rules of Procedure, this House has asked the minister to present an update on the status of the facility and the road map for its completion. Could we now get a statement from the Minister of Education and Sports?2.44THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDU -CATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable colleagues. First, I thank the august House for the passing of the National Sports Act. I congratulate you and the entire House. As of today, we have the Act and the Attorney-General is going to gazette it. Then after that, we will begin with enforcement and implementation.THE SPEAKER:  Thereafter, we shall expect the regulations in this House, before you -MR OGWANG:  Most obliged, Madam Speaker. According to the Hansard , we got as a ministry – (Interruption)THE SPEAKER:   There is a procedure. MR KIBALYA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, The Minister for Education and Sports has thanked the House for passing the Bill, which is now an Act. If the President signs -THE SPEAKER:   It was signed.MR KIBALYA:  Sorry, as it was signed. In the same spirit, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we also thank him the way we thanked Hon. Obua for giving us balls so that he updates us on the status of the balls that he is supposed to give the Members of Parliament? 10039THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023THE SPEAKER:   Honourable members, I get surprised when you ask for those small things. We are here to legislate for the country and we are talking about - honourable members, we are yet to find out which balls he is asking for. (Laughter)MR OGWANG:  Most obliged, Madam Speaker. But for the record, honourable colleagues -THE SPEAKER:  Can you go to your report? I do not want you to talk about balls.MR OGWANG:  The Ministry of Education and Sports, is mandated to plan and manage physical education and sports, improve access to quality physical education and sports and develop a cadre of elite athletes in the country. This is achievable through the Sports Act and, the National Physical Education and Sports Policy among other laws.Policies and regulationsColleagues, now I wish to present to you a brief about the ongoing construction of sports facilities in the country as outlined in the matrix. Madam Speaker and colleagues, you can see that I have a table here that indicates a facility - and I begin at Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium. The terms of office of the Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium Board of Trustees expired on 1 July 2020. The stadium is undergoing construction under a Public Private Partnership (PPP) agreement between the Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium Board and Ham Enterprise. In the absence of the Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium Board, a contract management team was constituted for the supervision of the PPP project. And Madam Speaker, I confirm to the august House, that the private developer under the PPP arrangement is doing a commendable job.Project No.2 - the Mandela National StadiumThe Ministry of Works and Transport developed the designs for the renovation and upgrading of the Mandela National Stadium.A memorandum of understanding was signed between the Ministry of Education and Sports, and the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, of fencing and renovation works at Mandela National Stadium and was developed and cleared by the Office of the Solicitor-General. So far, Shs 76 billion out of the Shs 94 billion has been received from the Ministry of Finance and has been released by the Ministry of Education and Sports to the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for the project.Fencing works are complete, while renovation physical progress - currently, I want to correct the 53 to 75 per cent with the expected date of completion being 30 November 2023.Buhinga StadiumMadam Speaker, a detailed feasibility study was undertaken and completed by the Ministry of Education and Sports. The final feasibility study, concept design, environmental and social impact assessment report were submitted to the Ministry of Finance in May 2021 for funding sourcing. The estimated cost for the construction is $64 million, which includes a hotel to enhance sustainability due to the high influx of tourists in the area. And I am talking about Fort Portal. Akii Bua Stadium A detailed feasibility study was undertaken and completed by the Ministry of Education and Sports. The final feasibility study, concept design, environmental and social impact assessment report were submitted to the Ministry of Finance in May 2021 for funds sourcing. 10040THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 [Mr Ogwang] STATEMENTThe estimated cost of the construction is $48 million and the final design of the proposed facility shall be agreed upon after further stakeholder engagement before the implementation. The National High-Altitude Training Centre, Teryet Physical progress of the works stands at 97 percent achieved with the following executed. The general electrical reticulation and lighting, water/mechanical reticulation works, concrete tanks, basis casts, fabricated tanks, stands erected on site and imported steel panels for the water tanks are being assembled. Remedial works on artificial turf fields are ongoing with sand being sieved before rubber granule infilling. This will remain under observation throughout the 12-month defect liability period on 26th May 2024. Remedial works on the jogging track and lightings have been sustainably completed, pending carpeting of the fitness stations and epoxy painting on the concrete edges of the jogging truck are on. The hostel block is sustainably completed, and side/roads parking and lighting installations are complete. General landscaping and tree planting are completed. Sports maintenance materials arrived in Mombasa pending clearance. In conclusion, the fencing work at the Mandela National Stadium has been completed while the renovation works are progressing well, with the physical progress standing at 75 percent. The construction works at Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium are also progressing well. Most of the pending works at the National High-Altitude Training Centre have now been sustainably completed and project activities and overall physical progress of implementation so far stand at 97 percent. The progress lag is attributed to some initial challenges whose solutions have now been solved. The contractor for the site mobilised more staff, that is specifically Mandela, equipment and material on-site and scaled up the works. The project teams, including the client, contractor and consultants are joined working together to ensure the delivery of the project. The proposed construction of Buhinga and Akii Bua stadia are awaiting funding from Ministry of Finance so that the tendering for the final design and construction can commence. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. I will still ask you to come back and give us an update. When you talk about Nakivubo, you play and show members the progress. (Applause)  When you talk about Namboole, put it on the screen and we see. MR OGWANG:  Most obliged as per your directive, I will comply. Thank you, so much. THE SPEAKER:  So, we will leave this on the Order Paper until he comes with the pictures of every project. We are not discussing anything on it anywhere because the presumption we have is that we do not know. We are only hearing. I want to see physically that this is what they are talking about. MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, the Minister of ICT has committed to support me in that cause and I thank him.THE SPEAKER:  Yes, it is still on the Order Paper and we are not debating. - I thought we were waiting for a debate when we have pictures? STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION ON THE  ENERGY CHARTER TREATYTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, Rule 53 of the Rules of Procedure, grants the Leader of the Opposition the mandate to make a statement on alternative policy or action among others, considering the importance of energy as a basic human need or an enabler of innovation. The Leader of the Opposition has a paper to present to that effect.10041THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 20232.55MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to make this statement on the Energy Charter Treaty. I would like to usher in my able alternative Minister of Energy to take us through the statement. 2.56MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga):  Madam Speaker, moved under Rule 53 of the Rules of Procedure, I hereby share the statement. In many instances, a handful of government officials are selected to deliberate and sign treaties on behalf of Uganda, without involving the people’s representatives, that is the Members of Parliament. This House ought to pick interest in the matter of entering treaties, conventions, agreements or other engagements between Uganda and any other country or between Uganda and any international organisation or body -THE SPEAKER:   Before you go far, I want you to quote the law which says the Member of Parliament should be the ones to sign the treaties or be involved. MS KAAYA:  Madam Speaker, that is why we are requesting for a review. THE SPEAKER:  Bring an amendment to the law.MS KAAYA:  Yes, that is one of our prayers. The Energy and Charter Treaty is an investment treaty that was developed in the 1990s to enable multilateral cooperation in the energy sector. This Energy Charter Treaty (ECT) is controversial in the sense that it protects investors against discriminatory access, expropriation, nationalisation, breaches of contract and other unexpected circumstances that could impact their profit expectations. In particular, privileges granted to investments in the energy sector are increasingly in conflict with efforts to curb climate change and environmental degradation. The controversies surrounding the Energy Charter Treaty have cost member states colossal sums of money in arbitration claims challenging Government actions made in the public interest, such as environmental policies or the protection of human rights and local communities. This is why countries like France, Spain, Poland, and the Netherlands have announced plans to withdraw from the Energy Charter Treaty, arguing that the accord runs counter to their climate goals. Belgium, Denmark, Slovenia, and Germany also reported considering a similar move. Italy withdrew from the Energy Charter Treaty in 2016. In 2015, Uganda signed the non-binding international charter as a demonstration of political commitment, making the first step towards acceding to the Energy Charter Treaty (ECT). In 2019, Uganda took a step further towards acceding to the ECT by submitting a letter of intent to the ECT Secretariat. Given the foregoing contention, it is our considered opinion that Uganda reconsiders her intended accession to the ECT, especially at a time when key members of the European Union are considering withdrawing from the treaty. If Uganda proceeds with the accession plans, this will derail our environmental and climate action efforts and also expose the country to hefty fines in case of breach of contract. We are cognisant of the provisions –THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.MR SILWANY:  Madam Speaker, Rule 76(1) of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament bars a Member – and I will read: “A Member shall not read his or her speech, but may read extracts from written or printed documents in support of his or her arguments and may refresh his or her memory by reference to notes.” 10042THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 [Mr Silwany] STATEMENTMadam Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is that since Members are barred by our rules from reading speeches, is it procedurally right for the shadow minister to read her speech verbatim to the House, yet she could just refer the House to the notes that refer to what she wants to communicate. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what is on the Order Paper is a statement, not a speech. The statement is as per rule 53 of the Rules of procedure. So, she is reading her statement. Please, go ahead. (Applause)MS KAAYA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the protection. We are cognisant of the provisions of Article 123 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda –THE SPEAKER:  And the Rule you are talking about concerns the debate.MS KAAYA:  Article 123 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda bestows in the President or any person authorised by the President, the power to enter into treaties, agreements or protocols with other countries or other international organisations on behalf of Uganda. We invite this House to consider a constitutional amendment to clothe Parliament –THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen.MS KAAYA:  We invite this House to consider a Constitutional amendment to clothe Parliament with powers to have an input in international instruments. I maintain that the same prerogative ought to be exercised judiciously and in the national interest as provided for under Article 99(1) of the Constitution. Madam Speaker, another related matter of concern is the failure or refusal to ratify and domesticate crucial treaties and protocols Uganda has voted in favour of and, in some instances, signed. Many treaties, which are ratifiable by the Executive, remain unratified. Most of those treaties relate to promotion and enforcement of fundamental human rights and freedoms. Without pre-empting, this matter is before the Committee on Foreign Affairs. I hope appropriate recommendations will be made. In the United Kingdom, for instance, parliament has a statutory role of ratifying treaties. The British Government is duty-bound to lay treaties, with an explanatory memorandum, before parliament for 21 sitting days before it can ratify them. Note that whereas the parliament may not debate, vote or amend the treaties, the House of Commons can block ratification of any treaty indefinitely. It is, therefore, important that Parliament, under the Ratification of Treaties Act, is wholly and singly mandated to ratify treaties entered on behalf of Uganda. In the premise, it is underwhelming that, instead, Uganda’s interest is in acceding to the ECT. Owing to the ramifications of the ECT, it is imperative that Uganda’s participation should not be undertaken in haste, especially at this time when the country’s investments in oil are in full gear. One of the most controversial clauses in the ECT is that even when a country exits the treaty, it remains vulnerable to litigation for the subsequent 20 years.Prayers Madam Speaker, in the circumstances, I pray that –1.  This House directs the Prime Minister to make a statement on the Government’s plan to accede to the ECT; and 2.  This House urges the Government to expedite a constitutional review, including empowering Parliament to have an input in the process of negotiating and binding Uganda to international instruments as well as ratifying the same. I beg to submit.10043THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Prime Minister?3.05THE THIRD DEPUTY  PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms  Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I thank the shadow minister. I am going to call the minister for energy to come back with a response. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Procedure?MR ALLAN MAYANJA:  I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Sometime back, the minister for energy laid an agreement, which was signed between the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan to sell power to South Sudan. When the agreement was laid, you referred it to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. According to our rules, the committee is given only 45 days to report back to Parliament. Is it not procedurally right, Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER:  When was it sent?MR ALLAN MAYANJA:  In June.THE SPEAKER:  On which date?MR ALLAN MAYANJA:  I think it was on the 12th. THE SPEAKER:  No, I want you to be certain of the date and that the 45 days have passed.MR ALLAN MAYANJA:  Madam Speaker, it was on the 12th of June. Is it not procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that we get a notification or any information from the committee on how far they have gone with the scrutiny of this agreement? We are eagerly waiting. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  I love the way Members have become whips of committees. Hon. Sarah was here whipping the education committee and Hon. Allan is whipping – anyway, the committee knows what it is doing; it will come with a report. (Members rose_)  What are you all standing on?The Prime Minister has said they are going to come with a written response. A statement has been made on the Floor and the minister for energy is also going to come with a statement to that effect and then you will be able to debate it. Next item.MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE THE UGANDA NATIONAL SENIOR ATHLETICS TEAM AND THE UGANDA NATIONAL NETBALL TEAM, THE SHE CRANES, FOR THEIR OUTSTANDING PERFORMANCE AT THE 19TH WORLD ATHLETICS CHAMPIONSHIPS IN BUDAPEST, HUNGARY AND THE NETBALL WORLD CUP IN CAPE TOWN, SOUTH AFRICATHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as you are aware, our national flag has continued to fly high at all major international athletics competitions. We have had exceptional performance by our athletes. Ugandan athletes have marketed this country significantly, and we must thank them. We must appreciate what they have done. The net benefit of this is the tourism sector. They have marketed the country; that is an investment which the country needs.The exceptional performance continued at the recently-concluded World Athletics Championships, where we won two gold medals. I invite the minister for sports to move a motion of tribute to Team Uganda. MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO TEAM UGANDA FOR THEIR EXCEPTIONAL PERFORMANCE AT THE WORLD ATHLETICS CHAMPIONSHIPS 2023, BUDAPEST, HUNGARY3.10THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you, Madam Speaker –  10044THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 TRIBUTE TO TEAM UGANDATHE SPEAKER: First apologise to the House for keeping us waiting.MR OGWANG: Apologies, Madam Speaker, and the august House.  I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate the Uganda National - THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am told the athletes are outside. Can somebody guide them into the House? Go ahead, Hon. Ogwang.MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate the Uganda National Senior Athletics Team and the Uganda National Netball Team, the She Cranes, for their outstanding performance at the 19th World Athletics Championships in Budapest, Hungary, and the World Netball Cup in Cape Town, South Africa.Madam Speaker, I move under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament:  “WHEREAS the Constitution of Uganda, 1995 under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XVII, mandates the state to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda;AND WHEREAS in fulfillment of the above objectives and directive principles, in August 2023, Uganda sponsored a team of athletes and the She Cranes Netball Team to participate in the 19th World Athletics Championships in Budapest, Hungary and the World Netball Cup in Cape Town, South Africa, respectively;NOTING THAT Uganda’ s Athletics Team won two gold medals with Joshua Cheptegei winning 10,000 metres, becoming the fourth runner in the world history to win three consecutive world titles in this race and Victor Kiplangat winning the world marathon, making him the fifth Ugandan young athlete in world history to win gold after Dorcus lnzikuru, Stephen Kiprotich, Halima Nakaayi and Joshua Kiptegei;FURTHER NOTING THAT this outstanding performance saw Uganda finish in the eleventh position out of 193 countries and becoming third in Africa in the World Athletics Championships;RECOGNISING that the Uganda National Netball Team, the She Cranes also exhibited great skills that saw the team defeat South Africa’ s Protea by a 49-47 goals difference, emerging the best in Africa and fifth in the world;FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT the She Cranes’ outstanding performance qualified Uganda to participate in the Netball World Cup 2027 scheduled to be held in Australia;APPRECIATING THAT the She Cranes’ outstanding victory is a remarkable improvement in her performance, considering that in the 2015 Netball World Cup performance in Sydney, Australia, the She Cranes ranked eighth in overall performance;CONVINCED THAT the athletics and netball teams’ victory gives Uganda not only international recognition, but is also on inspiration and great honour to the country;NOW THEREFORE be it resolved that Parliament collectively applauds and congratulates the Uganda National Senior Athletics Team and the Uganda National Netball Team, the She Cranes, for their outstanding performance at the championships in Budapest, Hungary and in the Netball World Cup 2023, in Cape Town, South Africa, respectively.”Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Is the motion seconded? Motion seconded by the Prime Minister; Government Chief Whip, Hon. Denis Obua; Hon. Bahati; Hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi; by the State Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (General Duties), Hon. Henry Musasizi; the State Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry 10045THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023and Fisheries (Animal Industry) Lt Col (Rtd)Hon. Rwamirama; the Minister of  Local Government; the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs (Defence), Hon. Oboth; Hon. Grace, shadow minister, Chairman of sports in Parliament, the Leader of the Opposition; and the whole House. (Applause)Would you love to speak to your motion?MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, first of all, I thank the august House for the overwhelming support it has given to the motion. The Uganda National Athletics Team; men and women, participated in the 19th World Athletics Championships in Budapest, from 18th to 28th August. The Ugandan Team was headed by me, as the minister for sports.A record of 2,100 athletes from 195 countries and one refugee team, participated in the World Athletics Championships, which was held in Budapest, Hungary. The championships were watched by over 400-ticketed spectators, coming from 195 countries. The championships saw one world record, one world under-20 record, seven championship records, 11 area records and 73 national records broken. In addition, the individual athletes set personal-best and season’s-best at their respective championships.Uganda was part of the above achievements. It sent a contingent of 20 athletes and returned with two gold medals, equaling its performance in 2019 in Doha, Qatar. This remains the best performance of the country in the championships since the first edition of the event.Honourable members, I want you to note the following: Uganda was ranked 11 out of the 39 countries which won gold medals, ahead of great countries like: 1. Australia, which got one gold medal;2. Italy got one gold medal;3. Greece got one gold medal;4. Japan got one gold medal;5. India got one gold medal;6. France got one silver medal; and7. China got bronze medals.In Africa, Uganda was one of the six countries that won medals, ranking third after Kenya and Ethiopia. (Applause) In total, Africa won nine gold medals: three went to Kenya; two to Uganda; two to Ethiopia; one to Morocco; and one to Burkina Faso. Uganda won two gold medals at the just-concluded championships.Honourable colleagues, I want us to thank, in a special way, the ever-green champion – I have given him a nickname – King Joshua Cheptegei, for winning a gold medal for the 10,000 metres race. (Applause)I also want to commend –THE SPEAKER: Joshua, may you stand up?MR OGWANG: Joshua is not here, but I have seen the president, and the entire team. May I request the entire contingent of Team Uganda which was in Budapest to stand up? There is the team; let us clap for them. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: You are most welcome. Kindly join me in welcoming them. (Applause) We will show you those members, name by name and one by one. MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, in a special way, I want us to congratulate the young marathoner, Victor Kiplangat, who is here. May we clap for him? (Applause) For your information, that is his second gold medal. I remember he won the first one in the Commonwealth Games in London, Birmingham. Do you remember that the young man first got lost, but again came back and was able to finish and win gold? So, let us clap for him. He is there. According to the timing of the athletes, Joshua Cheptegei won the 10,000 metres with 27.51.42. Victor Kiplangat won the marathon with 2 10046THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 [Mr Ogwang]hours 8 minutes 53 microseconds and is the 5th youngest Ugandan athlete in world history to win a gold medal after Dorcus Inzikuru. I want us to commend our young athlete, Kiplangat, because he has a bright future. (Applause)I also thank the entire team which participated in the just concluded event. Some of the factors, which I know, because I was there, that affected some of the athletes was the weather. Honourable colleagues, some of these children were running at temperatures of about 42 degrees. Had it been in Africa, that would have been news, but because we were in Europe, I do not think any of you saw that anywhere in the international press. That is why they resorted to making sure that the championship only happened at night, with the exception of the marathon and walking race. Even then, at 7.00 p.m., we were at 35, 36 or even 37 degrees. So, I commend them for their individual performance as Team Uganda in the just concluded championship.In a special way, I thank the coaches. Most times, they are unsung heroes. We only concentrate on the individual winners of the gold, but let me ask the coaches to stand up, if they are there. Where are the coaches? Yes, the coaches are here. (Applause)  With these medals we see, the hard work comes from these coaches. They are the ones who do all the donkey work to support our athletes. Now that we have the Sports Act and a provision in the law which talks about reward and recognition of these sports personalities, can I ask this Parliament to help me to begin appropriating money in the budget for purposes of us recognising these outstanding athletes who make our flag fly in the entire world, wherever they go? That has been lacking. Finally, we have the law in place. Secondly, there are some individual requests that I am following up, we need some specific infrastructure for some of them. For instance, where they train from - I know they come from the districts of Kween, Kapchorwa, and Bukwo. There is a specific road now under construction, but there is an S road which goes from the plains of Chepsikunya, Ngenge up to the hills of Kween. That is one of the core roads which needs to be worked on.Thirdly, I know that there are other roads they have submitted to me, which Madam Speaker, I request that during the appropriation, Parliament works with my ministry and the Ministry of Works and Transport to make sure that we fulfil the construction of some of those roads for purposes of helping us develop and win more medals. Above all, is the coming in of the National High Altitude Training Centre. Madam Speaker, Phase 1 is at 97 per cent. I am now requesting for Phases 2, 3 and 4. When I talk about Phase 2 –THE SPEAKER:  We want pictures. Do not tell us about your 97 per cent – MR OGWANG:  The pictures are going to come, but I want to put the House on notice that I need phase 2, phase 3 - why am I talking about this? Honourable members, some of these athletes go to Kenya to train and when they are there, they spend money. Time has come for us, as a country, to also begin receiving international athletes coming to train so that they leave money in Uganda. I would like to now go to the She Cranes. First, I thank the She Cranes for their outstanding performance in South Africa. You all recall that the She Cranes did defeat South Africa in Birmingham. I am happy the former sports minister is here. When I was in South Africa for the Rugby World Cup, my colleague, the Minister of Sports of South Africa, asked me a question: He asked, “How could the She Cranes beat South Africa?” I told her, “We are coming to Cape Town; and we will defeat you again.” No wonder, I was not in Cape Town, but can we congratulate those girls for defeating the number one champion of Africa on their own soil? TRIBUTE TO TEAM UGANDA10047THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023Some of our girls were outstanding in the championship. However, before I go there, there were 16 participating countries in the Netball World Cup. These were; South Africa, which was the host, New Zealand, Trinidad and Tobago, Australia, Zimbabwe, Tonga, Fiji, Uganda, Singapore, Wales, England, Barbados, Jamaica, Sri Lanka, Malawi, and Scotland. Look at those names. For Uganda to become the fifth in that category, aware of our funding, it means we have the talent. It is now up to us to begin to invest in sports and tap more talent for the purpose of our children getting professional contracts outside Uganda.Madam Speaker, I once said the following girls were outstanding during the championship. One of our girls called Shadia Nassanga was recognised as the best player every time the team played in that championship in South Africa during the World Cup. (Applause)  We also had a one Maggie Bagala. She also exhibited very high skills, which were recognised and commended on several occasions when she played during the championship. Of course, the overall winner of the tournament champions was Australia. The silver went to England, the bronze medal went to New Zealand, and these were awarded gold, silver, and bronze respectively. The fourth position went to Jamaica, and the fifth came to Uganda, for the National She Cranes. Madam Speaker, outside the two, I want to report the following: Team Uganda also participated in the World University Games, which was held in Chengdu in China. Uganda, again, got two medals; one gold medal and one silver. Again, a gold medal came from one Dismas Yeko, 10,000 metres, who again I want to say comes from one region. Members, why are we only concentrating on one region? I have said this before. What is the difference between Sebei and Kigezi? Why are we not getting the best runners from Kigezi? –(Interjections)-  I am coming to that. I am first talking about the 10,000 and 5,000 metre runners. Why are we not getting the best athletes from Acholi, West Nile, Lango and Teso? Honourable members, as I conclude, I want to challenge each one of us here that it is time we put a lot of emphasis in the sports subsector because it will help this country. It will employ our children to get more jobs and win professional contracts. The best paying jobs today in the world are in the sports sector. I thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable members, for giving me the opportunity to move this motion. I say all this for God and my country. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. I want to allay your fear that they do not come from only one region. We have an Olympian here who comes from Northern Uganda. Olympian, stand up. (Applause)  Honourable members – MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, I have been reminded one thing that I have not told the country what the athletes – First, for the record, a gold medallist in the championship in Budapest, according to the World Athletics Championship, is meant to get US $70,000 – (Interjection) -  yes, that is Gold. As a country, we do not tax this money. (Applause) Therefore, for that matter, when I say that we must put more emphasis on sports - that is money. I know of a nearby country where they got many medals and that is money coming to the economy.Number two, as the Government, we are meant to pay the teams’ allowance for participation. The Government of Uganda fully funded the Championship in Budapest and the Championship in the World Cup. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, you remember the Government also promised- I am happy the law has been passed, Dorcus Inzikuru was promised recognition, a house and a car. To date, she has not got them. 10048THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023She is only lucky that Parliament has given her some work to do. I thank Parliament for giving her a job. (Applause)  We need to appreciate Inzikuru as we appreciate the ones that have come now. We will handle the issue of the road, during the budgeting time. Can I have order in the House? On the issue of the road, the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and the Ministry of Education and Sports should work together when we start the budgeting process and see how we can handle that. We should be able to work on that road in appreciation of the medallists. On the issue of funding the second phase- honourable minister, he who seeks equity must come with clean hands. We are saying, come with clean hands, show us what has been done - we want accountability. For us to be able to give you the second phase, first give us accountability for the first phase. The same thing for Mandela National Stadium Namboole; we do not know what is happening with it, but we need an update from you on that. Honourable members, in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of officials and athletes who participated in the 19th World Athletic Championship, which took place in Budapest, Hungary, from 19-27 August 2023. We have officials:i. Mr Dominic Otucet - President, Uganda Athletics Federation;ii. Mr Peter Chelengat -  team coach;iii. Ms Grace Chesang – coach; andiv. Mr Elly Kironde Muwanguzi - team captain. The athletes are:i. Victor Kiplangat (Gold Medallist Marathon);ii. Joshua Cheptegei (Gold Medallist 10,000m)- Joshua is not here;iii. Rebecca Cheptegei;iv. Doreen Chesang;v. Mercyline Chelangat;vi. Prisica Chesang;vii. Joel Ayeko;viii. Rogers Kibet;ix. Oscar Chelimo;x. Leonard Chemutai;xi. Stephen Kissa; andxii. Andrew Rotich Kwemoi. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)It takes me back to what the honourable minister was saying; how come a Bahati is not there, Ssewungu is not there, and Kankunda. (Laughter)  It now tells you what is happening. We need to promote sports and I think the best way to promote sports, should be at the regional level. I like the way the FUFA Drum is taking shape, where you identify potential people from different regions. We should be able to do that and promote sports across the whole country, because my imagination is that, it is their own initiative, but they promote the country.Honourable members, you have heard. I want to make an amendment to your motion that Dorcus Inzikuru should also be rewarded. (Applause)  I now open the debate, Professor - who are the seconders? It was seconded by the whole House; that is why we are debating. The one who is going to speak is seconding. 3.34PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Inde -pendent, Sheema South County, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I second the mo -tion.I am very happy with the performance of our sportsmen and women. As a former President of the Uganda Athletics Federation -(Interjection)-  Yes, in 199 -THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members.[The Speaker] TRIBUTE TO TEAM UGANDA10049THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023PROF. MUSHEMEZA:  And an active athlete in the Parliamentary Sports Club. ( Applause ) I was very excited by the performance of our people. In athletics, the word ‘championships’ is more competitive than the Olympics. I watched champion Joshua Cheptegei on the 200 mark, as he engaged the gear. When he entered the home stretch, and I saw the arm swing, I knew it was done. (Applause)Madam Speaker, it is very important to support our sportsmen and women. These talents are all over. During my time, the best long-distance runners were from Kigezi Subregion. (Laughter ) I joined the national team in 1988 -THE SPEAKER: Professor, address the Chair, do not listen to Hon. Solomon.PROF. MUSHEMEZA: During that time, I remember participating in the marathon from Kabale Stadium, to Katuna Border, and back to the stadium, a distance of 42.195 kilometres. The best runner was Karokora from Kigezi. But, at that time, we had also spotted Kapchorwa as an area with potential. I remember moving with the athletes from the Forest of Kaptwata  in Kapchorwa, up to Kapchorwa Town, when we spotted some of those best athletes.I commend, the President of Uganda Athletics Federation, Mr Domenic Otucet, one of those who succeeded me, for the good work you are doing with the coaches. It is a job well done. I also commend the She Cranes; you need to have watched them playing- the skills, competence, experience and the vibe, it was a good team. Madam Speaker, I believe, this Parliament will continue to support sports and I strongly support the motion. Thank you, very much. (Applause) THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Professor. Yes, Hon. Asuman Basalirwa.3.34MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second and support the motion, to recognise the performance of our athletes and the She Cranes. Madam Speaker, as Parliament of Uganda, the best we can do for sports in this country as far as am concerned, are three things:i. Having an enabling legal regime. I am glad that this Parliament enacted the sports law, and that law is going to go a long way in professionalising the sports sector in this Country.ii. Parliament we can only do service to sports by ensuring that we make the necessary appropriations. Once monies are available to the sports sector, we will have done our job as an institution.Finally, to ensure that the monies appropriated are released in a timely manner. Yesterday, we were discussing this matter here. It does not make sense for us to appropriate money and the honourable Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development releases money as and when he feels like, well knowing that sports, has a calendar. We can only help the sports sector if we ensure that the monies appropriated are received in a timely manner. Finally, I would like to ask the Minister for Education and Sports to also take a very keen interest in our respective federations. It is also true that there is maladministration in these federations. Some of them operate briefcase offices, you will look for them and they are nowhere to be seen and yet National Council is releasing money to federations, but some of them are not even accounting. When you hear, for example, that players have not been paid, sometimes it is not that money is not there. The problem is with the federations. Minister, you have a duty to ensure that these federations are supervised and properly governed. 10050THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 [Mr Basalirwa]This aspect of misappropriation of resources-some of them do not even have constitutions, but you are dealing with them. We can only do a service to the sports sector, especially the athletes and the sports people, if we ensure that the federations are properly managed. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Asuman Basalirwa. Honourable Minister, I hope you are taking note. I see Hon. Oboth, do you want to talk? The issue is on country-wide identification of talent, regulations to be tabled in this House. Do not be happy that you have the law, necessary appropriation and timely disbursement of the money and then accountability from federations.3.41THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth):  Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER:   He used to be the national goalkeeper of Uganda Cranes -(Laughter)MR OBOTH:  Madam Speaker, you are nearly spot on –(Laughter)-  as a former athlete myself, and I have in this House the person who denied me the title of the championship, Hon. Julius Acon. We ran with him. That is very true. In Tororo and in the Eastern I hold a record of 100 meters and 200. I am one of the fastest-THE SPEAKER:   Honourable members, please listen.MR OBOTH:  I am currently the fastest minister in the Republic of Uganda -(Laughter) - and I rise to support the motion. If only we could realise the importance of sports in this country, it would be a priority among priorities. Free televised publicity of a nation, Uganda. The whole time our champions, were on the screen, everyone was forced to know and hear about Uganda. I want to congratulate our team. You make our country great. We are very proud of you and I want also to thank the Minister for being there. He is a sportsman. He has always feared to take me on for 100 metres, but if this becomes a contest, we shall invite you, Madam Speaker, to watch the two of us. (Laughter)  In this country, we can harvest a lot from sports therefore, we need the support of this House and the support of everyone else to make our country great. We have had great athletes and sportsmen from Bukedi Region and Eastern Uganda. For athletics, I hope that we are not going to focus on one region. The honourable professor here was a sportsman and no doubt - you cannot just get up here and say that you were. I want to join this House in congratulating our team and support the request, as put by the Minister of Sports. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:   Thank you, so much.3.44MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and also congratulate our athletes who were in Budapest. I stand here as a witness to support this motion because I was in Budapest, and I watched our brother Joshua take the Gold.However, the success by Joshua Cheptegei was celebrated by the whole world and wherever you go and identify that you are from Uganda, everybody would want to greet you. That is what I celebrated there. Everybody will recognise that Uganda is a great team. Please keep on and get us more athletes.Just as the minister has stated, it is good that we have done one great thing, having the Sports Act in place. The Minister of State for Sports must ensure that the regulation that is going to be put in place ensures that schools do not let us down because today, most schools are not taking these sports seriously. Instead, they engage students on academics ignoring sports and this is why we are failing to identify these talents from various schools. TRIBUTE TO TEAM UGANDA10051THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023The regulation must ensure that send children to participate in athletics, so that we identify all these talents. That is why you are seeing it only coming from Sebei because they have taken it as a great thing for their community. Where we had Akii Bua, Acon, Professor Mushemeza, is clear evidence that we can still get more athletes who can win gold for the country from those areas. So, honourable minister, the onus is on you. Just as has been raised by Hon. Asuman Basalirwa, sports have got a calendar and a period. For example, most of their calendar is between the first and second quarter, but unfortunately, this is a period where the Ministry of Finance releases little money to entities just as it is the beginning of the financial year. I would want to know from here, among other resolutions we are going to make; if all these athletes have got their allowances paid. If they have not been paid all their allowances, one of the resolutions of this House is to ensure that they are paid immediately.What they go through to bring this gold- people run and the moment they finish, they fall as if they are dying and then they come here and we do not give them their money.Finally, it should be the responsibility of this Parliament to ensure that we put in enough money because this is what sells the country at a free cost more than anything. I thank you, and wish to congratulate our athletes. I congratulate Parliament for passing the Sports Act. I congratulate the President for signing, and the onus is on the minister to ensure that it does not remain in papers. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:   Thank you. It still takes us to priority. If we do not take sports as a priority, then we are doomed. Honourable minister, much as we are celebrating, what the honourable member said is about the payment of the sports ladies and men. These federations do not pay these people – because the money is given to federations. We do not pay directly, as the Government. The federations must pay these people, and in time. 3.48MS PASKA ACIRO (Independent, Woman Representative , Pader):  Thank you, Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER:  I want that Sebei man – the MP for Kween – to come and speak.MS ACIRO:  I rise to support the motion and congratulate our great men and women who have raised the Ugandan flag internationally. Madam Speaker, as I congratulate these men and women, I do not forget to congratulate the children of Pader District who have so far, twice, won the athletics cup competition for Acholi subregion.Madam Speaker, as the minister is asking why we are not having others coming from the different regions, I implore him to take keen notice of these children who come to participate at the national level. This is because, as I speak now, the children of Pader District have won this cup twice and two of them have been spotted to go and represent Uganda in Australia. However, up to now, some of them have not got the requirements. This is very suppressing to parents because they are the ones who are supposed to pay for the passports and other requirements. Some of these parents are so poor that they cannot afford to pay for the passports. So, I interest and I call upon all Members to join hands and support sports so that we help and encourage our children, who already have the talents. I thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Hon. Hellen.3.51MS HELEN NAKIMULI (NUP, Woman Representative, Kalangala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to also 10052THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 [Ms Nakimuli]join my colleagues in congratulating our team for representing Uganda very well. As a sportswoman, I know what it takes to win even a silver medal for a country.I would also like to implore our other regions, like it has been said, because our colleagues are giving us competitors for the long races – we are only getting gold, silver and bronze medals in long races. We also need to win the short races. Being a short racer myself, Madam Speaker –(Laughter)-  it is only that this time -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, by the way, we have got a lot of medals through Hon. Helen and the team.MS NAKIMULI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is only that this time, I did not represent Uganda in the inter-parliamentary games because I participate in very many games and get tired. (Laughter)  I implore –(Member timed out.) THE SPEAKER: You be sincere that you did not represent us because of some other things. (Laughter)  Let us hear from Hon. Alobo.3.52MS JOAN ALOBO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti City):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join the House to congratulate our men and women who have made us proud as a country. Being an athlete myself and being the current 100 and 200 metres gold medallist at the East African Inter-Parliamentary Games, athletics is one of the games that is individual-based. If you do not have the gas, you never win. So, I know what it takes. I congratulate you. We are proud of you.I also join the House to say that all the pledges be fulfilled. I also request that the Uganda Athletics Federation takes it up to the fullest, like the FUFA Drum has done, to also drum athletics so that we also have competitors for all the races, just like my colleague has said. We have been jubilating in the long races, but what about these short races? It was only Dorcas Inzikuru who one time made us proud over a short race – was it also a long race? Oh, sorry. No, it was a short race –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we should have regional competitions in all the disciplines.MS ALOBO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Yes, Hon. William.3.54MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. First of all, I would like to thank all the Members. The way they have supported the motion is good and I am sure my people from Sebei are happy.  (Applause) This is one of the motions that everybody has stood up to support.Madam Speaker, sports can be a very good unifying factor because when it comes to sports, we all come together. These sons and daughters that you see in front pass through a lot of challenges. Some of us who interact with them sometimes feel ashamed to even celebrate with them.I would like to thank the honourable minister for being very close to Joshua, Kiplangat, Kiplimo and all the athletes, including their coaches.I have always been with the minister and I try to move with him. He has always given them ample time and listened to them and I am sure he has got to know all their challenges. However, let me summarise the challenges.The honourable minister talked about the issue of roads. As we talk now, Madam Speaker, none of these athletes is able to drive up to their homes, even as they leave here. Joshua and his parents have got impassable roads. Kiplangat, who is from Kween – from a subcounty called Benet, which is far away from the main road – is not even able to drive a car up to his home.10053THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023Madam Speaker, even on the issue of power, none of these athletes has power in their house. Even when it comes to water, none of these athletes has water in their homes; they move for many kilometres to get water.Madam Speaker, the road the honourable minister talked about is one of the only roads that connects Soi County to Kween and this is a road that would help them to train at high temperatures. In Sebei, we have the upper belt, which has very cold temperatures and the lower belt, which is very hot. So, this road, which the honourable minister talked about –THE SPEAKER:  We have already directed on the road.MR CHEMONGES:  Madam Speaker, the second road that the minister did not talk about is the road that moves from Atar – which is the main road in Keene, ascending and passing Kiplimo’s – by the way, Kiplimo and Kiplangat are brothers. There is a road that goes through their home up to a place called Mengia. It then goes to Kitawoi, Benet, Kwosir and then slopes to Cheminy.This is one of the roads that I have discussed with the athletes. They told me this road would make them train better because it runs through an area that has the coldest temperatures. Madam Speaker, the other issue that I want to raise is on water. After these people finish training and come back, they need a humble place for refreshments or even a swimming pool – those things. (Laughter)  So, we need to make sure –Getting water in Sebei is easy because you can easily tap it and it flows by force of gravity. It will not even take a lot of money to make sure that the areas they come from or even their own homes have access to water.Madam Speaker, let me conclude by saying this. I also spoke to our other medalist, Mr Moses Kipsiro. Kipsiro is the one who did wonders some years ago; I am sure all Members know this. I recently interacted with him and he looked very disappointed. This is because all the promises made were not fulfilled. Also, he would wish to mentor many people, but he says many small things are not being done. For example, Mr Kipsiro is crying that every district in Sebei should at least have a simple training ground, which should not be permanent, but of murram. It should just be a very good murram training ground; that is what he told me. Recently, Mr Joshua Cheptegei told me that his leg is not doing well and that has stopped him from participating in the next races. This happened because of training on the bad roads that are within Kween.THE SPEAKER: The Government has sent Mr Joshua Cheptegei for treatment.MR CHEMUTAI: That is true, Madam Speaker. We appreciate it, but I am highlighting it, such that we prevent the same. Even as we speak now, Mr Kiplimo has got a dislocation and these are all problems attributed to bad training grounds.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in whatever you do, there are occupational hazards. If the Government can come up and say, “Let us support and treat him” – as I speak, Mr Joshua Cheptegei – is it Joshua - has been sent to Italy.MR OGWANG: For the record, Madam Speaker, it is Mr Jacob Kiplimo because he pulled a hamstring when it was about three days to the competition. That did not allow him to go to Budapest, yet he is one of the best athletes we have, as Team Uganda. He has gone to Italy for medical attention, under the sponsorship of the Government. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I want to ask honourable members not to wait for the day when we are paying tribute to thank our athletes, to bring up these issues. (Applause)  Bring up those issues early. Today, we are supposed to make merry and be happy. (Applause)  Tell us you have this problem. Write to the Ministry of Water and Environment, to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and all these ministries. 10054THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 [The Speaker]Getting water in Sebei is the easiest thing because my place is served by Sebei. So, why wouldn’t you write to the ministry on that? As leaders, you are supposed to work for our people.MR CHEMONGES: Madam Speaker, I want to end by also highlighting another serious challenge that is faced by these athletes. This is the issue of resettlement.Mr Joshua Cheptegei, Mr Jacob Kiplimo and Mr Victor Kiplangat are all children of the people who are affected by the prolonged resettlement of the people who stay along the Mt Elgon National Park. Everybody knows this and they are all listening. As we speak now, I am sure they are watching and are not happy because their parents are the ones being chased every day. Their parents are staying on temporary land that they have been told to settle on, but not permanently. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Hon. Fadil.4.03MR FADIL TWALLA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know if I stand here and say I am an athlete, no one will doubt it - (Laughter) - because I have seen other people have been doubted. When the minister stood up, they doubted him – (Interjections) - yes, all of you.THE SPEAKER: Can you speak?MR TWALLA: Madam Speaker, I am here to support the motion. I know much has been spoken by my brother, Hon. William Chemonges, but I also have something to add. To improve on athletics in my region, we need to also consider grading small fields in primary and secondary schools because most of this talent is in these schools.In considering these roads, it is not only one road in Kween that needs to be worked on. We also have Sirinda-Ngangata Road; that is the area where most of these athletes of ours train from. It joins Ngangata-Kapchorwa –THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the problem is the roads; take it up.MR TWALLA: Madam Speaker, still on the issue of water; the water that comes to Bukedea is from my constituency. (Laughter)  Last time, these people rioted. They wanted to cut those pipes, but we went there and talked to them. (Laughter)  That very sub-county that gives you water –THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let it be on record that Bukedea people have not stolen your water. (Laughter)  The water was brought by the ministry, not anybody else and you do not have a right to cut the pipes. (Laughter)MR TWALLA: Of course, Madam Speaker, that would be mean – (Interjections) - You people, do not disturb me. This is time for Sebei and athletes; no information here. (Laughter)Madam Speaker, I want to tell you that we also have our own coaches; people who train these athletes. They are very important people and whenever we give gifts to our athletes, we always leave them out – those of Mr Peter Chelangat and Ms Grace Chesang. As these athletes train, they also run with them. So, there is a need for us to consider them. Thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: That is true and that is what the honourable minister had said. Apart from thanking the athletes, he was thanking the technical staff.4.07MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank our great men and women for the great performance that they showed us in Budapest. I am very proud of them. When they were performing, I felt very happy.I want to inform you that I am also an athlete. (Applause)  I used to do a lot of athletics and many other sports. I was doing field events; I was running long races and short races. 10055THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023Like somebody has said, we need to do more short races. We need our children to practice more on these. I know our people in Sebei mainly participate in the long races, but other regions can participate in the short races. (Interjections) Yes, Busoga and Buganda can do the short races.  I would like to thank the Government for bringing peace. We are participating in athletics because of the peace that the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Government has brought. (Applause)  Madam Speaker, our people in Sebei never used to participate in athletics in those days due to cattle rustling. We never used to sleep in our houses, we were migrating all the time; running away from the Karimojong. Now we are settled in our houses and this is why you see our children performing very well.  I would like to thank the coaches; Peter and Mr Otuket. These are God-fearing people. Usually, before they run, they pray. I thank God for the children’s performance. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI: Another challenge we face in Kapchorwa is that our main hospital has no ambulance. Whenever these children get injured, we do not have ambulances to transport them. I request the Minister of Health –  THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have teachers and students from Ikwera Primary School in Aduku, Kwania North County. They are represented by Hon. Kenny Auma and Hon. Bob Okae. You are most welcome. Please stand up.  We also have youth from Agago County represented by Hon. Amos Okot, Hon. Lagen and Hon. Beatrice Akori. You are most welcome. You have a good team from that area, please keep them. Honourable members, for your information, the Minister of Water and Environment, Hon. Sam Cheptoris, comes from Sebei. I want to ask the minister to make sure that there is water in Sebei.  Honourable members, the whole House seconded this motion. There is a motion  and motions take priority.  4.11MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been following the debate on the motion that has been moved by the Minister of Education and Sports and none of the Members who stood to speak on this motion has not supported the motion. By the look of the whole House, the country is very happy about the medals brought by our brothers and sisters to this nation. I therefore rise to move a motion that the question be put.  Madam Speaker, you have summarised the areas where we have to take note. In the debate, Members spoke a lot about budget support –  THE SPEAKER: We are not debating. Let us first get the seconders. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Silwany, the veterans and the Minister of Local Government.Honourable members, the issues raised are on talent identification at the lower levels in the whole country and investing in sports at school level. Regulations for the law that has been passed must be brought to this House.  The necessary appropriation and release of funds must be done by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, bearing in mind that we have a sports calendar. Honourable members, we should have competition for all disciplines at regional level for us to be able to have a “Musasizi” as an athlete.  We must also ensure that there is accountability by federations and all the sports persons must be paid by their federations. That is an amendment to your motion.  10056THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 [The Speaker]I now put the question that the House pays a resounding tribute to team Uganda for their exceptional performance at the World Athletics Championships, 2023. (Question put and agreed to.) THE SPEAKER: Yes, Honourable minister. MR OGWANG:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the support you have given to the motion and for the approval.  THE SPEAKER: I made an amendment that the “Inzikurus” must also be given all the promises that have been made to all the athletes, including Akii-Bua stadium. MR OGWANG:  I would like to make an emphasis on finances. Team Uganda is meant to participate in different disciplines in the East African Community games and All Africa Games. These activities are meant to take place in September and October, but as far as I am concerned, the release we got was less by Shs 10 billion. Therefore, in the near future, I hope you do not hear that team Uganda has failed to go and represent the country in these various disciplines. The budget was approved, but the question we would like to ask is: can the finance ministry give us the money as per what was appropriated for quarter one? Thank you. 4.15THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with the concerns of the Minister of State for Education and Sports (Sports) and this House.  Our budget cycle takes 12 months. However, before execution, we release money quarterly. There are instances where activities do not take place or cannot be implemented following our quarterly calendar. What we have advised entities to do is, where an activity of this nature appears, they should notify us early such that we plan accordingly.  For instance, in relation to what the minister is saying, if at the beginning of July, we had been notified that activities under athletics and the sports sub-sector will take place in the months of July, August and September, we would have made the release accordingly.  I would like to undertake that going forward, we shall work with the minister to ensure that releases are according to his programme. Of course, this quarter has passed. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We actually notified the ministry, but next time, better. Honourable minister, the netball team does not have a training ground. I want you to take note of that. The Mandela National Stadium, Namboole takes care of only athletes and footballers so you need to take note of that.  We also need to ensure that we pay all these people that we promised. Next item.BILLSSECOND READINGTHE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 THE SPEAKER:  Yes, mukatuliki . MR SSEWUNGU:  I want to start with my procedural matter. We have interesting scenarios these days in this House; senior ministers are never here. Hon. Musasizi is always giving us empty promises, but Hon. Matia Kasaija is very rare and in addition, the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business, Hon. Nabbanja – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable mukatuliki  - MR SSEWUNGU:  Joseph Gonzaga Ssewungu, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Joseph Ssewungu Mukatuliki , those are not funny promises. There is nothing that has ever been promised from the Front Bench and it is not fulfilled. The Hon. Musasizi that you are talking about 10057THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023is a chartered accountant and a real Minister of Finance. (Laughter)  He has full authority; he has been delegated by his boss.  One thing you need to know is that he used to be one of the best chairpersons of a committee. It is not a matter of having a senior person there. It is what we want to be done and he is discharging his duties.  MR SSEWUNGU:  I agree with what you are saying, but just a while ago, Hon. Ogwang was complaining about funds and both of them sit in the Cabinet. That is what the honourable member was saying and it is true.  THE SPEAKER:  That is normal.  MR SSEWUNGU:  I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports and we have had several engagements, but we need to see the senior ministers because they are Members of Parliament.  The Prime Minister is the Leader of Government Business, Madam Speaker, and she has to appear here to lead the business. However, we have been here for more than three weeks and the Prime Minister is never here. Even the one sitting in her position has gone out. I do not know what is happening with Gen. Moses Ali.  We need to know what is happening to our friends, Madam Speaker. We need them and they are appointed to run the Government. They are given Government funds, they have vehicles and other lead cars blocking us when we are moving. Why are they not here? They should appear, Madam Speaker.  THE SPEAKER:  I am actually going to request the President to appoint Hon. Joseph Gonzaga as one of the ministers. (Laughter)   BILLSSECOND READINGTHE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 4.21THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Veterinary Practitioners’ Bill, 2023” be read for the second time. THE SPEAKER:  Is the Bill seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Ibanda, Hon. Milton, the Member from Ssembabule, Hon. Alobo, Hon. Christine, by all the cattle keepers. (Laughter)  Hon. Charity, Gen. Kavuma, all of them. Would you love to speak to your Bill?  LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The object of the Bill is to: i. Repeal and replace the Veterinary Surgeon Act, Cap. 277;ii.  Provide an institutional framework for the regulation of veterinary practice by providing for the training, registration, and licensing of veterinary professionals and veterinary paraprofessionals;iii.  To improve the quality of veterinary services and coverage to strengthen the capacity of training institutions and improve the training of veterinary practitioners; iv. To remove obsolete provisions; and v. To revise fines for offences committed under the Act. I beg to move.  THE SPEAKER:  Thank you so much. Can I ask the chairperson of the committee to come and present a report on the Bill? Give us a summary. 10058THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 20234.21 THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry, and Fisheries on the Veterinary Practitioners’ Bill, 2023. I beg to lay.  I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of meetings – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I want all of you. I want quorum.MS OKORI-MOE:  I beg to lay on the Table minutes of the meetings that were held by the Committee on Agriculture while considering the Veterinary Practitioners’ Bill.  THE SPEAKER:  Please lay. MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Speaker, I now beg to present the report of the Committee on Agriculture on the Veterinary Practitioners Bill. It is a nine-page document, but we shall summarise.  The Veterinary Practitioners’ Bill, 2023 was read for the first time on 20 June 2023 and referred to the Committee on Agriculture in accordance with Rule 129(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.  The committee scrutinised the Bill in accordance with Rules 129(2), 129(3) and 129(4) of the Rules of Procedure and now begs to report.  Madam Speaker, the report is being presented in compliance with Rule 130(2) of the Rules of Procedure. The Veterinary Surgeons Act, Cap. 277, which this Bill seeks to repeal, came into force in 1958 and has never been amended.  The Act provides for the establishment of the Uganda Veterinary Board, which is an autonomous statutory body responsible for the regulation of veterinary professionals through registration and licensing.  The scope of the Act is, however, limited to the registration of degree holders (Bachelor in Veterinary Medicine) and diploma holders (those with a Diploma in Veterinary Science).  The memorandum of the Bill indicates that Uganda has only 1,186 registered veterinarians, but over 3,700 unregistered veterinary para-professionals and there is no law compelling veterinary paraprofessionals nor requiring their conduct to be regulated.  The veterinary paraprofessionals include meat examiners, veterinary public health officers, technical laboratory staff, and artificial inseminators.  The Bill therefore seeks to address this gap by providing for the registration of both veterinary surgeons and veterinary paraprofessionals. There are emerging innovations and technological advancements in the delivery of veterinary services and they now demand that veterinary professionals must continuously acquire new skills and knowledge to remain worthy and relevant to the veterinary practice. The Veterinary Surgeons Act, Cap. 277, does not, however, provide for continuous professional development of practitioners.  Since the enactment of the Veterinary Surgeons Act, Cap. 277 in 1958, there were new developments that merit reform and update to ensure that the Act is in line with the social, cultural and economic needs and values of the people of Uganda. In addition, Uganda has regional and international obligations in the field of veterinary and animal industry which must be observed, respected and promoted. These include the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) Terrestrial Health Code, 2012 to which Uganda is a signatory and is therefore bound to develop veterinary legislations that comply with the code, hence the need to amend The Veterinary Surgeons Act to ensure conformity. 10059THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023The objects of the Bill have already been read by the minister. The methodology that the committee used included meetings with various categories of entities as listed as well as various professional associations.  The educational institutions included Makerere University College of Veterinary Medicine, Animal Resources and Biosecurity; Makerere University College of Health Sciences; School of Health Sciences; Department of Pharmacy.  We also interacted with private individuals who included: a) Hon. Dr Opio Samuel; b) Dr Sam Byagagaire, senior presidential adviser on veterinary affairs; c) Dr Stephen Lutoti, Managing Director, Eloipharm (Uganda) Limited; d) Dr David Ekau, Managing Director, Spring Pharmacy Limited;e) Dr Owagage Mpaata Jerome, Pharmacist & Legal Counsel; and f) Dr Charles Lagu, Managing Director, Lanoa Agricultural and Technology Consult Limited. The committee also received and reviewed memorandum from Uganda Law Society and also made reference to the Veterinary Surgeons Act, Cap.277; The World Organisation for Animal Health, Terrestrial Animal Health Code, 2012; Veterinary Surgeons and Veterinary Paraprofessionals Act, 2011 of Kenya; and The Veterinary Act, 2003 of Tanzania. Committee observations and recommendations  On nomenclature, the committee observed that clause 2 of the Bill defines key terms used. However, some terms need to be revised and others need to be introduced for purposes of clarity and ease of application.   The committee recommends that definitions of key terms used in the Bill be amended appropriately and other relevant ones be introduced.  Application of the Act Clause 4(3) of the Bill says that the provisions of this Act relating to licensing do not apply to veterinary practitioners in the conduct of their duties in the Public Service, but where a veterinary practitioner intends to engage in private practice, those provisions shall apply. In the same vein, clause 16(1) of the Bill states that, “A veterinary practitioner, other than a public veterinary practitioner, shall not practise or hold himself or herself out, whether directly or indirectly, as engaging in or being able to engage in veterinary practice or to take up employment or operate a business as a veterinary practitioner, unless he or she is licensed under the Act.” The committee observed that application of the law to only private practitioners is discriminatory since provision of clinical veterinary services is carried out by both public and private veterinary practitioners. The committee observed that the provision is open to abuse in the event that a public veterinary practitioner is involved in some form of malpractice and cannot be reprimanded because they are not licensed. The committee also observed that all practitioners, especially public practitioners, are responsible for crucial regulatory services which support food safety and trade in animals. The committee recommends that both private and public veterinary practitioners be licensed to offer veterinary services. On registration of veterinary practitioners, the Bill sets out the requirement for registration of veterinary practitioners under clause 5.  Veterinary practitioners include veterinary surgeons, veterinary specialists and veterinary paraprofessionals. Clause 6(1)(a), clause 8(1) and clause 9(1) of the Bill state that a person shall qualify to register as a veterinary surgeon 10060THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 [Ms Okori-Moe]or a veterinary paraprofessional respectively if that person is a citizen of a partner state of the East African Community.  The committee observed that blanket recognition of veterinary practitioners from East African partner states will disadvantage veterinary practitioners from Uganda since the mutual recognition agreement to allow veterinary practitioners from East African member states to practise across borders is not yet enforced. The committee recommends that Uganda should prioritise employment in veterinary practice for its nationals just like other member states. On the membership of the Uganda Veterinary Council, clause 30 of the Bill says that the council shall consist of 10 members appointed by the minister with the approval of Cabinet. Clause 2 says thus: “(a) The Council shall comprise of the commissioner responsible for animal health or his or her representative;b)  A representative of veterinary schools, faculties or universities recognised by the Council who shall be a veterinary surgeon or veterinary specialist; c)  A representative of veterinary paraprofessional training institutions recognised by the Council; d)  A representative of animal research institutions;e)  A representative of veterinary surgeons in private practice;f)  A representative of the Uganda Veterinary Association nominated by the association;g)  A representative of the Uganda Veterinary Paraprofessional Association nominated by the association;h)  A representative of the paraprofessionals who is specially trained to manage aquatic diseases nominated by the Uganda Veterinary Association;i)  A wildlife veterinary surgeon or veterinary paraprofessional; andj)  A representative from the pharmaceutical industry.”Sub clause (4) says: “The Minister shall appoint a Chairperson of the Council from among the members of the Council who shall be a veterinary practitioner.” The committee observed that clause 30(1) provides for the council to consist of 10 members inclusive of the chairperson. The committee also observed that clause 32(h) focuses on para-professionals yet the sector has many other professionals.  Clause 30(4) of the Bill makes any veterinary practitioner eligible for appointment as a chairperson of the council. However, the term “veterinary practitioner” is defined to include para-professionals who are not holistically trained to handle all aspects of veterinary practice. The Council lacks a representative from the public health field yet zoonotic diseases that affect humans and animals like Ebola, Marburg and Brucellosis, etc. are on the increase. The committee recommends that in clause 30(2)(h), the term “veterinary paraprofessional” should be replaced with “veterinary practitioners” and in clause 30(4), the Chairperson of the Uganda Veterinary Council should be a veterinary surgeon who is holistically trained to handle all aspects of veterinary practice. The Council shall consist of 11 members. The 11th member shall be a representative of veterinary public health nominated by the Minister responsible for Health. On the tenure for office for members of the council, clause 32 of the Bill states that, “A 10061THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023member of the council shall hold office for four years and is eligible for reappointment for only one term. The minister shall appoint at least three members for a term of three years, renewable once.” The committee observed that the term of office for members of the council is not uniform and this could be a source of conflict. The committee recommends that members of the council shall hold office for four years, renewable once. Functions of the Uganda Veterinary Council Clause 34(2) of the Bill lists the functions of the Uganda Veterinary Council and they include setting the standards of training required to qualify for the award of degrees, diplomas and certificates including standards for continuous professional development, among many others. The committee observed that according to Section 5(d)(ii) and (j) of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, the National Council for Higher Education is mandated- “(d)  to receive, consider and process applications for –i) the establishment and accreditation of Private Tertiary Institutions, private Other Degree Awarding Institutions, and Private Universities; andii)  the accreditation of the academic and professional programmes of those institutions in consultation with professional Associations and regulatory bodies;  (J) to set and coordinate national standards for admission of students to the different institutions of higher education.”  The committee recommends that the Uganda Veterinary Council should set standards of training in conjunction with other relevant institutions or bodies.  Powers of veterinary inspectorsClause 44(7) of the Bill lists powers of veterinary inspectors. The powers include entering and inspecting premises or a vessel suspected to be used as a veterinary practice establishment, mandating the owner or operator of a veterinary practice establishment to maintain the veterinary practice establishment in good and tenable repair in accordance with the established standards, issuing a prohibition notice to the owner or the operator of a veterinary practice establishment that it is operating in contravention of the prescribed standards, seizing and retaining any drug, equipment, record, animal or any other thing that appears to him or her to constitute or contain evidence of a contravention of the Act and inquiring into any matter concerning veterinary practice within his or her area of jurisdiction.  The committee observed that the provision above does not cater for conflict of interest which may occur in the course of his or her duty. The committee, therefore, recommends that if a veterinary inspector has a conflict of interest, the person should declare it to enable the council to appoint another inspector.  Madam Speaker, clause 57(1) of the Bill states that: “In the conduct of an inquiry under Section 56, the council shall have the powers of the High Court to summon witnesses and to call for the production of books, plans and documents, and to examine witnesses on oath.”  According to clause 57(4), an inquiry under Section 56 shall be deemed to be a suit or proceeding in courts of law and the Evidence Act shall apply with necessary modifications. Clause 56 of the Bill is about an inquiry by the council into a complaint lodged with it or an inquiry by the council into the conduct of a veterinary practitioner or licensee.  The committee observed that the above provisions contradict the spirit of clause 56(6), which permits the council to adopt its procedure during an inquiry while observing the rules of 10062THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 [Ms Okori-Moe]natural justice. It will also curtail proceedings due to the technicalities of leading evidence, as would be dealt with in the courts of law.  The committee, therefore, recommends that the council should not have powers of the High Court. This will create an avenue of appeal to the High Court instead of the Magistrates’ Court as provided for in the Bill.  On the immunity of veterinary practitioners, clause 70(1) of the Bill states that: “A veterinary practitioner or a licensee shall not be held personally liable to any person in respect of the death of an animal in consequence of any act he or she does bona fide in the performance of his or her duties unless it is shown that the act was done illegally or with gross negligence.”  The committee observed that death is not the only consequence of the actions of a veterinary practitioner in the performance of his or her duties. The committee, therefore, recommends that in addition to death, a veterinary practitioner should be protected from any adverse drug effects that may occur during the bona fide performance of his or her duties.  Madam Speaker, this is the end of the committee’s report on the Veterinary Practitioners’ Bill. I beg to submit. (Applause) THE SPEAKER:  Thank you so much, the Chairperson, Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Members, you have heard and we can now open the debate. Do you have a motion? Yes, honourable member?  4.43MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have attentively listened to the presentation by the chairperson of the committee. I beg to move that this House constitute itself into a Committee of the whole House so that we consider the clauses of the Bill, together with the report for purposes of saving time and given that the report is clear. I beg to move.  THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Olanya, do you want to second it?  4.44MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, looking at how the chairperson was presenting, it was clause by clause. Therefore, it is better that we go to the Committee Stage so that we follow the Bill clause by clause, as she has been presenting. I beg to second.  THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, you heard what the committee chairperson was presenting. For you to understand that Bill, you need to move clause by clause because that is what she was reading. I was about to ask if she had gone to the Committee Stage. You will still follow the whole thing.  4.45MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  In good spirit, I pray that this motion is not carried forward so that you can give at least five Members a chance to debate and also for a proper Hansard .  THE SPEAKER:  You are already debating; you are the third person.  MR SSEWUNGU:  No, there is a motion and I am against it. I am giving the justification that once we give an open debate -  THE SPEAKER:  Okay, what is your contribution to the motion?  MR SSEWUNGU:  The motion is not yet carried, but I am against it. So, I was saying that if debate is allowed, I can bring in my issues. THE SPEAKER:  There is a procedural matter. I thought that you were seconding the motion.  MS CECILIA OGWAL:  Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity. The justification for this Bill is clear and very well-defined. The committee chairperson has done us a favour by guiding us through. 10063THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023Even me who has never thought of becoming a veterinarian got a bit interested. (Laughter)  She led us through the Bill, clause by clause. I am an animal keeper and so, I got interested.  Therefore, Madam Speaker, the procedure is that if anybody had fundamental problems or issues with this Bill, they should have approached the committee. Since there is no fundamental issue that has arisen I do not see any reason why we should delay going to the committee stage. I thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I am getting all your views. If you have any issue, you will address them at the clause -Yes, Hon. Santa.4.47MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. This is a very important Bill, having come into force in 1958. Listening to the chairperson very carefully, I think we need to go to the Committee Stage and move slowly. My only issue is that we have so many birds all over the place and I did not hear the chairperson capture it. I think this can still be addressed at the Committee Stage. I want to propose that we move to the Committee Stage.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I put the question that what has been proposed by Hon. Basalirwa be taken by this House.(Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the Veterinary Practitioners’ Bill, 2023 be read for the second time.(Question put and agreed to.)BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023Clause 1 THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill.   (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 1, agreed to.Clause 2THE CHAIRPERSON:  Can we skip clause 2 and come back to it since it is interpretation.Clause 3THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, committee chairperson.4.50THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Madam  Chairperson, on clause 3, the committee proposes to amend the provision as follows: In paragraph (b), by inserting the words “animal welfare” after the words “animal health.” Justification“Animal welfare” is provided for within the Veterinary Hippocratic Oath as one of the veterinary practices and should be included in the provisions.The committee also proposes to amend by deleting paragraph (d). JustificationThe Mutual Recognition Agreement to allow veterinary practitioners from the East African Community member states to practise across borders is not yet in place/force. I beg to move. 10064THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Hon. Jonathan? MR ODUR:  Madam Chairperson, I actually oppose that amendment. In fact, I had proposed a deletion of clause 3, which is the object. By good practice nowadays, the long title of the Bill, which is provided, is more comprehensive and adequate. If we limit ourselves to the objectives proposed here - First of all, it is a bit repetitive and when it comes to interpretation in the future, it will be limited to the scope of the objective and yet under the long title it says, “…and related matters”, which allows it to be open. Secondly, I am opposing it on the basis of that word “animal health”. This whole law is about regulating the conduct of professionals engaged in veterinary service. It actually has nothing to do with animal health or welfare for that matter. Therefore, I would like to reject it and propose that we delete clause 3 and rely on the long title instead.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, honourable minister.MR RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, we agreed with the committee on the amendment and I have consulted with the Attorney-General and he has no objection.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Hon. Basalirwa.MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson, I want to associate myself with the submission to have this provision deleted. Ideally, the object of an Act over and above it being repetitive is not justifiable so it is redundant. I want to beseech the chairperson and the minister that you be pleased to have this deleted because it may not add value and it has the effect of actually limiting the overall application of your Bill.Besides, it is not a justiciable issue. Nobody goes to court, for example, to challenge or to make a case on the basis of the objects of a Bill, limited as they are.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister, when you look at the long title, it says, “An Act to provide for the regulations…”MR RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, I concede.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. So, we are deleting clause 3, not clause 2. Yes, committee chairperson.MS OKORI-MOE:  I concede, Madam Chairperson.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 3 be deleted as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 3, deleted. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, that clause was redundant. It is covered; it is looked at in the long title. Clause 4, committee chairperson?Clause 4MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to re-draft subclause (3) to read as follows –THE CHAIRPERSON:  Re-draft clause 3 or 4?MS OKORI-MOE:  Clause 4. The proposal is to re-draft subclause (3) to read as follows:“The provisions of this Act relating to licensing shall apply to veterinary practitioners in the public and private veterinary practice in the conduct of their duties.” JustificationThe provision, as is, leaves out veterinary practitioners in the Public Service from being issued licences to provide veterinary services, yet it is essential that all veterinary practitioners in both public and private sectors are licensed by the Council and subject to legal disciplinary actions for any professional misconduct. I beg to move.10065THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023MR AOGON:  To the minister, is there no mechanism within the associations or the bodies of veterinary practitioners in the Government for checking on the professional conduct of their staff? Because for us in accounts –THE CHAIRPERSON:  Are you making an amendment to –MR AOGON:  I am seeking clarity from the minister. For us accountants, there is a mechanism for checking. If you go off the lane, you are brought back.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Is that in relation to clause 4?MR AOGON:  Yes.MR MUSASIZI:  To respond to what Hon. Aogon is asking, the accountants’ profession came to where we are after the Accountants’ Act of 2013. Actually what this law will establish is that mechanism you are asking for and if you heard what the chairperson proposed, he said, “Can we have a framework that regulates veterinary practitioners both in public and private practice?” Yes, I needed to clarify this. THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Hon. Jonathan. MR ODUR: Madam Chairperson, the spirit of the amendment by the chairperson is captured in subclause (1) that reads: “This Act applies to every person who engages or intends to engage in veterinary practice in Uganda.” Therefore, you do not have to mention whether it is public or private practice. Subclauses (2) and (3) fall off automatically.  MR MUSASIZI: For avoidance of doubt, I see no harm in us taking subclause (3) as the chairperson is proposing. MR ODUR: In subclause (3), the intention was to exempt veterinary practitioners in public offices. The chairperson is saying it is discriminatory. Therefore, we delete it so that it applies to those in both private and Government practice because they are still veterinary practitioners. When you look at subclause (1) that says, “…every person who intends…”, it means that subclauses (2) and (3) are not necessary. THE CHAIRPERSON: It is actually covered in subclause (1). In the interpretation clause a “veterinary practitioner” means a “veterinary surgeon, veterinary specialist or veterinary paraprofessional registered in accordance with this Act.”  MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, it is important for us to be specific on this issue and I want to draw examples from the legal profession.  In the legal profession, state-attorneys do not require practising certificates to appear before court but those of us in private practice have to get practising certificates every year. Therefore, it is important to be very specific when the chairperson talks about both private and public practice. Otherwise, what does it mean? Are you saying veterinary practitioners in Public Service will not be licensed every year? Do you want to exempt them from the annual licences or do you want to licence them the way those in private practice are licenced?  It is important to make that clarification and you need to draw it along those lines. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with counsel and so, I oppose the amendment by the chairperson. This is because all veterinary practitioners must register with the council, but only those in private veterinary practice are required to pay and obtain a licence. Therefore, I agree with counsel. I would like to respond to the honourable member who asked whether there was a mechanism. Yes, there is. The Veterinary Board has been doing exactly that. THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when you look at these clauses, Clause 1 is on practice, clause 2 is on registration and clause 3 is on licensing. Honourable minister, what 10066THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 [The Chairperson]amendment are you proposing? How do you want it to read? LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: The amendment should read, “The provision of this Act relating to licensing shall apply to veterinary practitioners in public and private veterinary practice in the conduct of their duties and only those in private veterinary practice are required to pay and obtain a licence.” THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that discrimina -tion, where you only want the private ones to pay? Hon. Asuman Basalirwa, can you propose the amendment you had mentioned? When you are licensing, you are doing it for both private and public practitioners. Even when you are registering, it is for both. MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, we need to distinguish between registration and licensing. Ideally, all veterinary practitioners –  THE CHAIRPERSON: Show us what it should look like. MR BASALIRWA: Let me think about it as we – but the point I was making was that we must distinguish between registration and licensing. Registration is for everybody.  THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Asuman Basalirwa, that is why they are in different subclauses. Subclause (1) talks about registration for everybody while subclause (2) talks about registration and subclause (3) is on licensing. Yes, Hon. Oguzu.  MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, I am a little worried about the impact of this law. In our villages, we have people who have not obtained any qualification in school, but they are helping. The input of this law is that all those people must subject themselves to the regulations herein.  Therefore, I would like the minister to clarify to us how we shall handle such people so that we can address ourselves to the specific clauses of the law and how it will apply to our people since we are talking about application. THE CHAIRPERSON: We are talking about licensing. MR OGUZU: We are not just talking about licensing. We are on clause 4, which talks about the application of the Act. Sub clause (1) says, “This Act shall apply to every person who engages or who intends to engage” and that is what I am addressing myself to. How does the law deal with such people? THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable mem -bers, some of these things like licensing will come in the regulations. MR ODUR: Madam Chairperson, I want the House to first appreciate the principle we are discussing. I will use the example of a driving licence. Here, the proposal by the minister and what is in the law is that a Government driver does not need a driving licence –  THE CHAIRPERSON: He needs it.MR ODUR: That is the same spirit, which you are proposing; that you are all drivers, but the one that drives a Government vehicle should not have a licence and therefore is not subject to renewal.  What the chairperson proposed in the amendment was that these people should not be discriminated against; whether you are driving for Government or private, you need a licence. This is why the chairperson proposed that we should delete and say, people working for Public Service and those in the private sector must obtain the annual licence. My argument was that if we agree on that principle, we can see how to propose the amendment. If we take the proposal by the chairperson, then subclauses (2) and (3) fall out. We delete them because subclause (1) will take care of it. If you reject the proposal and say we protect the people who work for the Government not to be subject to the licensing regime -  this is a highly regulated sector. We are talking about provision of animal health services so it must be held to a high standard. If you do not licence them annually, they may not be able to do the work. That is the principle I want to –  10067THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023THE CHAIRPERSON: When you talk about the deletion of clauses 3 (2) and (3), that would mean this Act applies to every person who engages. Engaging will mean that you are registering and licensing. Let us first hear from the minister. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Colleagues, we are referring to people of the same profession. Actually, the input of Hon. Asuman Basalirwa fits with our position. The way we have been doing it is that once the veterinary surgeon or veterinary practitioners register their practice, they pay the licence annually. What we are trying to say is those in Government will be registered, but they will not be compelled to pay licences. That is what we wanted –(Interjection)–  that is how it is. This is because they are employed by the Government; they are public officers. Whether you say they pay for it or not, it is still the Government, which is going to pay for them.  Therefore, we would like to say that all veterinary practitioners must register with the council, but only those in private veterinary practice are required to pay and obtain the licence. DR RUYONGA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to relate it to the medical profession. The licence is for all practitioners, but private practitioners have to pay for an operational licence. Thank you.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  If you refer to what he is saying, the licensing is for everybody, but the operational one is for you to be able to operate. Isn’t that what you are saying? DR RUYONGA:  For the private practitioners, it is a form of business so they have to pay a fee. MR MULIMBA:  Madam Chairperson, I entirely agree with what the minister has proposed here. I do not buy the proposal to delete any of these provisions under clause 4 because it is simply stipulating application and you are only trying to vary the scope.  Secondly, he is emphasising that all practitioners must register. The second one is talking about licensing those in private practice. I think this is the practice even in the medical field, as the doctor has said. For those who are in the public domain working for the Government, there should be no need for them to pay for a licence because they are already working for the Government, as long as they register. Registration is the bar; the regulatory mechanism.  MR ODUR:  Madam Chairperson, first look at the definition of a veterinary practitioner so that we can make sense of it. It is defined, as you have said, thus: “…means a veterinary surgeon, veterinary specialist, veterinary paraprofessional registered in accordance with this Act.”  So, when you come under clause 4 and say that the provision of this Act relating to registration applies to veterinary practitioners, you have already said that a veterinary practitioner is a person registered. This is double registration.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  The issue here is on the application of the Act where we are talking about registration and licensing. Who is supposed to pay?  MR KOMAKECH:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for giving me the opportunity. I think we are confusing two things; the practising licence and trading licence. These veterinarians get registered, but they are supposed to pay a practising licence annually.  It is not merely giving a licence. When you go to renew your licence, they check your credibility; how have you been performing? Should we exempt civil servants from being checked on how they are performing and we engage the private practitioners on how they are performing? I think that would not be fair. Therefore, let us separate a practising licence from a trading licence. I think that is where the confusion is. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. MS NALUYIMA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Taking it from what has already 10068THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 [Ms Naluyima]been submitted and what we are agreeing upon, both private and public practitioners need to be licensed. I therefore propose that we add a fourth subclause under clause 4 to take care of only the private practitioner. It should be about the operational or trading licence so that it is only for private practitioners.  However, as far as licensing is concerned -   THE SPEAKER:  The trading licence is catered for under another clause. Let us phrase clause 3.  MR BASALIRWA:  Let us set the principle straight. I am a Commissioner for Oaths. I am also a Notary Public. Every year, I have to get a Commissioner for Oaths licence, which I pay for. However, a magistrate will commission your documents without that licence. In fact, they use a Latin term called “ virtute officii ” (by virtue of their office.)  Now, there are entitlements that come with being a public officer and one of those entitlements relates to exemptions of this nature. I am telling you that it happens in the legal profession. Therefore, what we need to sort out here is, one, do we want veterinary officers or practitioners in public offices to be annually licensed or not?  If we are talking about having them licensed every year then we go by the proposal of the committee chairperson. If we are saying that since they are public officers, the requirement of annual licensing should not apply or should be exempted then we should maintain the provision in the Bill, as proposed by the minister.  I think the House should agree on those two elements; whether licensing should apply to all or not. Let us focus the debate on that aspect. Once the House agrees on the principle, we will help with the drafting.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  That is what the minister wants and that is what the Attorney-General has agreed to; that the Bill stands as it is.  Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 stands part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 4, agreed to.Clause 5MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend subclause (2) by substituting “five years” with “three years.”  JustificationRegistration soon after attaining the relevant qualification will ensure uptake and scaling up of registration by practitioners. I beg to move. THE SPEAKER:  Yes, honourable minister. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  I have no objection.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Olanya? MR OLANYA:  Madam Chairperson, looking at the original clause, it is more meaningful to let it be for five years. The moment you reduce it to a shorter time, nobody will follow the profession. It is very important to let the person go for five years and if the person fails to be licensed, they are allowed to go back and sit for the exams. This is better than reducing it to three years. THE CHAIRPERSON:  It is actually not an exam for a qualification, but rather for registration. Yes, we are looking at time. MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson, we want to understand from both the committee and the minister the rationale - THE CHAIRPERSON: If you are not registered for five years, you rust. MR BASALIRWA: No, Madam Chairperson. What is the rationale for the three or five years yet I have studied and graduated? An academic 10069THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023institution has certified me as a graduate so why are you conditioning me?  THE CHAIRPERSON:  You need to know that it does not take away your qualification. Can you practise after becoming a lawyer without going to Law Development Centre (LDC)? MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, these two are different and that is why I wanted to find out. The university has cleared me, but you are saying that I should take five years to be registered. What happens in between and how am I going to practise or apply my knowledge without breaking the law? You asked about the legal profession. Let me provide -  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe the justification for three years and not five years is in medicine because there are a lot of changes. Sicknesses come from nowhere, new innovations come up so, you do not need a longer time. First of all, it is risky. Let me hear from a doctor. (Laughter) DR OPIO: I think we are not understanding fully. What is being referred to here is the time within which you have to apply for registration and it was given within five years. So, it could be one, two or three years, but after five years, it expires.  What is being proposed is that within three years - So, you can apply within the first, second or even third year, but after the third year, it has expired and you have to renew. THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you okay with three years? Let me talk to doctors. DR OPIO:  The proposal is okay. You are giving a shorter period because when you give a longer period for them to apply then they could be practising as quacks. Thank you. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, I put the question that clause 5 - MR ODUR:  Madam Chairperson, before clause 5, the drafting of the entire Bill might confuse us. If you look at Part 4, from clause 28 - because clause 5 is now introducing certain things like the word “council” and yet we are going to establish the Council ahead.  What happens if we do not establish it or if we change certain things from the council? If possible, we could stand over this clause because modern drafting demands that where you are establishing a body that is going to regulate, it should come immediately.  We should have dealt with Part 4 which is (28) before we come to this. Here, you are now handling council powers. That is the first point I wanted to make, but if it does not augur well, I am okay.Secondly, this definition or use of the word -  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Okorimoe, have you got what the Member is raising? We are legislating in anticipation that the House will approve the word “council” in clause 28.MR ODUR: Secondly, under clause 5(1), we have these definitions; veterinary surgeon and veterinary specialist. I do not have any problem with those two, but specifically veterinary paraprofessionals. The use of the word “professional” here would connote that they are actually above specialists and surgeons. In other practices, these are either veterinary aids, veterinary assistants, veterinary nurses or veterinary attendants.  Once you introduce “paraprofessional veterinary…”, it connotes that they have higher qualifications than surgeons and specialists. If we approve them here as it is - THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable member, I want to refer you to the interpretation. Veterinary paraprofessional means a veterinary practitioner who is registered to practise veterinary medicine under the direct or general supervision of the veterinary surgeon.     MR ODUR: Madam Chairperson, that is the gist of my - 10070THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023THE CHAIRPERSON:  I thought you would understand. PROF. MUSHEMEZA:  Madam Chairperson, the practice here has been that we deal with definitions and interpretations at the end., Even in his previous submission, the honourable counsel was referring to a definition, which we are supposed to deal with at the end. Is he in order to continue referring to definitions which are supposed to be dealt with at the end of the Bill?   THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, we are taking three years that have been proposed by the minister. I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.THE CHAIRPERSON: It is not the norm that interpretation comes last. Incidentally, interpretation is clause 2 of the Bill.  Clause 6MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend the provision in subclause 1(a) by substituting the words, “An East African Community Partner State”, with the word “Uganda”. JustificationBlanket recognition of veterinary practitioners from East African partner states will disadvantage veterinary practitioners from Uganda in the field of veterinary practice since the mutual recognition agreement to allow veterinary practitioners from East African member states to practise across borders is not yet in place. In subclause 4 by replacing the words, “oaths prescribed by regulations” with the words “oaths set out in Schedule 5.” JustificationTo clearly specify the oaths of veterinary surgeons and veterinary paraprofessionals within the Act. I beg to move.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Is it Schedule 2 or Schedule 5? MS OKORI-MOE:  I think it is Schedule 2, Madam Chairperson. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I do not see Schedule 5. It is a new insertion.  MR AOGON:  As she is searching for the schedule, Madam Chairperson, I have a concern. As we speak, Uganda is leading in promoting the deepening, widening and tightening of the East African Community. If my animal is sick and there is a veterinarian from Tanzania passing by, should I wait to get the one from Uganda to treat it? I would think that it is only proper that we allow the forces of demand and supply - If you are a quality doctor, you will treat my animal. (Interjection)  Local content should be applied to other issues, but not veterinary. That is my view.  LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, as champions of the integration process, our original proposal was actually based on that. However, all the Acts of our neighbours are not aligned to the East Africa Community. Therefore, it is for this House to decide whether we just tender ourselves. That was the spirit of the Bill, but the committee had a point and we conceded.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, I want you to look at clause 9. It states: “9. Temporary registration(1) A person may apply to the Council for temporary registration if -(a) that person is not a citizen of a Partner State of the East African Community and intends to engage in veterinary practice in Uganda;10071THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023(b)  that person possesses qualifications from an institution in a jurisdiction other than an institution from a Partner State of the East African Community.”  Can I hear from the diplomat?  MR MULIMBA:  Madam Chairperson, the import of the earlier provision is actually what prompts the provision of clause 9 that you have just read. I have been told by the committee chairperson that they looked at the laws in other East African partner states and they do not cater for East Africa. I would also like to remind this House, Madam Chairperson, that Uganda has stood out as a champion of integration. (Applause) Secondly, Madam Chairperson, we have had Uganda championing the harmonisation of laws in respect of integration. For example, if you look at the East African Safety and Standardisation Act, it was championed by this House during the Ninth Parliament.  We are talking about running towards mutual recognition agreements such that we can manage trans-boundary diseases. For those of you who come from Isingiro or Karamoja, we have trans-boundary diseases, which we must manage as a country. Therefore, we would like to propose that we continue to stand out as champions of the integration by providing for East African legislation. I therefore, propose that it stays. MR KAJWENGYE:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am happy that finally, I have caught your eye. The previous two - No, this particular one – THE CHAIRPERSON:  First, apologise. MR KAJWENGYE:  I apologise. This clause, Madam Chairperson, is about - THE CHAIRPERSON:  Bring water for Hon.  Kajwengye. (Laughter)   MR KAJWENGYE:  Thank you. This clause is about registration for veterinary specialists and qualification for veterinary surgeons. We already have an Eastern African Protocol on Labour, especially professional labour. However, each country holds their professionals under certain standards. As an East African lawyer, you have to be a lawyer first in Kenya and qualified to practise in Kenya before you can practise in Uganda. You first have to qualify to be a veterinary surgeon in Uganda under Ugandan standards for you to be able to apply elsewhere.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  So, what is your amendment?  MR KAJWENGYE:  My amendment is that we go with the committee. (Applause) THE CHAIRPERSON  Thank you. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As I mentioned earlier, the spirit of the original Bill was actually to champion East African integration. However, some lawyers advised that we could generate a mutual recognition agreement between the parties. Once this was introduced, we conceded to putting “Uganda” and then we can proceed with mutual recognition agreements between states. Otherwise, we are opening our labour industry to foreigners.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed by the committee. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 6, as amended, agreed to. Clause 7MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, on clause 7, the proposal is to amend subclause (2) by replacing the word “may” with “shall”.  Justification To compel the council to register the applicant once satisfied that the applicant meets the requirements for registration. I beg to move.  10072THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, honourable minister. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, we have no objection.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. I put that question that clause 7 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 7, as amended, agreed to. Clause 8MR MAYANJA:  Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I think we are legislating in anticipation because when you look at clauses 7, 8 and 9, we are talking about the Council. The establishment of this Council is under clause 28, as Hon. Odur mentioned. THE CHAIRPERSON:  “Council” is not a new word. In all the legislation that we have had in this House, the word “Council” is not imported from another language; we will always have a Council. MR MAYANJA:  Thank you.  THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 8. MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal on clause 8 is to amend the provision in subclause (1) by substituting the words “a partner state of East African Community” with the word “Uganda.”  The justification is that it is consequential. Another proposal is to insert a new sub clause after subclause (2) to read as follows:“A person registered by the Council under this section shall swear or affirm the oath set out in Schedule 5 and shall be entitled to have his or her name entered in the register.” JustificationTo specifically cater for the oath of paraprofessionals which shall be prescribed in the new Schedule 5. I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Hon. Oguzu Lee? MR OGUZU: Madam  Chairperson, earlier on I raised an issue and when you referred to the definition of “paraprofessional”, I thought this clause should be able to address my concerns.We have people in the villages who have not exceeded post-secondary, but they are helping. They seem not to be catered for and I am worried that if we do not cater for them, we will not have services. An example is Village Health Teams (VHTs); they have not gone to any school, but they are helping the Government. If you look at the definition of who qualifies for a paraprofessional, that leaves them out. For example, they must have successfully completed post-secondary training, they should have gone through many training sessions, which do not exist. Therefore, if we go by this, we will have a law which has serious implications for Ugandans. Honourable minister, I suggest that you come up with a middle ground. What you are doing now is to ring-fence this thing for some people and I see many Ugandans suffering. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, in the definition, those actually operate under the supervision of highly qualified persons who have been described in the beginning as veterinary surgeons so, they are adequately covered. MS OPENDI:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I just want to give clarification. This is the Veterinary Practitioners’ Bill, which will become an Act. Just like we have the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners’ Council, the Village Health Teams are not part of this Council. They do not fall under that. 10073THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023I think what the honourable member is talking about is that they do not even fall under the para-professionals that we are talking about here. That can be covered under a different policy. Let us focus on veterinary doctors, surgeons and other para-veterinary workers just like we have doctors and dental surgeons under the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners’ Council. That is just clarification. THE CHAIRPERSON:  It is like including traditional birth attendants in the medical - Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 8, as amended, agreed to. Clause 9  MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, on clause 9, the proposal is to amend subclause (1) (a) by substituting the words “…is not a citizen of a partner state of the East African Community” with the words “…is not a citizen of Uganda.” JustificationTo broaden the scope of the provision to cater for other foreign practitioners to register for temporary veterinary practice in Uganda. I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, honourable minister. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, this is a consequential amendment; we have no objection. THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 9, as amended, agreed to. Clause 10THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 10 stands part of the Bill.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 10, agreed to. Clause 11MS OKORI-MOE : Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend subclause (1) by inserting the words “…within 30 days from the date of receipt of the application” at the end of the provision. JustificationTo provide a time-frame within which the Council should consider and communicate the decision to the applicant in order to avoid any abuse of the process. I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, honourable minister. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, we do not agree. What if the Council cannot take a decision within 30 days? We propose that it should be replaced with “…as soon as practicable and in any case, not later than 60 days from the date of receipt of the application.” THE CHAIRPERSON:  We are replacing “one month” with “two months”. Are we going with two months or 60 days? Make the amendment. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Two months, Madam Chairperson. We propose that it be replaced with “…as soon as practicable, and in any case, not later than 60 days from the date of receipt of the application.” THE CHAIRPERSON:  “As soon as practicable” makes it redundant. Let us just put 60 days. Remove the redundant part and put in the 60 days. Honourable minister, make the amendment. 10074THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023MOTION TO INTRODUCE A PRIV ATE MEMBER’S BILLLT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  “The Council shall consider an application for registration and shall communicate its decision to the applicant within 60 days of the receipt of the application.” THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed by the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 11, as amended, agreed to. Clause 12MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend subclause (1) by substituting the word “may” with “shall”. The justification is to compel the council to register the applicant once satisfied that the applicant meets the requirements for registration. I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister? LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, that takes away the powers of the council so we object. We want to maintain “may”. THE CHAIRPERSON: Where the council is satisfied, it “shall”. There is no power that is being taken over. Honourable minister, your colleague wants to speak to it.  MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate the fear of my honourable colleague. However, that fear is taken away by the words, “where the Council is satisfied”. I think that puts everything to rest.  Why would you be satisfied and then you do not want to – I think that is the import of that word. So, I want to persuade my colleague to agree that the fear has been taken away by the words, “where the Council is satisfied”. I will persuade you. (Laughter) LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I concede, Madam Chairperson. (Applause) THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, honourable minister. I put the question that clause 12 stands – MR OGUZU: There may be cases where the council claims they are not satisfied and yet as the applicant, I think I have met the requirements. In that case, I should have an opportunity to appeal that decision. I do not know where it has been taken care of. THE CHAIRPERSON: That is another clause. I put the question that clause 12 be amended, as proposed.  (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 12, as amended, agreed to. Clause 13MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend clause 13(2)(c) by substituting the words “in good order” with “…in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Council”. The justification is to avoid ambiguity. Use of the term “good order” is subjective and can easily cause confusion in the mind of the reader. I beg to move.  THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what is your comment?  LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: We have no objection. THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 13 be amended, as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 13, as amended, agreed to. 10075THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023Clause 14MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal on clause 14 is to amend the provision as follows:a) By deleting the words “registered”, “suspended or” and “suspension or”; andb) By creating another subclause to cater for suspensions. Redraft the provision to read as follows:“A veterinary practitioner whose certificate of registration, for purposes of this Act:a) is suspended shall not operate within the period of suspension; or b) is cancelled shall be taken not to be registered from the date of cancellation of the certificate of registration.”  The justification is: a) Deletion of the word “registered” is because it is repetitive; b) The term “veterinary practitioner” is defined to mean persons registered under the Act; andc) Suspension of a certificate should not have the same implication as cancellation. I beg to submit.THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you want to comment? LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, we are in agreement with the amendment. THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 14 be amended, as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 14, as amended, agreed to. Clause 15MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, before we handle clause 15, if the registration has been recalled, why can’t we have this person immediately removed from the register by the Council? I am talking of cancellation; this is the item I wanted to raise under clause 14, before you put the question. THE CHAIRPERSON: The committee’s drafting is very okay. Clause 15.Clause 15MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend clause 15(2) by replacing the fine of “one hundred and fifty currency points” with “three hundred and fifty currency points” and the term of imprisonment of “one year” with “five years”. The justification is to make the penalty more deterrent. I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, honourable minister. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, we are in agreement.  MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, subclause (2) says, “A person who uses a title referred to in subsection (1), which he or she is not entitled to use, commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding one hundred and fifty currency points or a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year or both.” Why don’t we use “is not qualified to use” and not “entitled”? THE CHAIRPERSON: That is subclause (2). It says, “A person who uses a title referred to in subsection (1), which he or she is not entitled to use, commits an offence…” – The one who calls himself a doctor. PROF. MUSHEMEZA: The concept “entitlement” covers even those who have 10076THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023 [Prof. Mushemeza]MOTION TO INTRODUCE A PRIV ATE MEMBER’S BILLgotten it as an honorary award. If we use “qualified”, we will have ruled out those who may have used it because it is an honorary award. So, the concept of entitlement is better; it will encompass even those others. THE CHAIRPERSON: That includes people who get PhDs online. (Laughter)  Professor is spot-on that you must be entitled; not with our cows, veterinarian. The Member for Busia does not have one. MR ODUR: Madam Chairperson, this clause confers upon those qualified the titles of a veterinary surgeon or a veterinary specialist. The name “doctor” is optional. It says, “they may”, if they wish, but the one that they are entitled to or qualified for is a veterinary surgeon or veterinary specialist. Clause 15(2)(a) says “they may”, which is optional in case they want to use it. Therefore, I agree with the proposal by the committee. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 15, as amended, agreed to. Clause 16THE CHAIRPERSON:  Committee chairperson, after this I want to get the list of the members of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to verify who is in the House; I see the chairperson and the deputy. All the others must pick warning letters from my office tomorrow. You cannot pass a Bill when you are not in the House. So, where are you? You are lobbying for seeds and all that - Professor, I want to know how many committee chairpersons are in the House. MS OKORI-MOE:  Thank you. The proposal is to amend the provision as follows:In subclause (1) by deleting the words, “other than a public veterinary practitioner”.  The justification is that it is a consequential amendment. In subclause (3) by increasing the term of imprisonment from “two years” to “five years.”  The justification is to make the penalty more deterrent. In subclause (4) by replacing a fine of “10 currency points in respect of each day on which the contravention continues” with “a fine not exceeding 700 currency points” and the provision should read as follows: “(4) In the case of continuous contravention following a conviction under subsection (3), that person shall be liable to one additional penalty not exceeding 700 currency points.”  The justification is to allow punishment for continuous offenders to be more punitive and deterrent. I beg to submit. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister, what is your take? LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, as earlier argued, the first amendment of deleting “other than public veterinary practitioners” - the provision requires veterinary practitioners in Public Service to obtain licences, which is contrary to the norm. The Government does not pay for the licences of its employees. Therefore, we are not in agreement with the first amendment but we agree with the committee on the rest of the amendments. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, the minister has an issue with subclause (4); “In the case of continuous contribution following a conviction under subsection (3), that person shall be liable to an additional penalty of 10 currency points in respect of each day”. The committee is saying 700 (a flat rate) while the minister is saying, “10 currency points each day on which the contravention continues.” LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, I would like to make clarification on clause 16(1). She was proposing to delete 10077THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023“other than a public veterinary practitioner” and I am saying we must maintain it. The justification is that the provision requires veterinary practitioners in Public Service to obtain licences, which is contrary – THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister, that is consequential. You cannot delete it. MR KIBALYA:  Madam Chairperson, I have an issue with the agreement. As we make this law and the minister comes on the Floor to emphasise it, we must also clean the House. I want to borrow a leaf from Bugabula where the cows we treat may have no veterinary doctor. These are people who learnt to treat and inject when they were on various farms. You are now bringing a law when you have not included them. Before we say that we want to imprison people for three or five years -   THE CHAIRPERSON:  Do you want to tell me that you do not have a veterinary doctor in your district? MR KIBALYA:  The district has one veterinary doctor who is an old man. In Bugabula, we do not have any; we are crying while the cows are dying. Therefore, as we put the punishment of imprisoning people, what have we done to make sure that these people are available? Otherwise, we shall first subject the cows to death because these people will fear to do anything – THE CHAIRPERSON:  But even these unqualified people kill our cows while treating them. MR KIBALYA:  The “ mulerwas”  are the ones who are there. These people have failed to -  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Maurice Kibalya does not even have a goat. ( Laughter)  Therefore, he does not know the pain of losing a cow. MR MUZAALE:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As you rightly stated, Hon. Maurice may not have a goat, but I have cows. The truth is that our area has not attracted professionals because we do not have many cows. Therefore, the punishment that is being put in the law is not fair to our people who have actually been helping our communities. MR KIBALYA:  Thank you for the information. I have written letters to the district requesting for veterinary officers and doctors, but they are not available. The minister should probably go on the Hansard and tell us – THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, the law is very good for some of us. I lost cows because I gave them to somebody who claimed to be a veterinary doctor. Hon. Og -wang - now these are cattle keepers talking. MR OGWANG:  I thank the agriculture minister and the committee. Members, we must accept that there is a reason as to why we went to school and specialised in a certain area. This equates to you telling me that we should continue allowing quack doctors to treat our people. I lost 80 cows in my kraal. How much money did I lose? We are here saying that we should allow such impunity to continue. No. I was paying this quack person money - Imagine paying him money and he makes you lose your cows. What are we talking about here? Therefore, there must be a punitive punishment for these people who masquerade. Personally, if you are talking about “three years”, I would even propose it to be “10 years.” I thank you.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Rwamirama, are you okay with the amendment of the committee?  LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  I am very much pleased with the amendment.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  The amendment is on clause 16 (4). What about (1)? Do we maintain it as it is?  10078THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023MOTION TO INTRODUCE A PRIV ATE MEMBER’S BILLLT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  And the rest as amended.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that clause 16(1) stands part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 16, as amended, agreed to. Clause 17MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend sub-clause (1) by deleting the word “private”. It is a consequential amendment. I beg to move.  LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, we have no objection. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.Clause 18, agreed to.Clause 19, agreed to.Clause 20, agreed to.THE CHAIRPERSON:  The amendment is in such a way that if you are a practitioner, you should not hold it. You know these people go into their private things.Clause 21MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend the provision in subclause (1) by replacing the words “veterinary surgeon, veterinary specialist, or veterinary paraprofessional” with “veterinary practitioner” and amend to reflect the same amendment throughout the Bill. Justification The word “veterinary practitioner” has been defined to include all the three categories of veterinary practitioners, that is; veterinary surgeons, veterinary specialists, or veterinary paraprofessionals. In subclause (4), by deleting the words “subject to subsection (5)”.JustificationFor clarity and proper chronological order and to avoid subjecting a provision to a later provision. I beg to move.  MS ALUM:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee as to why she is suggesting to replace “veterinary practitioner” with “veterinary surgeons, specialists and veterinary paraprofessionals.” I thought veterinary paraprofessionals are people of lower rank. When you bundle them together to mean veterinary professionals, I see a problem. You cannot make a paraprofessional who is perhaps a certificate holder - Some of these people examine meat or are inseminators and you want to equate them with a surgeon or a specialist. I see a problem with that. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe you could also read the definition of veterinary para-professionals and practitioners. Read it together before you bring it out. MR AOGON:  Madam Chairperson, I was actually standing in line with what she has raised.  THE CHAIRPERSON: I have given you a response; read the interpretation; the meaning of the two.  MR AOGON:  Much obliged, but allow me just a second. It is good to allow people who have qualified fully to have their own titles and not mix them with the people who are still 10079THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023on the road to qualification. I thought that we should take this seriously. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, I do not know the drafting language properly, but in the original Bill, as it stands before the amendment, we were considering the concerns of honourable colleagues.  However, in the regulations, the para-vets must work under those who have been named and they may be either in public and private practice. We need to be guided by –(Interjections) - I get you, but they are not supposed to. In practice, the para will always work under a veterinary surgeon who is qualified; either holding a diploma - I think this can be covered in the regulations.  MR AOGON:  Madam Chairperson, let us single this out and revert to the original position. Define these terms one by one and deal with the paralegals and practitioners separately so that it is clear.  DR RUYONGA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We can add “a registered veterinary practitioner” instead of leaving it blank.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Pardon?  DR RUYONGA:  A registered veterinary practitioner, in the last words. Then “paraprofessionals” may have to be removed because they are not registered; they are not professionals.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, I want to refer you to the original Bill. “A veterinary surgeon, veterinary specialist or veterinary paraprofessional licensed under this Act is entitled to engage in private veterinary practice and to demand, sue for and recover reasonable charges for professional advice, visits and any other services and the value of all the veterinary appliances or material or sub -stances supplied by him or her .” That is the original.Now, the committee is making an amendment in subclause (1) of clause 21 by replacing the words “veterinary surgeon, veterinary specialist or veterinary paraprofessional” with the words, “veterinary practitioner”. Yes, Member for Kazo – I mean, Kiruhura?MR KAJWENGYE:  Madam Chairperson, I actually represent Nyabushozi County. There is proof and justification for having “veterinary surgeon” and “veterinary specialist”, different from “para-vet”. Why? It is because this law creates rights, accountabilities and standards. In this particular one, there are rights, and so, when you bundle them together, you miss the idea that this law is actually supposed to create standards and hold them accountable. (Applause)  I beg to submit.THE CHAIRPERSON:  The rights of a surgeon are different from those of a specialist, and those are different from the rights of a paraprofessional.MR ODUR: Madam Chairperson, what the chairperson of the committee wanted to cure is just consistency: we either use “veterinary practitioner” throughout or the three separately. Under subclause (1), we are using the three differently, but under subclause (2), we have reverted back to “veterinary practitioner”. Otherwise, the chairperson of the committee had sought to cure that, for consistency. It means that, if we retain the three titles under subclause (1) – THE CHAIRPERSON:   Then, in subclause (3), we go back to what was in subclause (1)?MR ODUR:  Exactly? So, we either choose to use the three or go with “veterinary practitioner”. THE CHAIRPERSON:   Honourable mem -bers, let us use the three and amend subclause (2) to mention the three, instead of “veterinary practitioner” throughout. (Applause)MR BASALILWA:  Madam Chairperson, in legislative drafting, once you have made –10080THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023THE CHAIRPERSON:  Actually, when you look at it, “veterinary practitioner” means veterinary surgeon, veterinary specialist or a veterinary paraprofessional registered in accordance with this Act.MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson, that is the point I wanted to make, that once we have defined it, there is no reason to be repetitive here.THE CHAIRPERSON: No, if we are going to use “veterinary practitioner” in subclause (1), then, we should use it throughout.MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson, in legislative drafting, once you define by description or by narrative –THE CHAIRPERSON:  So, where we have “veterinary surgeon, veterinary specialist or veterinary paraprofessional” we use the “veterinary practitioner registered…” However, the problem is on the rights. The rights that the surgeon has are different from those of a paraprofessional.MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson, what a paraprofessional is supposed to do is also highlighted in this law. THE CHAIRPERSON:  So, what is your amendment?MR BASALIRWA:  My amendment is that we maintain the words “veterinary practitioner” to cover the three – (Interjections) – yes, because that is what is in the definition. A veterinary practitioner has already been defined. Two, what a para-vet is supposed to do is also outlined in this law. There is no contradiction. Why do you want to be repetitive over something you have already defined?THE CHAIRPERSON:  Let us hear from the Member for Dokolo.MS CECILIA OGWAL:  Madam Chairperson, actually, we are all saying the same thing, but talking like the Banyankole –(Interjection)- you are not a Munyankole; sit down –(Interruption)PROF. MUSHEMEZA:  Is it in order, Madam Chairperson, for Hon. Cecilia Ogwal to insinuate that the Banyankole talk fwaa. (Laughter)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable member, maybe it is because most of the cows come from Ankole.MS CECILIA OGWAL: Exactly that, Madam Chairperson. I was saying that the definition has actually clarified the issue. So, if we go back to the definition, there is no need for us to have conflict in clause 21. If we want to change our mind, the chairperson could guide us to go back to change the definition. In the definition, we have come out with one, but meaning all the three.That is why I was wondering – and, Madam Chairperson, to put the professor at peace, with a Munyankole, when he is going somewhere and he is very far, he tells you “ hanu hanu”,  which means “very near” – yet the place is very far. (Laughter)LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, the argument by Hon. Basalirwa has actually helped us a lot. Para-vets are also qualified because they are diploma holders. So, the amendment of the committee is actually adequate and appropriate. (Applause)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Do we include the amendment of Dr Ruyonga “…registered…”?LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  No, let us go with the amendment of the committee.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Veterinary practi -tioners? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 be amended as pro -posed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.MR NAMBESHE:  (Inaudible) - because the mandate to compound, prepare and dispense drugs, as per the National Drug Authority 10081THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023Act, is the preserve of a pharmacist. Thus, that would require even deleting (3) by the way. Just to cross-examine it.Clause 22MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend subclause (2) to increase the period of imprisonment from two years to five years. This is to make it more punitive and deterrent. I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, honourable minister. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  I agree with the amendment. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)MS NALUYIMA:  Madam Chairperson, I agree that the “ayes” have already got it, but we need to understand ourselves. If at a certain time, the rating of 350 was equivalent to two years, then how come when we increase the years we do not also increase the currency points? We need to look into that.THE CHAIRPERSON:  The law is not cast in stone. We will amend it. I put the question that clause 22, as amended, stands part of the Bill. Question put and agreed to.Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.Clause 23THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 23 stands part of the Bill.MR ODUR:  Madam Chairperson, I have an issue with clause 23(1)(d), which requires them to provide monthly written reports in the prescribed format to veterinary officers. I am wondering whether monthly is feasible in the circumstances that all these practitioners we have mentioned, will be filing monthly reports. Why not probably quarterly or even annual reports? THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Odur, disease surveillance needs regular reporting. For instance, today you can have ticks, tomorrow you may have another disease such as Tsetse flies, or whichever. One month is actually too much.  I put the question that clause 23, as amended, stands as part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.Clause 24 MR ODUR:  Madam Chairperson, there have been discussions about certain categories of people within the communities that should not be subject to this. I thought this is where the proposal should be taken care of. The spirit here is that the minister may exempt certain categories of persons to be able to do certain veterinary activities - THE CHAIRPERSON:  By regulations?  MR ODUR:  Yes, by regulations. But my proposal here is that we could just exempt the activities in the law directly so that we do not disturb the minister. So, all those who are traditional veterinarians, who can do small incisions, are already taken care of here because the activities are clear; they are not complex. So, instead of again subjecting it to the minister; that everyone should apply to the minister to be exempt. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Check subsection (2). “Notwithstanding subsection (1), an exception shall be granted in respect of…”-  Look at them.MR AOGON:  Additionally, to support your position, it is easier for the minister to amend the regulations than for Parliament to seek to 10082THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023amend the law. So, I would agree with the first proposal.THE CHAIRPERSON:   I would like to refer you to clause 24(2) (a). Hon. Odur, read clause 24 (2) (a).MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson, if the Bugabula South Member was very alert, as he is, and Buzaaya County, and Hon. Oguzu Lee and all of us, we would have noticed that section 24 will allow the minister to cater for the situation we are talking about. Actually, for the first time, if you read the Public Health Act and all those other pieces of legislation, you will notice that there is nothing as permissive and flexible as this piece of legislation. Now, we have an opportunity for the minister, through regulations, to offer a leeway to our ordinary people to provide these services that would otherwise be an exclusive preserve for the professionals, by granting exemptions. It is good that the legislation has tried, as much as possible, to outline those activities where exemption can be applied.Madam Chairperson, we were talking about regulations here - I hope the minister will come up very quickly, upon the enactment of this law and upon being assented to by my colleague if he is not busy, come up with the regulations as quickly as possible to make this a reality and to comfort all of us. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. I put the question that clause 24 stands part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 24, agreed to.Clause 25MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend subclauses (1), (2), (3) and (4) by replacing the word “Inspector” with “Veterinary inspector.” This is for consistency. “Veterinary inspector” is more specific, descriptive and consistent with the interpretation. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, honourable minister.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:   We have no objection to the amendment. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Have you defined “Veterinary Inspector?” You will have to define it in section 2. I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.Clause 26, agreed to.Clause 27, agreed to.Clause 28, agreed to.Clause 29, agreed toClause 30MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, in clause 30, the proposal is to amend the provision as follows: In subclause (1), by substituting the words “10 members” with the words, “11 members.” The justification is for purposes of voting; the membership should be an odd number so that when there is a tie, the presiding officer should have a casting vote, as provided for in Schedule Two. Secondly, in subclause (2) (f), by inserting the words “Uganda Veterinary” immediately before the word “Association” appearing at the end of the paragraph for clarity. In subclause (2(g), by inserting the words “Uganda Veterinary Paraprofessional” immediately before the word “Association” appearing at the end of the paragraph. The justification is for clarity. In subclause (2)(h), by replacing the word “paraprofessionals” with the words “Veterinary practitioners.” This is for inclusivity. [Mr Aogon]10083THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023Other veterinary practitioners, other than paraprofessionals, also manage aquatic diseases. In subclause (2)(i), by deleting the words “or veterinary paraprofessional” to read as follows: “(i) a wildlife veterinary surgeon nominated by the responsible body;” Justification The training and expertise of veterinary paraprofessionals is inadequate to represent the interest of the wildlife sector on the council. In subclause (2)(j), by inserting the word “veterinary” before the words “pharmaceutical industry.” The justification is to specify the category of pharmaceutical industry.In subclause (2), by inserting a new paragraph (k) to read as follows:“(k) a person in charge of veterinary public health nominated by the ministry responsible for health.”JustificationsPublic health veterinarians at the Ministry of Health should be included because they are recruited by the Ministry of Health to handle diseases that affect both humans and animals. In subclause (4), by substituting the words “veterinary practitioner” with the words “veterinary surgeon”. The justification is that a veterinary surgeon is holistically trained to cover all aspects of veterinary practice. I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Hon. Christine Kaaya.MS KAAYA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I request that we get a representative from the NGOs especially, those dealing in veterinary services because they are the ones helping us with accreditation of the other people below the paraprofessionals; those training farmer-to-farmer extensions. (Interruption)THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Hon. Ethel Naluyima.MS NALUYIMA: Thank you very much. First of all, I pray that because of the issues of public expenditure, we reduce the number to nine.THE CHAIRPERSON: Seven or nine? MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I want to entirely agree. Eleven is too huge a number for a board and I agree that we reduce it. It can be seven or nine. Clause 30(e) of the Bill says a “representative of veterinary surgeons in private practice”. Yet, we still have clause 30(f).THE CHAIRPERSON:  No, let us agree on the number. They will rearrange within what they have. How many do you propose?MS OPENDI: I propose nine because of the complexities.THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Member for Dokolo.MS CECILIA OGWAL: Chairperson, I have two issues with this number. One, I would go for seven. I think seven is generally adopted as the standard membership of a council or board.The chairperson of this committee is a lady, but in all this line up, she did not prescribe the percentage of gender representation in the council. Therefore, I move that 40 per cent of the membership be represented by – THE CHAIRPERSON: We have a constitutional provision on that.MS CECILLIA OGWAL: Constitutionally, it is 30 per cent, but we have now moved from there; the African Union has prescribed 50 per cent and so, I am taking a middle ground, which is 40 per cent. I beg to submit.10084THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Hon. Ayoo.MR TONNY AYOO:  Madam chairperson, I think we are trying to have a lean body with people who are not too crowded to talk too many things, set confusion and bring issues of deals in what they do. So, I think we go by seven so we can monitor - they can communicate properly, have meetings and accountability can be got faster from seven people than from 11 people. So let us go by seven. Since we are going to rationalisation and downsizing, I think we should start practicing it on some of these things. Thank you.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Let me first hear from the minister.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with the proposed amendments but I have two concerns. The first is on (i), where the committee proposed that “a wildlife veterinary surgeon nominated by the responsible body”. I think that is vague. It should be ministry responsible for wildlife. The second is on the numbers of the council members. I would like to draw the attention of Members to the importance of this council in lieu of one health concept and diverse scope of disease spread. I suggest that we keep the number to nine because the stakeholders are very many. We are looking at wildlife, we are looking at the Ministry of Health, we are looking at the professional bodies; it is very wide. So, we can move from 10 to nine instead of 11.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, I put the question that clause 30 be amended as proposed by the Minister of Agri -culture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the committee.  Issues of gender are provided for in the Constitution. Yes, we have taken nine members.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.Clause 31THE CHAIRPERSON:  Clause 31, Chairperson. MS OKORI-MOE:  The proposal is to amend the provision in paragraph (b) by substituting the term “good standing” with the word “good conduct”.THE CHAIRPERSON:  It is an amendment to the provision in subclause (b), not paragraph?MS OKORI-MOE:  The proposal is to amend the provision in subclause (b) by substituting the term “good standing” with the word “good conduct.”The justification is that this is for clarity and consistency. I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Have you defined, good conduct? MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the term good standing is a bit vague. Good standing according to my understanding may mean somebody who has money; some financial standing, who has muscle. (Laughter)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Does good standing not mean integrity and reputable? In all the laws we have passed, we are talking about good standing. It is about integrity. Yes, Hon. Kajwengye MR KAJWENGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Actually, good standing means a person has not been adjudged to having been bankrupt, convicted of a felony or misdemeanour to that effect - that is when we say a person is of good standing in society. Otherwise, the phrase, “good conduct” is mild, Madam Chairperson. I beg that we maintain the phrase “a person of good standing.”THE CHAIRPERSON: The phrase “good conduct” is restrictive. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 31 – 10085THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem. Clause 31(a) on “permanent resident of Uganda” is not defined in our Constitution. A permanent resident can be anybody who has gone through some processes of citizenship registration. Madam Chairperson - THE CHAIRPERSON: I want you to read (a) together with (c).MS CECILIA OGWAL: A citizen of Uganda - so, if we are using a citizen -THE CHAIRPERSON: And has not been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude.MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I agree with you as far as (c) is concerned, but I am wondering why the chairperson did not adopt “a citizen of Uganda” in (c). That would give us clarity on why she did not use the “citizen of Uganda” rather than “permanent resident.”THE CHAIRPERSON: Permanent because I want you to be available to treat my cows. Yes, you may be a citizen but you keep going to Kenya. MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to take you to the issue of “good standing.” THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Cecilia, you have been in this Parliament – there was a Member of Parliament in this House who was a practising doctor in Scotland. (Laughter) Are those the kind of people you want to bring?Honourable members, I put the question that clause 31 stands part of the Bill.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 31, agreed to.Clause 32MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend the provision by deleting the words “except that the minister shall appoint at least three members for a term of three years, renewable once.”The justification is that this is the practice in many boards, councils, and statutory bodies. The provision as it is may be a subject of conflict. Staggering of the membership can be handled administratively. I beg to move.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, I do not agree with the amendment. The provision does not allow the staggering of membership of the council which will then create a vacuum when the term of office ends, as the tenure of office of all the members of the council will end at the same time. I prefer that we maintain the clause –THE CHAIRPERSON: Institutional memory. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Yes, we maintain the clause as it is.THE CHAIRPERSON: The original position is that a member of the council shall hold office for four years and is eligible for reappointment for only one term, except that the minister shall appoint at least three members for a term of three years, renewable once.I put the question that clause 32 stands part of the Bill.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 32, agreed to.Clause 33, agreed to.Clause 34MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend subclause (2) as follows: In paragraph (a) by substituting the words “veterinary professionals and veterinary paraprofessionals” with the words, “veterinary practitioners.”10086THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023The justification is that “Veterinary practitioners” is well defined in the interpretation clause - it is consequential. In paragraph (c) insert the words “collaborate with the relevant institutions or bodies to” at the beginning of the paragraph. Rephrase the provision to read as: “(c) collaborate with the relevant institutions or bodies” to set standards of training required to qualify for the award of degrees, diplomas and certificates in veterinary practice, including continuing professional development.JustificationThe function, as captured in the Bill, contradicts the mandate of the National Council for Higher Education, under Section 5(j) of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 200l.In paragraph (i) delete the words “interests of the” to read as “(i) protect the veterinary practice, and deal with any matter related to the practice.”The justification is to avoid ambiguity since interests cannot be quantified. Veterinary practice is defined while interest is not. In paragraph (k) replace the words “supervise the dispensing and” with the words, “monitor the” and insert the words “in collaboration with the relevant authorities” at the end of the provision. Redraft the provision to read as: “(k) monitor the proper utilisation of veterinary drugs and devices in collaboration with the relevant authorities.”The justification is that the role of the National Drug Authority to supervise the dispensing of drugs according to the National Drug Authority Act, Cap. 206. I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes?MR AOGON: My only concern; my heart is still telling me that we need to go back and define the other terms separately. Otherwise, we are going to have a problem.THE CHAIRPERSON: We stood over clause 2. We will go back to it.MR AOGON: That assurance is very important, Madam Chairperson.THE CHAIRPERSON: But we have not passed clause 2.MR AOGON: Thank you.THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, honourable minister.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, we have no objection to the amendment. THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 34 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.Clause 35MR ODUR: On Clause 35,  I propose a minor amendment that is also consequential to give them powers to fine and issue administrative penalties. This is because ahead, we have given them powers to levy for breach, up to 250 currency points. So, it is better if we give them that power here. There are certain things that do not need to go to court since they are a regulatory council. They can impose a fine if there is any breach. So, I propose we add paragraph (f) to read, “impose an administrative penalty for any breach of this Act.” MS NALUYIMA: Madam Chairperson, I think we already provided for the penalties everywhere. Therefore, let us not give further powers.[Ms Okori-Moe]10087THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023THE CHAIRPERSON: We will do it through the – MR ODUR: If you look at Clause 60(f), - I am sorry we are going ahead - it reads “the council can impose an administrative penalty not exceeding 250 currency points.” It is already part of this.THE CHAIRPERSON: When you look at Section 71 of the Act under regulations, it says, “The minister shall, in consultation with the council, make regulations…”  Section 71(h) reads, “prescribe any fee to be charged under this Act;”     MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, there is going to be a moment when the clients of these people will either get aggrieved or there will be a concern which somebody must complain about. I think it should be “within the powers of this council to hear any complaints or any -THE CHAIRPERSON:  That is on regulations. MR OGUZU:  Where is it explicitly provided? THE CHAIRPERSON:  Appeals, on 71(1).MR OGUZU:  The other appeal is when I am aggrieved by the decision of the council, there should be a mechanism for me to appeal as a practitioner but if a client of these practitioners is aggrieved by them - maybe, they went to treat my animals and were negligent or something - I should have a mechanism to come to the council. In that case, I want the council to have powers to hear my complaints, as one of its powers. THE CHAIRPERSON:  When you look at Section 71(a) of the Act, it talks about the prescribed code of professionalism and ethics. This code should have penalties. MR OGUZU: Maybe I should be got right. My issue is, we have a council that regulates the practitioners and the practitioners serve the population. If the population has issues, wouldn’t it be right that they are able to come to the council to complain about them if they are acting unprofessional?THE CHAIRPERSON:  The minister is the policy supervisor of the council. MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson, that is covered under clause 34(2)(e), when you look at functions of the council. They set and enforce standards of professional conduct and ethics and exercise disciplinary control over veterinary practitioners. So, if you are complaining about, for example, professional negligence or misconduct, then this is what will cover you. As to how you get to this, cannot be a legislative issue. It can only be in the regulations; how you make a complaint to where and to who. However, if your complaint is on professionalism, then this provision here will be able to cater for it. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, we are on Clause 35 on imposing fines. MR ODUR:  I can clarify that. For advocates, for example, if you have a complaint about a lawyer, you go to the law council. They have powers to the extent that they can even cause a reimbursement; they can say that you deceived a client, you did not do the work and you disappeared, so you refund them. That is where I was trying to come from.THE CHAIRPERSON:  So, he wants to have powers to impose administrative penalties to be added as (f). Does it cause any harm to you?LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Well, the issue is -THE CHAIRPERSON:  Didn’t Hon. Odur take us to court for imposing something on the Floor?LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, I am actually reluctant - THE CHAIRPERSON:  Let us avoid that court - I fear Hon. Odur will take us to court. I put the question that clause 35 stands part of the Bill. 10088THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 35, agreed to.Clause 36, agreed to.Clause 37, agreed to.Clause 38, agreed to.Clause 39, agreed to.Clause 40, agreed to.Clause 41, agreed to.Clause 42, agreed to.Clause 43, agreed to.Clause 44 MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend the provision as follows:  In subclause 7 (d), by deleting the words “appears to him or her to” and maintain the provision to read as follows; “to seize and retain any veterinary drug, equipment, record, animal or any other thing that constitutes or contains evidence of a contravention of this Act.” The justification is for clarity and to restrict the powers of inspectors to only confiscate items which are in contravention of the Act. Then by inserting a new subclause after subclause (7) to cater for conflict of interest and should read as follows: - “Where a person declares that a veterinary inspector has conflict of interest in any matter under inspection, or a veterinary inspector declares so, the council shall designate another veterinary inspector to inspect the veterinary practice establishment.” The justification is for transparency and accountability and to avoid biases in the findings of the veterinary inspector. I beg to move.MR AOGON:  In the event that the complaint is coming from a third party and not the two, what happens? If I am a third party and I am complaining about a conflict here, shouldn’t it be attended to?LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, we have no objection to the amendment of the committee; we have actually harmonised on this point. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 44 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.Clause 45, agreed to.Clause 46, agreed to.Clause 47, agreed to.Clause 48, agreed to.Clause 49, agreed to.Clause 50, agreed to.Clause 51, agreed to.Clause 52, agreed to.Clause 53, agreed to.Clause 54, agreed to.Clause 55, agreed to.Clause 56, agreed to.Clause 57MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend the provision- in subclause (1), by deleting the words “of the High Court”.The justification is that the council should have administrative powers and a person aggrieved by the decision of the council should have recourse to the High Court.10089THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023Secondly, by deleting subclause (4). And the justification is that this is consequential, arising from the amendment in clause 56. I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON:  “Clause 57 - witnesses at inquiry - in the conduct of an inquiry under section 56, the Council shall have the powers to summon witnesses and to call for production of books, plans and documents to examine witnesses on oaths.” That is the amendment they are saying. Originally, it was: “(1) In the conduct of an inquiry under section 56, the Council shall have the powers of the High Court… ”Yes, honourable minister.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  We have no objection to the amendment. MR ODUR:  Madam Chairperson, I am opposed to the amendment by the committee. The clause, as it is, serves the purpose. It was meant to give the council the powers to compel witnesses. That is why they have equated it to the High Court. It does not mean that this council is sitting as the High Court. However, in summoning witnesses and dealing with witnesses, just like the committees of Parliament here –THE CHAIRPERSON:  Just like Article 90 of the Constitution, which gives committees of Parliament powers of the High Court?MR ODUR:  Yes, if you take that away, people will be stubborn. MR AOGON:  Additionally, before the honourable colleague comes on board, Madam Chairperson, it would be good for us to specify those powers when we are talking about -THE CHAIRPERSON:  The powers of the High Court are known by everybody. The powers here are to summon witnesses and call for production of books, plans and documents and to examine them on oath. Those are the powers we are talking about.MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson, I am persuaded by the proposal of the committee. There is a wrong assumption that the powers to summon witnesses are an exclusive preserve of the High Court.A magistrate’s court has the power. Commissions, under the Commissions of Inquiries Act, also have the power. So, it is not true that it is only the High Court –THE CHAIRPERSON:  Even the LC can summon.MR BASALIRWA: By the way, it is even under the Local Councils Courts Act. So, it is not true that the power to summon is limited to the High Court. I know it is also in our rules, but it does not make it right.So, Madam Chairperson, the committee has stressed that, that power to summon can be contained in a piece of legislation, on its own, without even making reference to the High Court. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Does it cause any harm if we leave it the way it is?MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson, it will not, but what I want to disabuse is this thinking that the power to summon is a preserve of the High Court. Anybody can be given that authority by law. Just like - what if you had written that “the council shall have powers of the Magistrates’ Court to summon witnesses”? Would it be wrong? It would not, definitely. So, if we left it this way, there would be no harm. However, the point I am emphasising is that it is not true that summoning is a preserve of the High Court.MR ODUR: Madam Chairperson, the reason why they state the “High Court’’ is that it has unlimited original jurisdiction. So, even if somebody is outside somewhere, they can summon you. THE CHAIRPERSON : Honourable mem -bers, I put the question that clause 57 stands part of the Bill.10090THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 57, agreed to.Clause 58, agreed to.Clause 59, agreed to.Clause 60MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend the provision - in subclause (3), by replacing the words “subsection (1)(f)” with the words “subsection (1)(e)”. This is for proper referencing because the cease and desist order is provided for under subclause (1)(e). Then further, in subclause (4), by increasing the period of imprisonment from “two years” to “seven years”.The justification is that causing death or endangering humans or animals should carry a more punitive punishment. I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON:  For me, I lost a hundred cows, so, this business – yes, honourable minister.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, I agree with the committee. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 60 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 60, as amended, agreed to.Clause 61MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend subclause (3), by substituting “a Chief Magistrates’ Court” with the words, “High Court”. The justification is that decisions of the council are administrative in nature, hence, should be appealable to the High Court. I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Why are you replacing “Magistrates’ Court” with “High Court?”MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson, you see the High Court is very far from judicial accessibility. A chief magistrate ideally exists in every district, unlike the High Court and these decisions are quasi-judicial decisions. I do not think you want to burden the High Court with quasi-judicial decisions. I propose, Madam Chairperson, that we retain the proposal by the minister.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, I put the question that clause 61 stands part of the Bill.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 61, agreed to.Clause 62MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend sub-clause (2) (e) by inserting the word “veterinary” before “laboratories”. This is for clarity. I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, honourable minister. Do you have any comment?LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  We agree with the amendment.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 62 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 62, as amended, agreed to.Clause 63 agreed to.Clause 64 agreed toClause 65MR ODUR:  Madam Chairperson, in clause 65, I would like the minister to explain these annual retention fees because the practitioner 10091THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023is going to pay a registration fee and pay for the license. Now, what is this annual retention fee and what purpose will it serve? Is it a savings like a SACCO or what?THE CHAIRPERSON:  Isn’t it a registration fee? Look at 65(3). “The retention fee for the subsequent year shall be paid before the 31st of December of the Calendar year proceeding the subsequent year.”3. “The Council shall remove from the register the name of a veterinary practitioner…”-MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson -THE CHAIRPERSON:  I thought the Chairperson is talking?MR BASALIRWA:  Okay. (Laughter)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister, what is this “retention fee?” LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  I think this is the annual registration fee.MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson, can I now say something?THE CHAIRPERSON:  You can talk.MR BASALIRWA:  Honourable minister, let us help each other. The connotation “retention fees” here is misleading. What are you paying for? What are you retaining?  Either, it is annual license fees or registration, and if it is registration, it cannot be annual, because registration ideally is done once. So, here, you can only talk about annual license fees. I want to imagine that perhaps the minister meant either a license fee, but even a subscription fee in a professional body like this one, is not like Uganda Medical Association (UMA) or DSTV that you are paying a monthly subscription fee.I think it would make sense if we said thus, “Everybody registered practitioner and a licensee shall pay to the Council an annual license fee in such amounts as prescribed by the regulations”.  Then the title of this clause should be “Annual License Fees”. I think the idea was to allow the Council to charge annual licenses; the one we talked about for the private practitioners. THE CHAIRPERSON:  The headnote is what we are correcting. MR BASALIRWA:  Yes, we can correct both the headnote and the body because the body is talking about the annual retention fee. So, we begin with the body. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Where there is “retention fee” is where we put “annual license”. MR BASALIRWA:  Exactly! Madam Chairperson, even the spirit, you can even look at subclause (65) of clause 2: “The subsequent year shall be paid before 31st December”. So, for all intents and purposes, this is intended to be an annual license fee and not a retention fee, but the minister can guide us. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Honourable members, an annual retention fee applies to both private and public veterinary practitioners. When you are registered, you have to pay a certain fee to remain on the Register annually and when you are practicing, you have to pay for license. That is how it has been. MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Chairperson, I have been a member of the Institute of Certified Public Accountants since 2010. Every year, the Institute of Certified Public Accountants reviews its membership list and at every stage of review, we pay registration fees, annually. I used to be in practice; on top of this registration fees, I would pay annual license fees in order for me to get a practicing certificate. When I stopped practicing, I now pay annual registration fees. Madam Chairperson, with this explanation, I want to support the minister because he is seeking that all members of the veterinary profession, must pay annual registration fees because they will be reviewed annually. People will be getting in, and others will be getting out. 10092THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023Those who do not do continuous professional development will be getting out.On top of that, if you are in private practice; if you are practicing veterinary medicine, you pay annual license fees, which is different from retention fees. This one seeks to address the membership registration, which is annual.THE CHAIRPERSON:  We are talking about registration and then licensing. If you are registered and you enter into a book, for you to be retained in the circumstance that you are not practicing at that period, you must pay annually. MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson, this law is not creating anything new. There is no-THE CHAIRPERSON:  That is why the minister is saying that they have been doing it. MR BASALIRWA:  I am saying it is not new in the sense that they are other professional laws. I will give you an example. In the legal practise, if you decide not to renew your practicing licenses this year, there is no problem. You will remain on the register of advocates. However, should you want to be practicing after two or three years, you must pay for all the years you did not renew you license.THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what they call retention fee. They are saying instead of paying wholesome, pay annually. Hon. Basalirwa, is it because you are at the border?MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Chairperson, I am very sober. I think we need to help each other.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Actually, you have explained very well.  Everyone has now understood. MR BASALIRWA:  I would like to perfect it now.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, I put the question that clause 65 stands part of the Bill.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 65, agreed to.Clause 66, agreed to.Clause 67, agreed to.Clause 68MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend subclause (1)(e) by increasing the period of imprisonment from two years to five years. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment. I beg to submit.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 68 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 68, as amended, agreed to. Clause 69, agreed to.Clause 70MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend subclause (1) by inserting the words “an adverse drug effect to an animal” before the word “death” to read as follows:“(1) A veterinary practitioner or a licensee shall not be held personally liable to any person in respect of an adverse drug effect to an animal or death of an animal in consequence of any act he or she does bonfide in the performance of his or her duties unless it is shown that the act was done illegally or with gross negligence.”The justification is to cater for any other undesirable occurrence during bonfide performance of duties. It is not only death that occurs in the performance of the veterinary practitioner’s provision of service. Animals can sometimes suffer from adverse effects of drugs as well. I beg to move.[Mr Musasizi]10093THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023MR AOGON: I have seen in human medicine people go to court. How special is the animal sector such that we do not talk about it? If a person is not clear in his or her actions, shouldn’t we go for the person? A person can administer a drug which has an adverse effect on the animal and then goes clean and says that the law protects me. Is that really okay? I do not think so.THE CHAIRPERSON:  There is a disclaimer here that says “…unless it is shown that the act was done illegally or with gross negligence”. Gross negligence cannot go unpunished.MR OZUGU:  In clause 69, we just allowed the council to exempt certain treatment tests and operations. I think people were allowed to operate under clauses 69 and 24, where we gave the minister power to take care of our Village Health Teams(VHTs). In animal sector, they should also be exempted from any liability. They should be part of the officials exempted because someone may go and treat an animal yet you want to hold them responsible when they were not negligent.My proposal is that the exemption provided under clause 69 must apply to this group. Therefore, I want to introduce an amendment –THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister, the original clause is okay, but the committee introduces an aspect of adverse effect drugs.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, I have no objection with the committee amendment.MR AOGON:  Madam Chairperson, a good doctor should be able to tell that these drugs can cause adverse effects to an animal. If you cannot do that, then you do not qualify to be there.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Different bodies react differently to different drugs.Honourable members, I put the question that clause 70 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 70, as amended, agreed to.Clause 71, agreed to.Clause 72, agreed to. Clause 73, agreed to. Clause 2MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, on clause 2, the proposal is to amend the following words in the interpretation clause:Animal Amend the definition by inserting the words “wild birds” immediately after the words “poultry species” so that the provision reads as follows:“Animal includes domestic animals, wild animals, aquatic animals, laboratory animals, poultry species, bees, insects, fish and silk worms.”The justification is that wild birds are not classified under poultry species and yet are excluded from the definition. On continuous professional development, the proposal is to substitute the words “continuous professional development”, as used in the provision with “that a veterinary practitioner keeps updated with the new and emerging veterinary technical trends in theory and practice”. Rephrase the definition to read as follows:“Continuous professional development means unapproved training required of a veterinary practitioner, as the Council may determine, for purposes of ensuring that a veterinary practitioner keeps updated with the new and emerging veterinary technical trends in theory and practice.” The justification is that the initial definition uses the words “continuous professional 10094THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023development” to define the same term. The definition, therefore, lacks clarity, appears repetitive and sounds ambiguous. On direct supervision, substitute the word “premises” with the words “veterinary practice establishment” and rephrase the provision to read as follows:“Direct supervision means the supervision of a person by a responsible veterinary surgeon who is physically present in the veterinary practice establishment.” The justification is that the word “premises” is ambiguous and not provided for in the interpretation, while the words “veterinary practice establishment” are precise and well-defined in the Bill.Another proposal is to delete the definition “locum tenens”. The justification is that the term is not used in any provision of the Bill. A further proposal is to amend the interpretation of the word “register” by inserting the words “and veterinary practice establishments” after the words “veterinary practitioners”, and rephrase the provision to read as follows:“Register means a register of veterinary practitioners and veterinary practice establishments kept and maintained by the Council under Section 62 of this Act.”The justification is that the Council maintains a register of both veterinary practitioners and veterinary practice establishments, under Clause 62(1). Additionally, we propose to amend the definition of veterinary practice in Paragraph (e) by:i) Inserting the words “ethno veterinary medicine” before the word “complimentary”;ii) Deleting the word “alternative”; and iii) Inserting the word “medicine” after the word “complementary”.Rephrase the definition to read as follows:“(e) Veterinary practice means the provision of ethno veterinary medicine, complementary medicine and integrative therapies to animals.”The justification is that this is for clarity. Ethno-veterinary medicine is always confused with complementary medicine. iv) Introducing a new paragraph, after Paragraph (f), to read as follows:“(g) Any other related services as prescribed by the Council.” The justification is to cater for any other emerging services that are not listed in the definition. We further propose is to amend the veterinary practice establishment to include other facilities such as “wildlife breeding sanctuary” and “wildlife ranch”, and rephrase the provision to read as follows:“Veterinary practice establishment includes premises, structures, veterinary laboratory, zoo, ambulatory service facility, animal checkpoint, holding ground, quarantine station, wildlife breeding sanctuary, wildlife ranch and any other specialised establishment where veterinary practice is conducted.” The justification is that the addition of a wildlife breeding sanctuary and wildlife ranch will broaden the scope of the veterinary practice establishment. Veterinary public healthSubstitute the words “veterinary medicine” with “veterinary science and technology” and rephrase the definition to read as follows:“Veterinary public health means the application of veterinary science and technology to protect and improve the physical, mental, and social well-being of humans.”[Ms Okori-Moe]10095THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023The justification is to accommodate broad aspects of veterinary practice. Veterinary science and technology involves the use of other approaches, for example, meat inspection and extension/advisory services, etcetera. Veterinary surgeonAmend by inserting the words “and is registered in accordance with this Act” at the end of the provision and rephrase it to read as follows: “Veterinary surgeon means a person trained in veterinary medicine at a degree level, and who is engaged in veterinary practice and is registered, in accordance with this Act.”JustificationHaving any degree and practising is not sufficient for one to become a veterinary surgeon. Registration requirements of the regulatory body are vital for one to be recognised as a veterinary surgeon. Insert new definitions to cater for the following terms:i) “Animal husbandry” to appear immediately after the definition of the word “animal” and to read as follows:“Animal husbandry” means livestock management and animal care practices undertaken to promote animal welfare, and improve productivity and farm profits; and ii) “Internship” to appear immediately after the definition of the word “register” and to read as follows:“Internship” means a prescribed period of supervised practical training that a veterinary student obtains after completing formal education, to the time of satisfying the supervisor that the practitioner is competent, in accordance with the provisions of this Act.” The justification is that this for clarity. On clause 3 –Amend the provision –THE CHAIRPERSON: You have concluded, chairperson?MS OKORI-MOE: I have finished. It is Hon. Aogon trying to confuse me. (Laughter)  I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee chair -person, the veterinary practice establishment; what is that?MR BASALIRWA: Veterinary practice establishment is described – In the definition, Madam Chairperson, it is merely described and it talks about premises, structures, zoo, ambulatory service and the rest. That is how it is captured here. I do not know whether the intention was to define or describe, or to do both. You see, veterinary practice establishment is something that runs across the Bill. So, I do not know whether it was your intention to make it descriptive in that manner.MR OGUZU: Under clause 2, we should provide for community veterinary first aiders. This is a category of people who are exempt by the minister, under Section 24. THE CHAIRPERSON: How many times has that word been used, Hon. Jonathan Odur?MR OGUZU: There are people like that who are going to be exempted by the minister and the licencing shall not apply to them. They are community first aiders and they are not doing it for reward.THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to refer you to the case of Hon. Odur v. the Attorney-General, the Speaker of Parliament and others. I do not want Hon. Jonathan Odur to take me to court for smuggling things into the Bill. Where we have left something out, this Bill is not cast on stone, we will bring an amendment if it is within the Bill. 10096THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023MR ODUR:  I want to add the words “licence under veterinary practice establishment” because throughout, it is a place, “licence”. Therefore, we must include that “a licence includes a premise, structure, licenced for that purpose”. Secondly, the use of the word “paraveterinary professionals” –THE CHAIRPERSON: He says that it is a site where veterinary services are carried out for example, if I took somebody to treat my cows, that is the establishment, therefore, it is not licensed. Honourable Minister, you are the right person to handle this Bill because you are a cattle keeper.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Thank you. Before she brought the amendment, we had agreed with all of them and I agree with the amendment. I also appreciate the input of the members, but the site where the veterinary profession is practised is the one they refer to.THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Hon. Noeline Kisembo.MS KISEMBO:  Madam Chairperson, the committee introduced one phrase, “veterinary inspector”, and we agreed we would define it in clause 25.MS OBIGAH: The areas where these people were able to support the practitioners were already cleared and therefore, asking them to pay or register is just too much. They are like first aiders. I agree with the committee position; let us conclude and go home. Thank you. (Laughter)THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, please define the term “veterinary inspector”.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, a veterinary inspector means a person appointed under Clause 44 of this Bill. THE CHAIRPERSON: “ The council shall appoint a veterinary inspector who shall be responsible for monitoring compliance with this Act. The veterinary inspector shall be appointed from the following categories of the public officers; staff of the Council, public veterinary practitioners nominated by the Commissioner responsible for animal health and public officers whose functions are relevant or related to the function of this council”. I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.Schedule 1, agreed to.Schedule 2, agreed to.Schedule 3MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to amend the schedule by inserting a new paragraph 1(j) to read as follows: “Any other functions as the council from time to time determines”. The justification is to cater for any other related duties that may be missing from the list of services that should be offered by the veterinary paraprofessionals. I beg to move.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection.THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Schedule 3 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Schedule 3, as amended, agreed to.Schedule 4, agreed to.New ScheduleMS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, there is a proposal to insert a new schedule to cater for oaths of veterinary surgeons and 10097THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 2023veterinary paraprofessionals; it should read as follows. Schedule 5, Section 6(4) and 8(3) Oaths. The veterinary surgeons’ oath. “Solemn oaths for veterinary surgeons to be declared on admission to the membership of the veterinary profession”. THE CHAIRPERSON: I thought we changed that. Instead of mentioning all the three, we use “Practitioners”. So, you are having different oaths for each of them? MS OKORI-MOE:  Yes, Madam Chairperson.MR AOGON:  I think we should have separated because we will find problems with the presiding officers of court.THE CHAIRPERSON:  No, they have separated.MR AOGON:  Then my issue is different. 71 needs to be re-committed.MS OKORI-MOE:  I read the veterinary surgeons’ oath - THE CHAIRPERSON: You do not have to read the oath. We are looking at the schedule. It has an oath for the veterinary surgeons and veterinary paraprofessionals and we are making an amendment on that. I put the question that the proposed Schedule Five stands part of this Bill.(Question put and agreed to.)Proposed Schedule Five, agreed to.The Title, agreed to.MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME7.55THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama):  I agree to the proposal for the two oaths; one for –THE CHAIRPERSON:  No, we passed that. We are now on a motion for resumption of the House. (Laughter)  The minister is tired. LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled – THE CHAIRPERSON:  Let us first have the motion for the House to resume; it is a motion for resumption of the House. 7.56THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.THE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. (Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Speaker, presiding_)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSETHE SPEAKER:  Yes, honourable minister. 7.56THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama):  Madam Chairperson, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Veterinary Practitioners’ Bill, 2023” and passed it with amendments. 10098THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE7.57THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.MR SILAS AOGON:  Madam Speaker, before the third reading for this Bill is done –(Interjections)-  you cannot say “order”. I represent a constituency and I have a matter to raise - (Interjections) - it is unconstitutional for you to do that –  THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, first of all, it is unethical for you to switch on the microphone and start talking. Secondly, of all people, I would not expect Hon. Aogon to be the one shouting. You come and apologise on the Floor. MR AOGON:  Madam Speaker, I officially apologise because you are my Speaker. I also request this House to always respect the views of other Members. Thank you. I have something for recommittal – THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Silas Aogon, the apology should not be conditional – and remember I am one of your voters. (Laughter)MR AOGON:  Madam Speaker, I agree with you. This apology is unequivocal; it is unconditional. THE SPEAKER:  Father, you first come and teach Hon. Silo Aogon, the law of the Bible. FR CHARLES ONEN:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for representing Uganda in Rome. (Applause)  Actually, I was planning to travel with you because I have a letter for His Holiness the Pope. Anyhow, Madam Speaker, we need to be tolerant. You mentioned that the law is not cast in stone and so sometimes we need to tolerate certain behaviours of some Members of this House. Hon. Silas is my good friend, just like all the honourable members here are. According to the Rules of Procedure, once you have come to tender your apology, you do not mix it with other issues. Madam Speaker, Hon. Silas Aogon has not tendered any apology. (Laughter)  For this, he must come and apologise properly. MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I think he has done his part. He is my mentor, I accept, much as he came to Parliament after I did. THE SPEAKER: Can you bring your recommittal? MR AOGON:  My recommittal is on clause 71. THE SPEAKER:  Move a motion. MR AOGON: I, therefore, move a motion that we recommit that particular provision on clause 71, which speaks to issues –THE SPEAKER:  Quote the rule, please. MR AOGON:  It talks about the production of guidelines. It is only Parliament that has the powers to delegate the issuance of the guidelines to the minister, but we are talking about giving those powers to the council. That is my concern. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I put the question to the recommittal. (Question put and negatived.)THE SPEAKER:  Is there another recommittal?10099THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 30 AUGUST 20238.02MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we considered clause 55, we mentioned that compliance should be to the Public Finance Management Act, yet compliance should be right away from the Constitution. We should also consider the National Audit Act and any legislation concerning finances. With that, I beg that the House recommits that part so that we are able to add the phrase “any other legislation in this country”. THE SPEAKER:  Before you ask for a recommittal, I want you to check the cross-references.BILLS THIRD READING THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 20238.03THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Veterinary Practitioners’ Bill, 2023” be read for the third time and do pass. THE SPEAKER : When we started this sitting, we had 202 Members. We went to the committee and we still maintain the quorum. I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Veterinary Practitioners’ Bill, 2023” be read the third time and do pass. (Question put and agreed to.)A BILL FOR AN ACT TITLED “THE VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS’ BILL, 2023”THE SPEAKER:  The people who are saying “passed without quorum” are the people who do not even know what cows look like. (Laughter)  They are just here; they want to frustrate the issue of our cows. If you do not have cows, keep quiet. Let people with cows talk. (Laughter)  The Title is settled and the Bill passes. (Applause)Honourable members, I thank the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Chairperson, Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Members here. Just as a reminder, Government Chief Whip, I want all the Members of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, who are not in the House, to be given warning letters tomorrow. We cannot pass your Bill when you are not in the House. I want the different Whips to have these Members warned.  Two, Government Chief Whip whichever chairperson of a committee, not in this House, must be warned.  I want to tell chairpersons of committees; if you do not attend the House, remember there are other people who attend and who can even be better chairpersons. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 8.06 and adjourned until Thursday, 31 August 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)