Tuesday, 4 August 2015

Parliament met at 10.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you have seen, the Order Paper has two items; we should be able to finish them today to pave way for the second processes for item No.4, which has many stages. However, I will cause alteration of the Order Paper so that we start discussion from item No.4.

Honourable members, I still have to confirm but I want to give you advance notice that there is a possibility of this House having a special sitting on Friday morning to host President Uhuru Kenyatta, who will address us. We await confirmation on that but take note that there is that possibility. When the communication is complete, I will be informing you formally so that we can accord him the audience, so that he can address us on Friday morning. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, debate had started on this particular motion for second reading of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015. Debate continues; each member will take seven minutes. Let us proceed with the debate.

10. 16
MR KIYINGI BBOSA (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity to contribute to this very important matter. Allow me to also thank the committee for the work well done and for the deliberations that they were able to carry out across the country on the matter of constitutional amendments.

I would like to narrow down my submission to my personal experience, that is, the three years that I spent in court on the matter of independent Members of Parliament associating with political parties or taking part in activities of political parties. I believe if not well addressed during these deliberations, this may still cause a problem in the near future. I spent three valuable years in court, which I would have ably used to serve the people of Mawokota South. Unfortunately, all that time was spent in court trying to defend myself for having participated in one of the activities of the NRM party, for which I and other independent MPs had been invited to attend. Fortunately, court declared that I did not, in any way, contravene any laws. It also established that there was still a lacuna - something that does not spell out the parameters for a Member of Parliament, especially an independent one. It does not spell out the extent to which such a Member can associate with a political party. 

We are considering the 12 months to the election, which is a good thing, and I totally agree with my colleagues, MPs who are independent, who are vying to join political parties. However, before those 12 months, how about that time when one can be invited for an activity and his participation in that activity is misinterpreted as joining or crossing? I believe that there is a lacuna there and I do pray that this august House does consider, during these amendments, something to solve that.

One thing that I did pick from the people of Mawokota was the matter of federalism. Much as I was not there in those earlier days when this matter was discussed, they asked me to come and ask Parliament to explain how far this issue has gone and what future the people of Uganda have in as far federalism is concerned. I do not have much information on that but I do call upon the senior legislators who were here then to explain to Ugandans who are agitating for federalism. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any Member who would like to contribute? Does that mean that we are through with this debate on constitutional amendments? 

10. 19
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to speak to this very important motion. I also thank colleagues who are here and have shown commitment to this subject matter. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, I want to start by commending our committee headed by hon. Stephen Tashobya. They had limited time but in my view they did excellent work. First, they did research, which I think was extensive. They presented to us documents - the report shows the summary - and they went to our neighbours and beyond. I think the findings they made are very informative to this debate.

In addition, I would like colleagues to note that civil society, including some colleagues on the other side of the House, also carried out fairly extensive consultations with the population. I think they literally went to all districts having in mind this intention of our country to re-examine our Constitution. Our committee also went to some districts but given the time, they could not go everywhere. 

From the work submitted by civil society and some political actors, you get the demands by the population - they want certain changes in the Constitution. Hon. Tashobya’s committee, which went later, also brought additional new points that the population want included in this. So, from the findings of our committee and those of the civil society, you clearly get the impression that our population would like to re-examine our Constitution. 

We cannot say that the two routes - our committee and civil society - exhausted the field. It actually gives you an impression that if you went back, you would get more views. So, the idea that we should provide for another constitutional review commission, which would have more time and wider ranging terms of reference, is very well founded and I think all of us should support that. 

However, at the same time we are running the country. Therefore, where we see the need to make changes, provided we follow the right procedures, we should do so. On one hand, the population has shown, from the sample that was visited, that they want to participate in reviewing the Constitution and on the other hand I think there are issues that we can tackle here. It is for that reason that I also appeal to honourable members of this House that we should handle the minimum package brought by the Government through the Bill and then also support this idea of a constitutional review commission so that at a later stage we can be more exhaustive in this debate.

When I go to the research that our colleagues in the committee did, it is clear that in the vast majority of the countries from which information was got the appointment of the Electoral Commission is done by the President. That is very clear, wherever you are. You may have different modalities on how you reach up to the President but in most of the countries, it is very clear that the appointments are being done by the President. I think we would be doing a good job to sustain that position.

I find it a bit farfetched and utopian to say that because there is a sitting President, who is likely to participate in the coming elections –(Interjection)– Yes, in the case of NRM, we have a sole candidate; my young brother would like to know this and that is the position. To say that because of that then there is likely to be bias, I think that argument needs to be very well structured and positioned. If that argument was to hold, then the President should not even appoint the Chief Justice. The Chief Justice heads the Judiciary, which is independent but which makes judgements that sometimes may involve the President; for example, if there is a petition, the Chief Justice will preside over that court. Therefore, I think we should not take it that far.

I think the system we have been having this far is reasonable, whereby the President initiates the appointment of members of the Electoral Commission and we, the parliamentarians, the representatives of the people, review these appointments. Where we find someone is not fit, we have the power given to us by the Constitution to throw out such a name. There is a precedent in this House on a number of appointments where members of our Appointments Committee have rejected certain appointments initiated by the President.

I will ask my colleague and brother, my historical and ideological comrade, the hon. Phillip Wafula Oguttu, to bear with me because I just want to reveal something I shared with him. He did appeal to me quietly and said we should change the way the Electoral Commission is appointed. He said the way it is now is not proper; it is biased –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is up but you can proceed.

DR KIYONGA: Just two minutes, Mr Speaker. I did point out to my brother, hon. Wafula Oguttu, the Leader of the Opposition, that in my view the Electoral Commission we have has acted reasonably impartial. I pointed out to him that we have had so many by-elections, for example, and a number of them have been won by the Opposition in broad daylight. That has happened in our time and we have seen it. There was also a time, I think because of the war and the cattle rustling from Karamoja, the vast portion of our people in Northern Uganda were massively voting against the NRM and against the current President. It was this Electoral Commission appointed the way it was, which was in charge. 

In summary, Mr Speaker – (Mr Paul Mwiru rose_) - my time has run out, Ndugu Mwiru – my view is that we should do the bear minimum, which has been presented by the Government and then we support the view that we should have a constitutional review commission and - (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Dr Kiyonga, for giving way. Did I hear you say that when the Electoral Commission messes up the process and there is a by-election, it carries out a very good job? I am saying this because I am a product of a by-election, where the Electoral Commission had under-declared my results and court declared that they acted illegally in doing so. That is why there was a by-election. Are you saying that because there was a by-election, they acted very fairly?

DR KIYONGA: No, the point I made, which I exchanged with hon. Wafula Oguttu, was that we have had by-elections and a significant number of them have been won by the Opposition.  Those by-elections have been organised by the Electoral Commission that came in place using the system that we are having. That is the point that I was making.

Therefore, my support, Mr Speaker, is for minimum amendments now as presented by the Government and for the creation of a constitutional review commission so that our population can participate in the next change in our Constitution. I thank you, Mr Speaker

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. On what matter do you raise, Leader of the Opposition? He is not holding the Floor any more. You could build it up in your -

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank Dr Chrispus Kiyonga for your submission and for our secret meetings - what we talked in secrecy. However, none of us says that the President should not appoint members of the Electoral Commission. None of us says that. Even if you look at the minority report, we do not say that. It is the process, which is the problem. 

The President identifies the people, brings them to us, we approve and then he appoints. We are saying that we should change that system. The President should not identify the candidates. If he wants, he can use another method as any other citizen but we should identify those names, maybe through interviews, and the names should be processed and then sent to him to appoint. That is what we are saying.

Mr Speaker, hon. Kiyonga is saying that during by-elections - and we have heard a lot of that – we have had people who have won. However, all of us still suffered injustices of the Electoral Commission. I personally know that the number of votes that they announced I had won with are less than what I actually won with, using my DR forms. As we were seated in a hall in Bugiri with hon. Mugabi there, they were changing my results in the computer system and I have proof of that. We have also proof that in Najjanankumbi the votes of Dr Besigye were changed in hundreds of thousands. When you compare what is on the DR forms with the Electoral Commission results, they are different and this can be adduced even in this House or in courts.

Therefore, what we are saying – and opinion polls have been done – is that people do not have confidence in the Electoral Commission even if they are very good. The perception has already been formed that this Electoral Commission will not deliver a free and fair election. You have gone around, people have gone around, parties and civil society organisations have gone around and people have told them that they do not have confidence in the Electoral Commission - more than 60 per cent do not have confidence in the Electoral Commission. You have ignored these views but they are the views of Ugandans. When it suits you, you involve the people but when it does not suit you, you disregard the people; you behave in a very hypocritical way.

We are saying people in the country are tired of elections, which eventually are said to be rigged, not free and fair. Why don’t you accord the people of Uganda an electoral system which, from the word go, they will have confidence in? That is what we are saying. As you are in charge of our country, you think that what you think is what is best for the people and what the people tell you is best for them you disregard. We can see slowly -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now speaking as the Leader of the Opposition or you are just making remarks?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: No, I am just giving clarification. Our request – (Interruption)

MS ABIA: Thank you, my Leader of the Opposition. The information I would like to give you is actually the position that my Congolese brother, –(Laughter)– Chrispus Kiyonga, gave to you. 

In his submission, he indicated that during by-elections the Opposition wins. Why does the Opposition win? It is because at that particular moment, the Electoral Commission and its processes therein are closely watched by the presence of the Opposition. Therefore, truth only comes out when they are being watched. That goes, therefore, to confirm that the entire process and the people handling the process cannot be prospects for another election the way they have been doing. 

The presidency has a very long arm; once you are appointed and you know that your bread and butter comes from the appointing authority and the appointing authority is a candidate, how do you go against those kinds of wishes? If you want as Government to establish sanity and credibility in the electoral process like it was as in Ten-Point Programme No. 1, then these proposals coming from our side will help you alleviate your own internal injustice. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much for the information. What we want and what Ugandans want is to have peaceful elections and peaceful transfer of power. It could actually be from Museveni to Museveni but it should be arrived at in a free and fair manner. That is what we are looking for.

The perception of Ugandans about the Electoral Commission is real - they do not have confidence in it. Some people do - about 40 per cent - but the 60 per cent matter. It is important that we look at this Electoral Commission. You have talked about time, but in 2010 the Opposition brought here proposals and the Government said there was no time and that they would do it after the elections. It has taken four years and you have done nothing. Again, you are saying there is no time. Therefore, it is deliberate that you do not want to have these reforms. That is very clear from your own records.

I mentioned to you, honourable minister, that Kenya had a similar problem - people did not have confidence in the Electoral Commission and there was no time. What they did is what we are proposing to you; they increased the number of electoral commissioners, which we have proposed in the minority report. You already have seven whom you appointed as you liked and we said let us have confidence in these four new ones who are coming in; at least we will have been consulted on those four. They will not make a big difference because they will still be a minority, nevertheless we can feel more comfortable that at least they are there. Let us go along with that. If you do not accept that, I am sure we are going to have a problem during this coming election. Mr Speaker, I just wanted to clarify on that.

10.37
MR GUDOI YAHAYA (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a few observations which I want to bring to the attention of the Minister for Justice. 

Important issues like constitutional amendments should have been brought early enough. Even the subjects in the sample space my friend, the hon. Kiyonga, was talking about were not representative enough. Let me give you an example of eastern Uganda. I have never been told by any person from Bungokho North that research was being carried out for this noble cause of constitutional amendment.

Government issues, which are very important such as changing the Constitution, should be brought early enough. Let us have one year, for instance. Now we are trying to hurry up with these things and the electoral process has already started – there is the update of the register. Also, if we do not raise quorum in Parliament, what do we do? What I am trying to say to the Government I support is that let us not get these things done at gun point. There is no time as I talk. Indeed, when you look at the parties now, they are in the climate of elections. That is why we cannot exhaustively handle those constitutional amendments because they are many.

Mr Speaker, I want to say to my colleagues in the Executive that in future if they see that this issue is important and should be dealt with, bring it in time. Otherwise, I do not want to bore you. What I would like to say is that up to now my people of Bungokho North are asking, “When are you bringing the constitutional amendments?” When you say they are already on the Floor of the House, they wonder. I do not know where the committee went. During their visits, they should have also let the people of Bungokho North, Mbale District and eastern – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, my MP for Bungokho North. The information I want to give is that I thought that it was only Budadiri West – we are neighbours – that never saw people handling the constitutional amendments. You mean even Bungokho North, which is – (Laughter) – So, you are right. We thought you had seen; we never saw.

MR GUDOI: Thank you for the information. Therefore, the committee that handled the constitutional amendments, led my by friend, the hon. Stephen Tashobya, next time should not leave out Mbale or eastern Uganda. This is because we are handling a very serious issue and I do not know whether this thing we are handling will help us carry out the elections smoothly. Thank you, Mr Speaker.


10.41
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I would like to thank you for this opportunity and also the committee for the report. I support the motion and I would like to thank the Government; although it is late, at least we have something now. 

Mr Speaker, I would also like to thank you because you gave us the opportunity and you announced in this House that whoever had issues would be able to appear before the responsible committee. As legislators, we always consult our people. At individual level, we were also given the opportunity to present issues if they were there. 

I would like to thank the committee for their recommendation to establish a constitutional review commission. In my understanding, if that commission comes into place, it will address some of the issues, which we cannot handle now. However, there are basic issues we can handle which concern the elections to come. I see this as a fair game because postponing elections will be a very difficult thing to do. Therefore, I support the committee’s recommendation on that.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to also thank the committee for having proposed provisions for flexibility, where people can be able to decide to shift their positions. Learning is continuous and you can never stop change. They have proposed a provision where any person from a political party or independent side can be able to review his or her mind and make a decision for the next election.

Mr Speaker, I would also wish to say that I am grateful for the provision they proposed concerning an independent Member of Parliament. It means there is a lot of recognition in relation to the rights of the people. If a person does not want to associate with any of the political parties, he or she will still have that opportunity.

Lastly, I would like to know from Government when they are bringing the proposal in relation to affirmative action because it is supposed to be reviewed and it has not been done. When is the Government bringing the motion because this affects a large number of people - the women, persons with disabilities and the youth? Thank you.

10.45
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its report and the House for the debate. 

Mr Speaker, I concur with the committee’s recommendations especially on the age of the judges. I have been going around my constituency consulting - I know every weekend we are expected to be in our constituencies – and the youth have expressed their desire for the age limit to be reduced to tally with that of all the civil servants. I know that other civil servants retire at the age of 60, but to say we are going to increase the retirement age of the judges to 75 and 70 will do them a disservice. That is why after consulting, I had to agree with the committee that possibly, we leave the status quo as it is.

Mr Speaker, I expected to see an amendment in regard to the Office of the Speaker. There is the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker but in the event that both are not around, how do we proceed? It has caused a stalemate. At one point when both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker are away, there is a stalemate. This proposal has been coming up whenever we are amending the Constitution and I expected us to introduce at least a First Deputy Speaker. This is happening in this region. It is a proposal, which I am bringing forward, and if it can be borrowed it will help us to ease the work of Parliament. 

We are part of the East African Community and I expected the chairperson of the committee to come up with a proposal to introduce two Houses because we have senior citizens. Today, we are grappling with constituencies; where are all these people going to sit? If we had the upper and the lower House, possibly, some of these people would go to the other House and the others remain in the House of representatives. This would help especially to tap into the experience of the senior citizens who would want to guide and advise this country. These are proposals which I am making so that when we are handling the entire Constitution (Amendment) Bill, they are incorporated.

Mr Speaker, in 2005 when we were amending the Constitution, we incorporated an amendment to establish regional governments. Last week, I listened to hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, but I would like to disagree with him especially on those districts and regions which are ready to go regional tier. I know that in all the districts of Bunyoro, councils passed resolutions to be incorporated into a regional government. I would like to find out from the minister - I raised this concern and my colleagues have been doing the same - when do you intend to implement this Article of the Constitution? If it is redundant, then let us leave it out because it costs us nothing to keep it in the Constitution.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity and I want to plead with my colleagues; the more we prolong this debate, the more we shall keep at it and yet we have to also  go out to look for votes. I pray that we debate and then we come – we have whips facilitated by Parliament to whip their members - and then we pass those other amendments and we go back to look for votes. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

10.49
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report presented to this House. However, I would also like to express my disappointment with Government, particularly hon.  Kahinda Otafiire, for the kind of Bill that was brought to this House. The Bill that was presented to this House falls short of the aspirations of the people of Uganda. You know what the people of Uganda want in terms of constitutional reforms and amendment to the Constitution. These were expressed by different groups that appeared before the committee of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, as I stand in this House, I am a very proud person. A few years ago, while you were the chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, a report was brought here for constitutional amendments. One of the recommendations that your committee made was the removal of term limits. I stood right there where hon. Ignatius Mudimi is now seated and opposed that proposal, which in essence would enable somebody to be President for life in this country. I am happy that many of my colleagues, who at the time voted for the removal of term limits, regret their actions to date and they will continue to be haunted by that decision. I had expected that while we debate amendments of the Constitution, this particular provision should have been considered and that this Parliament could have found it necessary to reintroduce term limits.

On another point, Mr Speaker, the Electoral Commission is being renamed the Independent Electoral Commission. All that Government is doing is to introduce the word “independent”. By introducing the word “independent”, there is no guarantee that the Electoral Commission is going to act independently.  This equates to calling the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah by name and thinking that he will be a different person when he puts on a different colour of suit. He remains the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah and that personality remains the same. He can only change if a finger is cut off his hand or he develops something like a tumour. That is when you begin to say the person who was the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah is now different in form. In my view, the Electoral Commission will not change by just a change of name. It will continue to act the same way. I would have loved - (Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, hon. Amuriat is very aware of the procedure and decorum of this House. To make a clear reference that informs the Hansard about a tumour and the Speaker’s hand being cut off, supposing that happens tomorrow is it proper that as an engineer you proceed that way and that forms part of the Hansard? Don’t you think it would be better for you to use different figurative references? Don’t you think it is necessary that you withdraw your statement for the sake of the record and the future of this country? 

MR AMURIAT: I did not mean any evil to my uncle, the Member of Parliament of my mother. I did not mean any evil at all. All I was doing was to illustrate. Actually, I wish you could help, Mr Speaker. I could have used any other person in this House as an example or anybody out there, but I wanted to drive my point home and I believe I have done that. 

Mr Speaker, I would like also to express my view, and this is a view that has kept coming up over the years, where proposals have been made – I remember it was Gen. Muntu, while he was a member of this House, who brought a proposal for a constitutional amendment and he was supported by hon. Onapito Ekomoloit, at the time the Member of Parliament for Amuria County. They brought a proposal here to delink the Executive from Parliament. In other words, there was a proposal for members of the Frontbench of Government to come from outside the elected membership in the country. I think this was such a wonderful proposal. I thought for once, the committee should have considered such proposals.

What we have seen in this House is Members of the Frontbench of Government operating under fear and duress. They would want to play to the gallery so as to please the appointing authority. This mischief, Mr Speaker, would have been removed if the Chair of the Speaker was occupied by somebody other than an elected Member of Parliament and if the Frontbench was occupied by people nominated from outside the elected membership of the House. Therefore, it is my assumption that the independence of ministers as leaders of this House would be enhanced. At the moment, this is not happening. Everything is about somebody being told what to do. 

I sympathise with members of the Frontbench because they are lame ducks; they are toothless - (Interjections) – On the other side, of course. Once the caucus has decided, they have no control over what happens in this House. They have very little control over what happens in their ministries because they have to be told what to do because the Executive directly nominates them and - (Member timed out.)  

10.57
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Picking up on the issue of clear separation of powers, you look at the Executive and the Legislature combined and this fusion is one of the reasons we have deficiency in service delivery. Why do I say that? When the NRM had its frequent caucus meetings, this Legislature was rendered ineffective because quite a number of the Members of Parliament, who are the Executive, were in Kyankwanzi transacting party business at the expense of national business. 

One of the best ways to run an effective Government, which many governments in Africa have now adopted, is to ensure that the Executive is delinked from the Legislature. Where countries have lean and efficient Executives, the population stands to benefit from service delivery.  Unfortunately, in our case, you get one Executive member who is a Member of Parliament and he is arrested and taken to Luzira; first of all, there is a deficiency at the Executive level and at the same time a representation vacuum. This, therefore, calls this House to responsibility; one of the key things in this process that we need to do for our own country, children and for posterity is to delink the Executive from the Legislature. 

Mr Speaker, on regional governments, there are certain things I think the ruling party pushes just for cosmetology, just to be cosmetic enough to appeal. Assuming we had regional governments, this country would work harder. There would be regional competition and better resource use at regional levels. As a country, we would compete to grow. 

However, what is happening now is that they will have a pronouncement that there will be regional governments - This regional governments business was just introduced to take care of the sentiments, if I may say so, of the central region. This is because you supposedly have a powerful king and within the kingdom sits the central government and you did not want to delink that in order to appease the people of a certain region. I think it is therefore now that we need to pronounce ourselves clearly on the essentials and the reasons that we should have a regional government. 

As far as the term limits are concerned, it is just a smart way of doing things. You cannot be at the helm for 30 years and you think that you are yet to establish a more efficient and effective government; it cannot work!  There is what we call diminishing returns and this is both physical and mental. We know the challenges of over staying in power. One thing that happened in the history of our country is that when the current leadership came into office, the first thing they told the world was that it is not useful to overstay in power. However, if three decades later you still want to be at helm and you think that you have something to offer the country, then we have a problem. 

I think we should start running our country as a corporation. It is the smart way to do business, not that when my friend, hon. Kiyonga, or Rt Hon. Moses Ali are still in office the people of Moyo or wherever stand to benefit. There must be a time when you say enough is enough and you sit back so that probably, if there is a creation of an upper House, you go there and veto the decisions of the lower House. 

Finally, on the issues of the Electoral Commission, I think people get appreciated more when they have interviews. They feel better when they pass those interviews and take up jobs. Why should such an important office be a gift to someone who will sit there knowing very well that it was their uncle, their cousin’s aunt’s cousin, who appointed them to this office? I think that interviews would bring credibility, confidence and usher in hard work. Knowing very well that someone is going to sit in this office for seven years, uninterrupted and has that job security, that person is likely to work harder and deliver a smart election.

It is, therefore, my considered opinion that the minority report needs to be supported by this country, if for sure we think that the Legislature will work for this country and for posterity. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I have just a small comment on the issue of the amendment of Article 105(2), which was done in 2005. The member for Kumi made the point that it was the committee, chaired by the current person sitting as Speaker, which recommended to Parliament that it should be removed. That statement does not fit well with history because that is not what happened. 

It was a Bill. The proposals were in the Bill and the Bill went to the committee, which I chaired. When the committee listened to all the parties, the committee’s recommendation was that the position of whether to remove or not was reconcilable at committee stage. It needed to be reconciled by the House by vote. Never did the committee recommend any of those matters. Let the records therefore show the correct position on this matter. (Laughter) 

11.04
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this matter. I hope you recognise my capacity in this House - we are only two representing political parties in this House. I am a party president today and I hope you will be able to give me an opportunity to expound a little bit more. 

Mr Speaker, I am disappointed that as a country, we continue to amend our Constitution in piecemeal. When an interest arises, we rush to this House and within two, three or four hours, we debate a particular Article and amend it without looking into and evaluating the entire Constitution. I find it sometimes very disappointing. I have been in this House for some time and we have had several amendments to our Constitution, more than other countries have had.

The key issues in this matter – Mr Speaker, I have listened to many Members talk about the interests of the Independents, the interests of political parties and how one should be expelled from political parties. All these are imbedded in some of the debates and arguments we are trying to raise on the Floor. However, for me the key focus is governance. If Government had come out to address the core issues of governance, we would not be engaging in some of these petty debates because then we would be constitutionally able to decide what type of governance to have. 

We only have three major types of governance and we would address most of these issues. The first one is a fully fledged presidential system, where Parliament is completely independent, like the one in the USA; the Congress is completely independent from the Executive. They do their own work and they deliver their own services but coordinate with Government. If we take that path and we do not fuse it with the parliamentary system, it would resolve many of the problems we are going through today - whether one should be at the Frontbench as a minister, whether should not be at the Frontbench. This really would not be an issue because we would have chosen a system of governance that would be clear.

The second system of governance that we could opt for would be the parliamentary system. It is practiced in the UK, where Members of Parliament are elected and when they finally come, it is a fusion; you draw your Executive from Parliament. It is a system that is tested and it is recognised. We can choose that. If Uganda chooses to go with a parliamentary system, the majority will eventually come and elect their leader to be President or Prime Minister and then we would proceed. The Leader of Government would be in Parliament; you would not have to look for somebody from outside because the leader of the political party would be sitting in Parliament.

The third system would be the party system of governance where we go by party lists. Here, you can expel your people if you want to and you can withdraw them because you have a party list. People vote for parties and not individuals and parties draw lists of people who should be Members of Parliament. 

It looks like we do not know what we want. We either do not know what we want or we are incapable of doing what is right because it is just a core issue of the system of governance. Once we pick it right, we would be able to settle down. Many of these debates going on here would not even arise - whether the Independents should be there, whether if you are appointed a minister you should not be here; it is all about the system of governance. It is therefore high time the Executive thinks about this and the people of Uganda too and we choose a type of governance that will resolve some of these problems. 

I am also disappointed that we continue amending our Constitution without testing some of the provisions. It is quite sad for us to amend a provision of the Constitution when we have not tested it, for instance the third term. We had not tested it but we rushed to amend it. That is impunity. It is unacceptable. You cannot amend what you have not tested. The framers of the Constitution put it there to be tested. How will the people of Uganda know whether two terms are good or not? It has never been tested. 

I think that this impunity must also stop. When we put in our Constitution certain things, we must respect and test them. It is on the basis of test that we can amend the Constitution. You cannot amend the Constitution when you have not tested it. I think this was quite sad for our country and in the history of our country. I have never heard of any other country in any other part of the world that has amended a provision in the Constitution which has never been tested – (Interjections) – Yes, that is the reason why I said that is impunity and impunity is not an excuse in governance. 

There are other aspects of the Constitution, Mr Speaker, that have been put there and they have never been put forward for operationalization. I want to challenge the Attorney-General and Government; there is the provision on regional tiers, for example, why did you leave it there for all these years? How many years down the road and it is just there lying idle. Why do you put some things there and for some other reasons or interests, you want to just keep them there for bargaining purposes or for other things? That is not fair. 

In this country people can choose what they want, and that was optional. If some people wanted it, why didn’t you operationalise it? But you leave it there and say there is a provision for regional tiers and yet you have not brought an implementing law to operationalise it. That is being selfish and opportunistic; you have put it in the Constitution for a different intention and interest. Why do you leave some people hanging, who may have wanted to test that? I know of some regions that are interested in having regional tiers but you blocked them. (Member timed out)

11.11
MR TANNA SANJAY (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I have a couple of issues to raise but I will be extremely brief. 

Mr Speaker, I will turn to the report presented to us on the Floor. The Minister of Justice had put an advert in the papers and had welcomed proposals for amendments to the Constitution and the committee did likewise. However, a group of Ugandans and people of Indian origin presented a petition or a memorandum to the committee regarding the annexure of tribes that live in Uganda. It is acknowledged by the committee but in the report, there is no response made to that particular petition presented. It is very clearly stated in our Constitution that all tribes that lived within the boundaries before 1926 shall be considered. This is a group of people that had requested for recognition and the committee has not responded to that particular petition and is absolutely quiet in the report, whereas on page 1 they acknowledge receipt of that petition. I would like to seek clarification on that particular matter.

Regarding other submissions by our colleagues, I would like to support the presentation by hon. Reagan Okumu and other honourable colleagues; why can’t we implement the regional tier, which is provided for? I would like to seek clarification on that matter as well from both the committee and Government.

The third issue, Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have not stated who these people are. Which people made this petition?

MR TANNA: Mr Speaker, it is clearly stated. Here they are referred to as the Bayindi tribe – (Interjections) – That is why I have not raised it because I do not believe that we – (Interjections) – Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence that the decorum of this House be protected. When a colleague starts heckling in this House, I think we are losing focus. Honourable colleagues, the name can be debated but I stand here for the principle – (Interruption) 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, we have all been in this country and we know what a tribe is all about. We also know that India is a whole sub-continent full of many tribes. The first tribes that came here, that this country knows very well and recognised were the Koli. They helped us build the railway line and later settled here. 

Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable member to claim that there is a tribe called Bayindi - (Laughter) – and yet we know that within the Indian community, there are various tribes not only from India but also from other countries like Pakistan? Is he in order to mislead this House, which is full of knowledge of the origin of the communities from Asia and also sympathizes with them and acknowledges that they should be recognized as citizens of this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Article 10 (a) of the Constitution, and also if you look at the third schedule it does not refer to tribes. It refers to indigenous communities as of 1 February 1926. If the honourable member feels there is qualification to that effect, I will not rule him out of order because that is what the Constitution says.

MR TANNA: I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. The Constitution at that time and the group that sat to write it recognised communities at that time, for example the Barundi and the Banyarwanda, and we also know that there are several tribes in Rwanda and there are several tribes in Burundi. I think it would be unfair for honourable colleagues, and I thank you for your wise ruling on this matter. 

The people of Indian origin – the Kolis - referred to the railway workers. My grandfather came here as a trader who supported the Kolis. Therefore, it is wrong for an educated and elite Member of Parliament to stand here and refer to all people of Indian origin as Kolis. It would be okay on the streets. We have Mr Allidina Visram. We also have Gomes who led to the sewing of the current gomesi. We had various skills and artisans, people of Indian and Asian origin who came –

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We appreciate that our colleague is in this House and yet he happens to be of Indian origin. We have not had any problem with him. However, the premise of what is defined as indigenous has a connotation of local perspective. When you look at it in that direction, it clearly shows that much as the Kolis were here as of 1926, they are not local because indigenous means local. 

Is the honourable member therefore in order to demean a real indigenous and local representative of the indigenous people as of 1926 in Uganda and imagine that he is the one who is right when he is not even local and indigenous?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, many of you have read history and you have heard of the Luo Migration and the tribal migrations all over. It is very difficult for somebody to say they are indigenous in the circumstances –(Applause)– because people have been moving up and down. Let us leave that kind of debate, please. 

In any case, in my town in Gulu, when you see a person of the appearance of the honourable member we call all of them Indians. We do not how to distinguish between Pakistani and others; we just refer to them as “Muyindi”. I think this applies in the whole country. So, please, let us avoid this kind of debate. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Sanjay Tanna is informing the House that the constitutional provision, which talks about communities and indigenous peoples, requires amendment because as you have rightly said, we are all migrants in this country. Therefore, to call others who migrated from India – I came from Ethiopia and we are part of the Israel community - (Laughter) - that moved here. We are cattle keepers from Ethiopia. 

Mr Speaker, on a serious note, that clause needs to be clarified and amended so that all the inhabitants who were here by 1926 are considered. (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, there was time in history when people were moving from one place to another. Today, you need permission to move from one place to another. People who occupied those areas have a right of admission. Is the hon. Ekanya in order to suggest that there cannot be locals and indigenous people because one time in history, people were just moving more or less like animals? Is he in order to suggest that it is still possible and that he is a Jew and he can simply walk anywhere? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that was more of information than a point of order. (Laughter) 

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Thank you so much, hon. Sanjay Tanna, for giving way. I would like to support my brother, hon. Sanjay Tanna, for one reason; we are not trying to reinvent the wheel here. This has happened in this House before; we have included the tribes he mentioned to become indigenous communities before. That means there is a criterion that was used then to look into issues of communities like the Barundi and the Banyarwanda. We can as well use such criteria based on the fact that this Indian community were here way before 1926 and have made tremendous contribution to our socio-economic aspects as Ugandans. 

Therefore, I would like to inform this House that it is vital and fundamental for us to consider amending the third schedule of this Constitution to consider hon. Sanjay Tanna’s position. Thank you so much.

MS AMUGE: Mr Speaker, I appreciate and sympathise with the honourable member. However, when you look at the Constitution, it clearly states who a citizen of Uganda is and if you look at the schedule they are talking about, it is there. 

However, my worry is, looking at history and what we are doing now we risk being misunderstood at this point by our own people we represent. What he is raising is fundamental, but I would really plead with you not to bring it up at this time because we have many other things to do. Our own people will not understand this at the level we are bringing it. So, I am pleading with you, honourable member, that you drop that for now. Thank you.

MR TANNA: Mr Speaker, I did not raise the issue. This issue was raised in the committee by a community; it is not me as an individual but I am representing and speaking on behalf of a group that is out there. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was brought to the committee and it is in the report of the committee. The member is entitled to raise it the way he did.

Honourable members, in the gallery this morning, we have pupils and teachers from Mothercare Primary School, represented by hon. Yona Musinguzi and hon. Naome Kabasharira, from Ntungamo. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, I had also indicated that there was a possibility of President Uhuru Kenyatta of Kenya addressing Parliament. I have now got confirmation that he will be addressing Parliament on Friday at 2.00. p.m. I am surprised that the honourable member is asking under what rule. (Laughter) If you look at rule 10 and subsequent rules, you will find that address of Parliament by foreign dignitaries and that includes heads of state.

You will also recall that at one time this House rejected a request for a secretary of state to come and address Parliament because this Parliament cannot be addressed by a foreign minister; it can only be addressed by a President. President Uhuru Kenyatta is a President so he will be addressing Parliament on Friday, 2.00 p.m. Members, please let us organise and be there to receive his address. Thank you.

11.27
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been asking myself whether in actual sense we have any amendments. If any, do we have any significant amendments? Unlike the previous time when amendments were made, even when the issues were very contentious one would really feel that amendments were indeed being made. Whether they hurt one side or not at least amendments were there. 

This time, Mr Speaker, when I look at the Electoral Commission, for example, by law our Electoral Commission is supposed to be independent and it does not require us to take hours and hours here debating as to whether the Electoral Commission should be independent or not. It is already entrenched in the law. So, I have been asking myself, what is it that the committee actually recommended? (Laughter) This is because by law, the Electoral Commission is supposed to be independent but they again proposed that the Electoral Commission should be independent. What has it been and what is it? That is why I feel that we need to revisit our time and approach in committees and try to consider a number of provisions within the laws before we can pen down most of the issues that we propose.

Mr Speaker, I would like to focus on two issues. One is the office of the Speaker. When you go to other parliaments, like the one of Ghana, they have a Speaker from the government side but they also have a Deputy Speaker from the minority side. What does that signify? It signifies that at one point in time, when the Speaker on the Government side is not in the Chair, the minority side can have their own in the Chair so that there is balance in the House.

I agree that the decisions that the Speaker in the Chair makes are indeed supposed to be independent and very neutral. However, sometimes there are also the feelings of the heart. I will give an example. When a Speaker, who also happens to be a member of the Central Executive Committee of NRMO, previously sat in the caucus at State House and decided on the critical issues of governance of this country, deciding on how NRMO can defeat the rest of the political parties and then the following day the Speaker comes to the Chair, sometimes our hearts feel touched. We say -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, for the record, the Speaker does not attend the caucus of the NRM. None of us does.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue I am specifically driving at is to the effect that - (Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, with your very wise guidance and considering that the Speaker is elected by this august House, is a neutral person and he does not take sides, is it in order for the honourable member, after your guidance, to proceed on a matter upon which you have wisely ruled? Is he in order to proceed without withdrawing and actually causing to be expunged from records what he has uttered - imputing partiality on the part of our respected Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement referred to is the statement to the effect that the Speaker attended a caucus in Entebbe. That statement is not true. The Speaker does not attend the NRM caucus; she does not. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I withdraw the statement and I just want to seek your guidance on this. We on the minority side are proposing that it would have been fair for us to have a Speaker who is not necessarily from any of the political parties, so that the Speaker can carry out his or her duties in a manner that all the sides of the House will be comfortable with.

Mr Speaker, we are right now picking nomination forms for primaries and you cannot pick a nomination form if you do not have a membership card of the political party under which you want to vie as a flag bearer in the next election. That is what I am saying. One, it would save the Speaker’s office from stress because if we have a Speaker who is not participating in the elections, then that Speaker will remain stress free and will not be intimidated by any of the sides of the House. 
Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, the hon. William Nzoghu is an articulate and very good debater who understands the rules of this House. He can appreciate the status and peace of mind of the Speaker, who even gives him opportunity to address the House the way he is doing, sometimes perhaps more than even other members of this House.

Mr Speaker, for him to impute that you are under stress, –(Laughter)– that you are so stressful that you are not even making proper and correct decisions in guiding this House? Is he in order to impute such improper motive on you when we know very well that you are very calm, smiling, very serious, very intelligently and strictly guiding this House correctly and properly? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the honourable member’s name means a big elephant. (Laughter) From where he is, he might be seeing as if the Speaker is stressed, - (Laughter) - going by the fact that he has a lot of difficulty rising to the microphone. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I appreciate your ruling. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I will talk about the office of the Vice President. Our side had proposed that we should not have a Vice-President but a Deputy President, so that the office of the Deputy President is not simply appointive. When a political party fronts its flag bearer for presidency, that flag bearer should tell the country who his or her running mate will be.

Mr Speaker, I have seen right from the late 1990s to date - when the President is not in the country the deputy should definitely take charge but in our country here, you find that when the President is out of the country, it is not the Vice-President who takes charge. We would like to have it as a constitutional mandate that in the circumstance that the President has any difficulty in discharging his or her duties at some point in time, automatically the Deputy President takes charge. That is the essence and spirit in which we want to bring this suggestion.

Mr Speaker, I would like to tell this House that in 2016, especially our colleagues on the other side – (Interruption)

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have listened attentively, and the Constitution commands that we should defend the Constitution. According to our Constitution, in the absence of the President the Vice-President takes charge. Is the honourable member in order to impute improper motive on the person of the Vice-President, that in the absence of the President the Vice-President does not take charge, declaring him incompetent and therefore overthrowing our Constitution?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The office of the Vice-President is a constitutional office and every time the President is leaving the country, he or she must notify the Vice-President is in writing under Article 100. The Office of the Vice-President is created by the Constitution under Article 108. The terms and the functions of the office are clear. Member, there is a Vice-President who takes charge.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.40
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to debate this motion. 

Mr Speaker, I have heard many Members advancing arguments that we should not amend the Constitution like we are doing. Article 259 (1) of the Constitution clearly states thus: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may amend by way of addition, variation or repeal, any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this Chapter.”

Mr Speaker, it goes on to state in clause (2), “This Constitution shall not be amended except by an Act of Parliament.” It also states the procedure of amending the Constitution, which is also very clear. One, there are certain provisions that are entrenched that can only be amended through a referendum; that is Article 260. There are also those that require the district councils to make resolutions and there are those that require Parliament to pass the amendments by two thirds of all Members present.

Mr Speaker, this Constitution was promulgated in 1995 and members, in their wisdom, made it clear that it is only through an Act of Parliament that this Constitution can be amended. Therefore, I support this amendment because the objectives are very clear.

First, the objective is to change the name of the Electoral Commission and add “independent”. Having made it independent in name, they also went on to state that the procedure of removal of a member of the Electoral Commission should also be put in place. At present, it is only the President that can remove a member of the Electoral Commission but under this amendment, it will be a tribunal. The President will not have power to remove a member of the Electoral Commission. 

This is a very important amendment that we should support because right now the President can decide and because of fear of tenure of office a member may be compromised. However, in this new amendment that we are about to pass – and I would like to urge members to pass it – will reinforce the independence of members of the Electoral Commission because the President will not have powers to remove them; it is only through the tribunal that will be appointed.

Mr Speaker, I also support this amendment because we are approaching elections and we would like our members, especially voters, to know that the Electoral Commission that we have will definitely organise a free and fair election and I believe they have been doing it. Therefore, this amendment will also encourage and empower them to do it freely and move forward when organising our elections. 

I also support the proposal by the committee that independent Members of Parliament be allowed to switch sides a year to elections. I think that is very important –(Interjections)– Is it all Members of Parliament? All Members of Parliament, including myself - I had not addressed my mind to that because I thought it was only the independent Members of Parliament. Right now, the procedure is very clear in our Constitution; you do not have to wait for a year. Even two days after you have been sworn in as a Member of Parliament, you can decide to cross and seek mandate –(Interjections)– No, once you cross, you have to seek a fresh mandate from the people.  

Our contract right now is five years. We have made a contract with our voters that in five years, I will be a Member of Parliament representing you under the NRM party. If you want the contract to be four years with the voters then that should be so. The procedure is clear. I do not understand why we are afraid. If you feel you would like to change sides, the Constitution allows you. Even two days after being sworn in, you can resign, go back to the voters and get a fresh mandate from the voters and you come back to Parliament. That is clear; why do you want to cheat voters? The Constitution makes it even better; we do not want prostitutes in politics –(Interruption)

MR KIYINGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been restrained but it is beyond my limit and I have to call my honourable colleague to order, well-knowing that six months towards elections there cannot be a by-election. Therefore, I find it misleading for our honourable colleague to insinuate that at any given time one can ably cross.  Mr Speaker, is hon. Okot Ogong in order to insinuate that such activities can go on in that misleading manner? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Constitution is clear that if you should join Parliament and change sides, you lose your seat; that is clear. What the constitutional amendment is trying to do is to create this exception and it is very specific, and I need the debate to be guided based on what is being proposed - 12 months before general elections, to participate in activities or programmes of a political party or political organisation relating to a general election. Therefore, it is a restricted kind of application. It is not for purposes of – 

Your mandate remains five years but for purposes of getting involved in activities of where you want to go, an exception is now being created for you to be able to do that without the risk of losing your seat. You will still not have crossed the Floor here, you will not have changed sides inside here but outside, you are engaging in activities to prepare for an election. That is what it is saying.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, thank you for your wise guidance. What I have said is also correct, that when we are elected for five years under a political party we have a contract with the voters that we will represent them under that party for five years. However, this proposal is that we should let it free for members to switch sides or to participate in activities regarding elections. I think this is also trying to fit our jacket. It is unconstitutional for Members, because the Constitution is very clear and I also do not know whether that provision is not entrenched; we shall have to check it. 

I can only accept if independent Members of Parliament would wish to change because they are independent, alone and they decide on their own. However, a member of a political party has a contract with the party and you cannot just play around that you are going here and there without - (Member timed out.)

11.50
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will go back to hon. Tanna’s issue. 

It is true that we gave a lot of proposals in the amendment of this Constitution but unfortunately, those proposals were neither taken up by the ministry nor the committee. It is very hurtful because I remember I presented a petition here for the Bakingwe and Bagabo. They petitioned Parliament to be included in the Constitution. I think during that time when they were making the Constitution, these people had no representative. They were completely omitted and it has been their cry that they have the right to culture as per Article 36 of the Constitution. 

Mr Speaker, you will give us a chance when we reach the committee stage to make sure that we review the whole Constitution because we made a lot of proposals and those proposals were not picked up. We need to review the whole Constitution to ensure that at least we make genuine amendments.

In reference to hon. Tanna’s issue, if we can have the Barundi and the Banyarwanda in the Constitution, – fortunately, we have a representative who is a citizen of this country but he is of Indian origin - why are these people not in the Constitution? They are part of the indigenous communities in this country. I think when we reach the third schedule we need to make some amendments within the Constitution to include those communities, especially the indigenous communities - the Bakingwe, the Bagabo. They have to appear in the Constitution.

This was a proposal that I made to the committee and I would like to thank the members who came up with the minority report because they tried to capture everything. If you look at Article 80 (1) of the Constitution about the qualifications of being a Member of Parliament, it is true that with the level of education in this country and the universities that we now have, at least each one must be learned. We have always been undermined outside there. One time I watched a talk show where a one Gashumba was talking about Members of Parliament, saying, “How can you argue with these senior six dropouts?” Sincerely, that is undermining! It is high time we supported this proposal so that the qualification of being a Member of Parliament is raised to degree level. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I will go back again to Article 105 of the Constitution. This is about the term limits. If you look at this country, we are moving very fast and now we are going from a developing country to a developed country. As we develop economically, we also need to develop politically, to have a real democratic country. We need to set a very good precedent for the coming generations. We really need term limits. There is nothing to hide. 

We are in the East African region and if we look at our neighbours, what is wrong with us matching with them so that we can have the same system of governance? – (Interjections) – It is because we are setting a very bad precedent for other countries; that is why they are trying to adopt Uganda’s system.  I think it is high time we restored the term limits as we amend this Constitution. Thank you.

11.56
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I would like to add my voice to the many members that have appreciated the good report by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. However, I would like to move a motion to request that the House moves to committee stage so that we can consider these issues clause by clause, given the urgency of the matter, so that we can have this Bill passed in time. This will enable some of us who intend to participate in the NRM primaries to get our way out. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a Constitution (Amendment) Bill and the vote at this stage cannot be taken lightly. We are required to take that decision by two-thirds majority of all voting Members of Parliament. Therefore, I think it will not be the right time to move a motion of that nature.

11.57
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues to thank the committee for a job well done and to also contribute to some few issues and clauses.

Mr Speaker, I would like begin with the issue being proposed in the amendment to include a salaries and remunerations board. I support that because quite often, we have been viewed as people, especially here in Parliament, who are very greedy. If you look at the roles of Members of Parliament vis-à-vis what we earn in addition to the perception out there, every person especially in Government service and even those who are self-employed, including farmers, will always complain that MPs are greedy and always increase their salaries. 

I think this gives us a window through which we are going to escape. If this board is put in place and the board understands all our tasks in the field, especially when we are doing parliamentary work in the constituencies and elsewhere, I am very sure that the board will even recommend tripling our salary because it is really too much. 

There are a lot of discrepancies and unfairness in some departments and agencies, which need to be understood and explained. How can a driver in KCCA earn a larger salary than a Chief Administrative Officer of a district? I think it is now time to have a body in place that will help us to harmonize all these.

I appreciate the committee’s concern especially when they realised that the need to have a body outside the government system would create again unnecessary costs in terms of government expenditure as salaries and employment to some. Since we already have the infrastructure in place, we just need to appoint people from within the system of public service and other agencies, which are related to this very noble cause. Otherwise, I support that and I request other members to look into this as an option for us to be saved from this embarrassment in the eyes of the community.

I also have a concern on the issue of the change of name to the “Independent Electoral Commission”. I have no disagreement with that but my only concern is that I thought it was already independent. If it is not yet ready, as some members have said, constitutionally, that is how it should be. However, Mr Speaker, you will also realise that as we go into the change of names, there are other attendant costs which are likely to come in – labelling, advertisement and others.

My argument here is that we just make the operations independent; the activities should be independent to portray the independence and not necessarily the name. In my view, we could just implement the constitutional requirement of its independence and avoid other unnecessary expenditure that will come up especially when it comes to marketing the new name to other people and outside this country.

Finally, I also support Members who are raising objection regarding the requirement that independent Members have 1,000 signatures for them to be nominated –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: I thank you, honourable member. On the independence of the Electoral Commission, I would like to inform you that the committee confirmed to the august House that the current Electoral Commission has not been independent because independence depends on how you work, act and behave. The committee therefore is right to say that at this time, we need the Independent Electoral Commission. 

MR BIGIRWA: I thought that the information was in regard to the 1,000 signatures required. However, I have also listened to you and I think that Members can still add their voices to that. 

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, the requirement of 1,000 signatures for an independent Member is really uncalled for. I do not see any difference between a Member standing as an independent and one on a party ticket. We are all the same and we need to be treated the same way and stick with the 20 signatures that are required of all of us. I therefore support the proposal that we should, at committee stage, vote on the matter to save independents from unnecessary and unfair judgement and treatment in regard to that. Otherwise, I thank you and I hope that as we move to committee stage, many of the amendments and other additions will be done.

12.05
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker. This would ordinarily have been a very big debate in the country but in my opinion, it seems like we are not handling it as that. Unless we are saying that we no longer take the Constitution to be the most important document in this country, nothing else can explain why, for example, the Leader of Government Business is not here with us. Mr Speaker, you have heard people say that we should conclude this debate very fast so that we go out and start on our campaigns, yet this is the document upon which even the campaigns are supposed to be based. 

The amendment of the Constitution is the mandate of Parliament and I wonder why Parliament is now being urged to run away from its constitutional obligation. The Government heard the views of the people well in time. In fact, that citizen’s compact that was presented to the Speaker of this Parliament was as a result of wide consultation which was under taken by a non-governmental organisation and the Opposition. These people came to my constituency in Mukono and consulted my people. We sat at Hotel Africana where even the NRM party was represented by some people who sit in this Parliament. 

That the Government brought the Bill without considering the views that had been raised from the public is a clear indication that we want to shut Ugandans out of this process. It is an indication that we are just here to bring this Government Bill to occupy us but in fact the views of Ugandans have been left out, not because they never prepared themselves this time but because there is no will for this process to be informed by what Ugandans do consider to be very important. 

The argument that we deal with the Government Bill only does not hold water for me. The commission that is being proposed can also handle those particular issues that are being raised in the Government Bill. If we say that we do not have time and we need another commission to handle this, then we should refer everything to the commission. However, if we say that we can handle the government Bill and it is this Parliament that sat and empowered the committee to go and interface with various groups of people, then we cannot run away from the contributions that they made. People should never be invited to Parliament in vain. That a Parliament committee invited people and listened to them and at the end of the day we say that we do not have time for them is very absurd.

I would like to say that the minority report has proposed some issues that do not require funds to implement; for example, there is a proposal that we restore the term limits. We do not need money to implement that because it can simply be done by a decision of this Parliament sitting here today and now. To decide that we are going to restore term limits will cost us nothing; there is no money or technical people needed. Once we resolve here in Parliament that we restore the term limits, it will be done. 

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be proper for us to consider those issues that are being raised in the minority report that cost nothing to implement at this time? I would like to end by thanking the author of the minority report and telling people that at least when in future the Hansard is read, people will know that there were some people in this House who still considered that a Constitution was a very important document. 

The whips must tell us something; how come this House is almost empty when we are considering such a very important matter? What are we telling Ugandans, that as Parliament we no longer consider the Constitution of Uganda to be an important document? Are we telling them that we do not have time to either come and support or disagree with issues that are being raised as we intend to amend our Constitution? 

Mr Speaker, I would like to register my disappointment with the way we are handling this very important debate with so many Members absent and without reason. It seems that some people like hon. Kafeero are here urging Parliament to make a law so that he can cross to the NRM party. (Interruption)   

MR KAFEERO: Mr Speaker, it is true that among the amendments being proposed by Government, we have one on Article 83(1) (h) which suggests that an independent member, after amendment, can cross to the NRM side or any other party. Is my honourable colleague and neighbour from Mukono in order to insinuate that I did say so with imputation of bad motive? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you stated on the record that you wanted to cross to the NRM.  

MS NAMBOOZE: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I would like to end my contribution by saying that the constitution that we are handling right now is not supposed to be written to benefit we, the members who are seated here such that if you do not see anything of benefit to you in the amendment, then you do not contribute. We shall be cheating Ugandans - (Member timed out.)

12.13
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Isingiro): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank members for their contributions and more so thank the members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the report.

The constitution is a special document that requires special attention. In this respect, I agree with my colleague, hon. Yahaya Gudoi that some of the decisions should not be hurried. I also would like to associate myself with the contribution of hon. Dr Crispus Kiyonga that a constitutional review commission as proposed by the committee is something we, as the august House, should be looking at.

We have a history to this; when we had just come into power, we instituted the Oder commission; we also had the Odoki commission and the Ssempebwa commission that have fundamentally changed the laws of Uganda. Reading from what is from the populace, you realise that people want this constitution fundamentally changed. A constitution is a living document that must breathe life as circumstances and times change. If you asked someone in 2005 who agitated for removal of term limits, today he will tell you that we needed them yesterday. We have heard some of them say it and we have examples to this. Therefore, a constitution should be a living document that must breathe life and move with changing circumstances.

I associate myself closely with those submitting that we should have a comprehensive review of our Constitution for fundamental amendments. 

Secondly, I also associate myself closely with this amendment that we should allow people move freely a year before elections. Some of our colleagues are on the opposite side not by choice but maybe by force. The circumstances forced them, some people were rigged out – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For this august house, members decided where they want to be and the voters, with their submission elected them to this august House. Is hon. Mujuni in order to insinuate that we were forced to be where we are without believing in who we are? Mr Speaker, you are aware that these members, on the agreement, swore to uphold in belief of being in this House. Is my colleague in order to insinuate that they are just being forced to be where they are?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the member stated that some members were forced by circumstances to be on the other side. Please wind up. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I was submitting that circumstances forced some members. We are aware of what happened internally in our primaries. I do not know what happened in FDC – (Interruption)

MS OTENGO: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information in support of his submission. In the Eighth Parliament, I was an independent member because we had disagreements in my party then which was UPC – (Interjection) - I have never been in FDC and I will never. 
When I came in under the Opposition, we were under the Office of the Speaker as independent members. I was an independent member for UPC; therefore, I was forced to be independent but I wanted to be in UPC. Thank you. 

MR MUJUNI: Thank you so much, honourable colleague. Finally, whereas the constitution commands that the Electoral Commission should be independent and whereas the mandate of the Electoral Commission is a creature of the Constitution –(Interruption) 

MR MUWANGA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of clarification to the previous Speaker, hon. Kyamadidi. I think in this country we ought to be serious; the framers of the 1995 Constitution put a provision, aware of our history. We can cause an absurdity if we create what we call a transfer period for politicians and in the final year of this Parliament, the entire Opposition decamps and becomes the Government side.

The framers of the 1995 Constitution were curing a certain disease in our politics in 1960 where members could freely cross political parties, from DP, UPC and at one time my party DP suffered immensely. We had a breed of politicians in this country who were not principled. Today they are UPC, then NRM or FDC. You will not build a democracy based on pluralism if you create this transfer period for politicians.
I would like to seek clarification from you where the argument of the framers of the Constitution has been washed aside for people to come and say now I am independent, then I want to join NRM. Please clarify that.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you so much, my colleague. You actually raised a very important issue and I would like to tell you that the Constitution should be read as whole. You must not read one Article of the Constitution at the expense of the others.

Article 29 of the Constitution clearly stipulates the right to associate - (Member timed out.)

12.21
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate but I will touch 247(a), “Salaries and Remunerations Board. There shall be a body known as the Salaries and Remunerations Board.

The Salaries and Remunerations Board shall consist of a chairperson, a deputy chairperson and such other member as Parliament shall by law prescribe, all of whom shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.

The Salaries and Remunerations Board shall be responsible for determining salaries and allowances of public officers and other persons whose salaries and allowances are paid from Consolidated Fund.” Genuinely, I am not comfortable with this for the following reasons; 
All of us here know what we face when we are in the constituencies. Actually, even if they said that every member should get a billion, I think some people who are generous this cannot be enough. 

Secondly, the workers who are not MPs fully benefit from their salaries but for members of Parliament, there is none who can use it sufficiently and also take something home. You find yourself even touching what you have invested. Therefore, Mr Speaker, for this reason, I am not comfortable with this board to determine salaries of members of Parliament. Maybe if we say - (Interruption)

MR MUGABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to my honourable colleague that this matter was given thorough thought by the committee and that we made a good recommendation in line with your fears. Therefore, I do not know if you are still interested in debating this matter in view of the committee’s recommendation.

MR KATOTO: I was just trying to put some more meat on the submission of hon. Junjura by saying that should we go with the position of hon. Junjura, then we are finished because there is no way someone will ever be comfortable in this Parliament unless these people are also made to go to the villages and contribute to the voters.

Mr Speaker, I would like to urge members as we amend this Constitution to be very careful because the country is watching us. I will go with hon. Nambooze’s submission that members are not here. I drove in the night to come and attend this Parliament but there are members now who cannot be allowed to come and they are in their constituencies.

When debating these matters, we need to be considerate to ourselves because the pressures in the constituencies are tense. Therefore for this case, any one of us will feel that he should not be guillotined. Therefore, is hon. Nambooze ready to be guillotined because she is not in her constituency? I do not blame any member who is not here; maybe we should advise them to come but we should not condemn them because the pressure in the constituencies is too much and people cannot afford to sit here. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.24
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back in this House, hon. Kwizera tried to introduce a motion that would force Government to set up an independent salary and remuneration commission but he was sabotaged by Government. I am now happy that the Government has just seen sense that an independent salaries and remuneration commission is necessary. This means that when you have little resources and little food, it will be very unfair to allow self-service. This is why right now people, especially civil servants, are moving from the traditional civil service to join Authorities and Commissions. 

Presently, we do not have extension workers especially in agriculture because of poor pay. People are running to URA, UNRA. From yesterday, the non-teaching staff of public universities are on strike because Government decided to increase salaries for professors leaving out the non-teaching staff and one wonders whether a professor will teach a student who is not registered. If you do not pay an academic registrar but increase the salary of a professor, who will the professor teach? I would like to thank Government that at last, you have seen common sense that we need to be treated equally especially in the labour market.

Mr Speaker, these amendments should have been introduced long time. We have been debating these amendments; I even do not see the right quorum which would take a vote. We are in the period of campaigns; those who are not in this House are in the countryside campaigning. Why don’t we postpone the debate on the constitutional amendments and then we can resume after elections. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

12.27
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and I would also like to get some clarification from the committee as far as Article 78 of the Constitution is concerned.

It is true we are dealing with a very important matter as far as the Constitution of this land is concerned and Article 78 (2) stipulates that upon the expiration of the period of 10 years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under clause 1 (b) and (c) of this article for the purpose of retaining, increasing or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it. 

I do not see this coming out clearly in the report of the committee and I thought as the constitution stipulates, it is upon Parliament at this right time to review the representation of the special interest groups. Maybe at an appropriate time, the committee will have to clarify on this so that at least some of us who represent special interest groups are safe.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say something about the Electoral Commission. I agree that we need first of all to change the name of the Electoral Commission to the Independent Electoral Commission of Uganda. However, that is not enough. The process to which the commissioners - the chairman, the vice chairman and the other five commissioners - join the commission is very important and I feel that this process should be in such a way that it instils confidence in the people of Uganda. This is because once the public is confident of the Electoral Commission, that is a sure deal that even the results of the elections will be accepted by all Ugandans.

The composition of the Electoral Commission should be clearly stated in the Constitution. For example for the Judicial Service Commission, the number is well stipulated in the Constitution and I feel that Parliament should not be again burdened each and every other time with getting or adding or reducing the number of the commissioners.

I also want to mention something about the Judges and the Justices of the High Court. The committee has proposed the ages of 70 and 75 respectively. Honestly speaking, I feel that at 75 or 70 a human being is a bit tired; even the Bible says that life after 70 is a bonus. Therefore, why shouldn’t we be fair to Judges so that at 70, they go and integrate with the community and look after their grandchildren?

Mr Speaker, we are living in the era of information technology and in this era, there is a lot of looking for information from Google and all the technology that is at hand. Therefore at 70, I feel some of these people are really tired to the extent that they may not be flexible enough to adapt to this information era that we are in. I would like to end my submission by thanking the committee and the House at large.

12.32
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues in adding my voice to this very important subject.

First and foremost, allow me to report to this august House that indeed the committee set out to visit various parts of the country to collect views from the public. However, I was disappointed with the committee during their visit to the West Nile region. The programme that was communicated to us was not followed. Some of the members who should have been on the committee while the committee was doing business in the region were not there.

When I was setting for Arua to go and meet the committee, I met some of the committee members around Pakwach coming back. I asked myself if the committee was to really do a good job and some of us who were supposed to be involved were, whom did they consult? When I went to Arua, I was told a few district officials met the committee with very few members. Therefore, I do not know whether the committee report that was presented here is substantive enough in terms of collecting views from the countryside.

Mr Speaker, I will lament like other colleagues have done here in regard to the amendment of the constitution. There are countries that have had their constitutions in place for very many years without doing any major surgery to the law of the country. However, here every five years when the election period is approaching, we begin to think of amending the constitution. Many times, this is done with ulterior motives and particularly by the sitting politicians, starting from the top up to the bottom and when I say the least, I mean here in Parliament because the mandate of amending the Constitution rests with us in Parliament here. 

Therefore, when I see the same Parliament coming up with proposals, I begin to ask myself whether this role of amending the Constitution is well-placed with us. I ask whether it is not proper that another institution somewhere should independently propose amendments to us as Parliament to debate and pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am faced with a very difficult situation - the provisions of Articles 262 and 263. Article 262 requires us to take this vote for the motion on second reading by two-third majority of all Members of Parliament. Article 263 is clear that the vote for the second reading and the vote for the third reading must be separated by at least 14 sittings of Parliament. If we are able to take the decision on the second reading today, we will of course be able to go to committee stage. However, the decision on third reading can only come after 14 sittings of Parliament. That is what the Constitution says.

Therefore, honourable members, we do not have a lot of time. I propose that we see if we can wind up debate at this stage. We will have more debate at committee stage when we are doing the actual proposals for amendment and taking them out. The motion we are debating is actually the motion for second reading of the Bill. We are not adopting a report of a committee in one way or the other because the committee has reported. The motion that we are going to vote on is for second reading of the Bill and to take that vote, we need two-thirds majority of all members of Parliament. 

When we are able to achieve that, we will go to Committee Stage and start processing. As I said earlier, at that stage the minority proposed amendments should be included. Everybody will be able to propose amendments and as we go along, we will take a decision on each one of them. Therefore, at this stage we might need to be preparing to take a decision on the motion for second reading. 

As a result, I am going to ask the Opposition side to sum up on the issues that have been raised and also ask the Government side to sum up so that we suspend up to 2.30 p.m. and come specifically to vote on the motion for second reading. I will propose the question then and we will proceed from there. That will help us so that we have some time as we go to committee stage and have all the discussion again.

At least the 14 sittings will be building up and we see how to make it in time. For purposes of these, every working day will be a sitting day of Parliament so that we are able to do it in two weeks. I am going to ask hon. Mwiru to sum from this side and the Learned Attorney-General will sum up from this side. After that, we shall suspend the House up to 2.30 p.m.

12.39
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I would like to start by appreciating you, Mr Speaker, for the manner in which you have guided this House. As the Opposition, we are very grateful with the manner in which you have guided the House. I have had the benefit to listen to my colleagues when this debate ensued. What is very clear is that there is no divergence in as far as the justifications raised in the minority report are concerned. 

Mr Speaker, when you read the majority and minority reports, for example, we agree on the tenure of the Electoral Commission. However, the majority only went to a wrong conclusion. It is on the basis of that that I would like to allay the fears of members. When the amendments were brought on the Floor, the question was, will the committee have time to deal with these issues? That was answered by the minority report. We had time and the report was produced. Therefore, the question of time no longer arises. 

A question again arose that does this Parliament have time to deal with these reforms? Honourable members, the framers of the Constitution were very clear. In Article 79, they bestowed on this Parliament the duty to make laws. I would like to invite members to look at page 2 of the minority report. We clearly show the functions of Parliament. Therefore, none of us can stand on the Floor and abdicate our duty. After engaging the public and spending public resources and you say let another person do this work. The citizens of this country may not take us very seriously if we take that path.

Secondly, page 3 of our report under Article 79 clearly shows the procedure of amending the Constitution. I am of the considered opinion that we are complying with that procedure. That is why the Speaker is rightly guiding us on the procedure to be followed.

When making laws as Parliament, we are making laws for the benefit of everybody in this country for posterity. I will invite members to know that the laws must be blunt. We should not think of who is going to be affected. We have a duty to make laws. Implementation of the laws is the responsibility of the Executive. I have listened to colleagues saying, “When it comes to implementation”; that is not our part. Ours is to make laws. At first they asked, “Do we have time to do these amendments?” However, you realise that most of the provisions – even in the minority report – do not actually require a lot of time; For example, the term limits, how much time do you need to restore term limits? It even has no financial implications. Parliament just needs to pronounce itself on the matter.

Mr Speaker, specifically, the minority report raises very salient issues which we need to pay attention to like the Electoral Commission. When we talk about the independence of the Electoral Commission, it guarantees the security of this country because out there, the public is interested to know what Parliament is going to say about this.  Therefore, I invite my honourable colleagues to take up the duty so that we pronounce ourselves on the matter such that it becomes a duty of the Executive.

The President of this Country has ever retired a commission. He said in public interest, they could no longer serve and he appointed another commission. I would like to know whether he can have that good heart to say once the law has been made, he can take that decision.

Mr Speaker, we are grappling with the cost of public administration. In the minority report under Article 53, for the record, we talked about reconstituting the size of Parliament and I urge members to interest themselves on that matter.

On the entrenchment of some of these provisions - there must be certainty when it comes to this constitutional amendment. Therefore, the public is not acting on tension of asking us what is going to be amended today and what is not going to be amended. Therefore, the procedure as laid out in the Constitution is actually adopted. 

I would like to end by reminding honourable members of Parliament that we have a duty to take a decision in the interest of the country and I invite you to adopt the major report up to the point of agreement and the minority from the point of dissent. Once you do that, you will have done this country a service and you will go down the history of this country as one of the parliaments which restored term limit and guaranteed free and fair elections in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker. May God bless you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

12.44
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank all members of Parliament who made wise contributions to this debate. I would like to take the opportunity to thank the committee, which diligently studied this report and made very wise proposals. 

However, Mr Speaker, because I have been itinerant recently and I have not been diligently following the report, may I, with your permission, ask the Attorney-General to come and sum up. Thank you.

12.45
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker and colleagues, first of all, I would like to adopt the statement of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs in appreciating the work of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and for all the contributions you have made to this important subject. A lot has been said and it has been quite a long journey up to this moment. 

The best approach is to urge each other to accept the need to establish a constitutional review commission which has been proposed by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in consultation with the Executive, in which we can do a comprehensive job. It is because apart from the contributions we have received from all the stakeholders, I believe as we speak, a lot still lies out there which can be useful in the work that we shall be handling in that particular review commission.

I want to emphasise one or two things- [KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Clarification!] 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable. 

MR RUHINDI: I am summarising. Mr Speaker, because one of the things - you see, the idea that they have only amended the name of the Electoral Commission and nothing else - as a matter of fact, let me state this for purposes of the record. The proposal in clause 1(a) of the Bill to rename the Electoral Commission as the Independent Electoral Commission was one of the proposals we received from the general public in 2014.

The justification for the proposal is to explicitly recognise the independence of the Electoral Commission in its name. Government supported the proposal since the proposal is not seeking to provide for the independence of the Electoral Commission but merely emphasising the independence of the Electoral Commission, which is already guaranteed by Article 62 of the Constitution. - (Laughter)  For the avoidance of doubt, Article 62 of the Constitution provides that subject to this Constitution, the Commission shall be independent and shall in the performance of its functions, not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.

However, in the proposed amendment, we go further to elucidate on the mode of removal of any member of the Electoral Commission to liken it to that of the judges of the High Court. I thought I should state that for the record.

Secondly, I have listened carefully to many of the contributions and I find them very useful. As I have said, we shall take them forward. There is one, however, on the review mentioned in Article 78 of the Constitution –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really did not want to interrupt the minister’s submission but he has just said Government has taken note of some of the concerns and they will take them forward. The clarification I am seeking is: what does “taking them forward” mean?

MR RUHINDI: It means forward in the debate and further consultations. Mr Speaker, I was talking about the review under Article 78 of the Constitution; there is a lot of insistence that it should have been done in this amendment. I do not know how but the provision is very clear. After the making of the constitution, the review was done after 10 years. Thereafter, it is supposed to be done after every five years and we have religiously done that for the past period. Every five years, we come here with the motion for a resolution of Parliament to retain, amend or adjust in any way - (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Attorney-General for allowing me to seek a clarification from him.

The Attorney-General was part of the early discussions of the Tenth Parliament and he said we needed to have electoral reforms - a review on the Constitution and other election related laws. You kept postponing and now you are here on the Floor saying you want to defer the matter to a constitutional review commission. Do you now admit to Ugandans, as the Attorney-General of this country, that you have deliberately let down I and the various stakeholders who were interested? 

I came to you with a proposed Bill together with other members here and you said you would process the Bill for constitutional amendments; do you admit to this county that you deliberately delayed the process so that you would come to this House to tell the country there is no more time?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Attorney-General, for allowing me raise my point of clarification. You have reported to us that the review on representative groups has been done in the past 10 years. Consequently, it has been done every five years.  I do not know of any special opportunity you have given to the people we represent to determine whether they want 10 men or women from the UPDF to continue representing. Are you serious about that undertaking? What do you want me to report to the people of Rubaga South on the same? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, the review is done by Parliament. I believe that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi represents his people of Rubaga in this Parliament. When the motion comes here, please consult your people, if you have never done so. 

In respect of what my sister hon. Alaso said, I can assure you that we received proposals. Some were included in the Government report and in the Government proposals in the amendment Bill. There are those in the minority report while others are still out there. 

In 1993, Government conditioned the Odoki Commission. In 2003, it commissioned the Ssempebwa Commission. We all joined each other saying we needed constitutional reforms. We undertook this exercise, in due process, we realised that we needed a comprehensive assessment of people’s views hence the proposal for the constitutional review commission. 

Many ideas that have come up are important and good, in my opinion. There are issues to do with the regional router and qualifications of the members of Parliament. I heard so many cheers about raising the bar for qualifications to the university level.

According to the Ssempebwa commission, the basic qualification is A-level for one to become a Member of Parliament. According to the commission’s finding at that time in 2005, the members of Parliament who had a degree were about 70 per cent. The most important thing in terms of being a Member of Parliament include; communication, ability to express oneself in the English language and to be knowledgeable. 

The idea was that you can easily get a person who is extremely good but with HSC qualification. Instead of denying that person an opportunity of being in Parliament, since in any case many members of Parliament do have a degree, there was no need to deny that particular person an opportunity to represent his or her people. However, if it is considered that this can be further reviewed, we can still take it up.   

Let me tell you one thing by the way; the greatest geniuses of our times never went for formal education. Take an example of Albert Einstein. The greatest intellectuals in the world are those who observe nature. You simply observe nature and operate within nature. I understand even Bill Gates falls in this category though I do not know about that. 

One or two things; there is where we deferred with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. We deferred on the issue of requirements. It was suggested that those vying to be independents get 1,000 persons to sponsor them. When we met with them, we conceded. We agreed that it was a high bar. Of course we also did not want to offend the principle of discrimination and equality under Article 21 of the Constitution. 

However, we still are of that view in the spirit of building the multi-party dispensation. In a situation where a person competes in the primary election of a party, loses in the election and wants to come as independent, then we should also raise the bar for coming as an independent. That is after that person has failed in the primaries - (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our Constitution is very clear and the Attorney-General is the custodian of that Constitution. It defines how interested persons can participate in an election. For those candidates who get to be flag bearer of their party, they just get a few signatures. For those who want to stand as independents, it is also well articulated in the Constitution. 

The point of order which I am raising is wouldn’t it be discriminatory for anybody to be given a different standard and yet these two individuals are competing for the same position? Is the minister in order to reel in the issue of discrimination when he is the custodian of the law in this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the Constitution (Amendment) Bill. It can be amended. That is why the Attorney-General is saying what he is saying because he knows the proposal is to amend the Constitution.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Not only are we now talking about the Constitution but we are also talking about constitutionalism. There is a challenge for many of us to appreciate the difference between the two; Constitutionalism and the Constitution.

Constitutionalism is the normative – is the belief in the rule of law  -(Interjection) - of course we do, that is why I am speaking about it and very confidently –(Interruption) 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I assume that the honourable Attorney-General fully understands the significance of the Constitution. When the Attorney-General gives two levels, the definition of the Constitution and the aspect of understanding that Constitution; isn’t he implying that the honourable member who was on the Floor lacked the understanding of the Constitution?

Is he therefore in order to assume that the hon. William Nzoghu does not understand the difference between a normative aspect and the Constitution itself? Is he in order? Should he undermine an honourable member?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Learned Attorney-General was making a distinction between a Constitution and the spirit of constitutionalism. He did not assign it to any member. Please wind up, honourable.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much for the wise ruling, Mr Speaker. In winding up – (Interruption)

MR TANNA: I would like to thank the honourable minister. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. In his presentation, he assumes that a member who goes to stand as an independent shall have failed in party primaries and therefore, would need the minimum of 1,000 signatures. 

However, I for one have never ever stood in any party primaries. When you put a bar of the 1,000 signatures – I would have no problem because in hindsight, it would keep away anybody from walking into the Electoral Commission to pick a form and would set – but the party, like you have explained, has registered members and therefore, by implication has the 1,000 signatures by backing.

I therefore would like us to differentiate both scenarios like you have rightly said. A member who seeks to stand after failing in party primaries or somebody who disassociates from all the existing political parties but decides to be Independent; I would like to get clarification on that particular issue. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need to suspend this House and I am going to do this right now.

MR RUHINDI: Let me wind up, please. The proposal we were making – it is good hon. Tanna asked a question - was to make a difference. If you came as an independent, that number would not be required. You would actually go through the normal process of nomination.

We were only talking about how to build a multi-party dispensation when people go into parties - and you know what happens in there. They stand in primaries and the next day – by the way, the principle of discrimination is not even applicable although we are putting this in the Constitution.  
This is simply because you can still associate either alone or with others. 

All we are saying is that in order to build the multi-party dispensation, just show that you are supported by such and such number of people. That is if you have gone through a primary and failed. Anyway, Mr Speaker, without going into - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have order, members? Please wind up.

MR RUHINDI: Please protect me, Mr Speaker. I would like to wind up. I am only making this proposal – we can actually follow it up as debate at the committee stage, as the Speaker said. We were thinking that it will be the ideal position which would strike a fair compromise in building our multi-party dispensation and also recognise that an individual can stand as an Independent or in association with others. With those few remarks, I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on looking at the Bill again, none of the proposals fall under Article 260 and none of them also fall under Article 261 which would require the separation of the 14 sittings of Parliament.

The proposals in the Bill are squarely under Article 262 and under it, it is only the two-thirds majority at second reading and third reading that is required. I need to make that clarification because the other ones relates to the one by referendum and also the one by approval by district councils under 261.

This will therefore not require the 14 sittings of Parliament to separate the second reading and the third reading. We will therefore be able to proceed and handle it the way we usually handle Bills.

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure and this is in public interest. I am witnessing a very uncomfortable trend in this Parliament and it is on the conduct of members of Parliament. We are going to amend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and even as on the Order Paper, we are also going to create new constituencies.

I would like to bring to the attention of this House as a matter of procedure to appendix F (4), Public interest: “Members shall base their conduct on full consideration of public interest. Avoid conflict between personal interest and public interest and resolve any conflict between the two at once and in favour of public interest.”

Another point of contention is No.7 (7), Declaration of Interests: “Members shall fulfil conscientiously the requirements of the House in respect of declaration of interests and shall always draw attention to any relevant interests in any proceeding of the House or its committee in any communication with ministers, Government and Executive agencies.”

We are amending a Constitution and some of the provisions concern members who would like to offer themselves as candidates. An individual can nurture interest in contesting through party primaries. Hurriedly, they request to amend the law. Some are already saying that they would like to go to the “promised land”. They therefore want a constitutional amendment so they can go to the ‘promised land.’ They have already declared their interests.

Mr Speaker, the full reading of the two sections requires that while we debate here, we do not forget our critical mandate to debate in the national interests. I am worried that this Parliament is turning into a kind of a dealing place; where one is expected to give something in turn for another – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a procedural matter. Can you raise the procedure and then you raise the order?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, we risk the integrity of this Parliament and history will judge us harshly if we do not rise to this bare minimum, which we put in our Rules of Procedure that this Parliament adopted. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to those provisions where Members who have interests in this constitutional debate, at a personal level, should declare those interests and excuse themselves at the point of debate. 

In addition, regarding the debate on the creation of new constituencies where Members want constituencies created and yet they are active Members, we must avoid a situation where a leader decides the people who vote him. You are reversing the whole notion of who votes you because you are supposed to be voted for but not for you to determine your voters – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the point is made.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Therefore, Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure as to whether the conduct of Members of this House does not conflict with these Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Is the point of order on the same matter?

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not want to interrupt my honourable colleague when he was making a passionate appeal to the House and to the conscience of the House. However, I found it a bit odd that having sat in the House and attentively listened to the Members raising very pertinent issues and engaging each other on matters that are of national importance and concern, a Member would stand up on the floor of the House and suggest that this floor of the august House is actually a floor of dealers. Is the Member in order to suggest and insinuate that honourable members of this House are actually dealers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House has a business and it deals in politics. (Laughter) That is the greatest deal for this House. (Laughter) Honourable member for Bugabula, if you did not know that the transactions here are political deals – As regards the negotiations that we are having about amending the Constitution, you are dealing with the interests of the people. Please, let us avoid splitting atoms.

On the procedural matter that was raised, let me just say this. The mere fact that a passenger is sitting in the bus and going to Gulu does not make the passenger the owner of the bus, even if he or she said so. There is national interest. The mere fact that a Member is assigning his or her personal interest on the national interest does not, in any way, make that national interest personal. (Applause) You can say that the Member was misguided or that the Member should not have said that but it does not alter the volume or the stature of what is there because what is there is in the national interest. Therefore, let us not be passengers who begin claiming to be bus owners. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have journalism students and a teacher from UMCIT. They are represented by hon. Moses Kasibante and hon. Sempala. They have come to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have a delegation of sub-county parish leaders from Bukomero sub-county, Kiboga District represented by hon. Kabajo James Kiwalabye and hon. Ruth Nankabirwa Sentamu. They have come to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.

Honourable members, as I said, we need to come to a decision on the motion for the second reading of this Bill. I am going to suspend the House and when we resume, we will be taking a decision on this matter. I am therefore going to ask the Whips to get the Members informed that we will be taking a vote on the motion for second reading when we resume the House and the vote is by roll call and tally. That is what our rules say and that is what we are going to do, nothing less and nothing more.

Members, I now put the question that the Bill entitled, The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015, be read for the second time. That vote will be taken when we resume at 2.30 p.m. House is suspended to 2.30.p.m

(The House was suspended at 01.18 p.m.)

(On resumption at 02.38 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We had agreed that we would come and take a decision on this matter of the second reading of this Bill. I do not see the Chief Whips here, what has happened? We need to see them by their fruits. Honourable Prime Minister, where are the ministers?

2.39
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you. I cannot say where they may be; I think each one is on his own. Today, we did not have a Cabinet meeting, which usually keeps us together. All I expect is that they will be coming in. Thank you. [Hon. Mwiru: “At what time?”] 

MR KAJURA: When they come in.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, again I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill 2015”, be read the second time. That is the motion for decision but because of the way we are constituted right now, we will not be able to make any decisions. House is suspended for 15 minutes. After 15 minutes, if there are no Members, I will adjourn this House.

(The House was suspended at 2.39 p.m.)

(On resumption at 02.55 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 179 CLAUSE 4 OF THE CONSTITUTION PROVIDING FOR CREATION OF NEW COUNTIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, where were we?

2.57
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we broke off, we ended on a matter to do with the constitutional amendments and to that extent, I thought we were proceeding in that direction. However, I am surprised that the Minister for Local Government is here to move a motion for the creation of new counties. 

I thought that all our minds were set and if you could read the mood in the House, we were more prepared for the constitutional amendments, in the first place, and then we would proceed on to the creation of counties.

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the minister to deviate from your orders as we left off and he now introduces a new item? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am the one who called the item. We are trying to see if we can take this decision but the numbers are not yet right. Therefore, we can, as well, handle another item because the other one was only to take a decision. That is why we called item three.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I had already moved my motion, which was duly seconded. I had spoken to my motion and Members had made substantial contributions to the motion.

Mr Speaker, as the idea of creating new counties was mooted and as the committee continued with public hearings on the motion for creation of new counties, the government received a number of petitions from some areas, which also sought to have new counties created. I therefore take this opportunity to move the following amendments to my motion for which I had already given notice.

I had already moved an amendment earlier to add Namutumba District and the committee went on the ground to examine the proposal. I will be requesting you, Mr Speaker, to allow the chairperson of the committee to report on the findings, which the committee made on Namutumba last week.

However, the amendments that I would like to move today, are to create a county called Tochi County out of the present Omoro County to comprise of Ongako, Koro and Bobi sub-counties. The current Omoro County will remain with the sub-counties of Odek, Lalogi and Lakwana.

Secondly, I move a motion to alter the boundaries of the current Terego County to create Terego County East to comprise of the sub-counties of Riama, Odupi, Omugo and Terego County West to comprise of the sub-counties of Viliafe, Kapurin and Ayivu – (Interjection) Thank you for that correction.

Mr Speaker, I also propose to alter the boundaries of the current Madi-Okollo County to create upper Madi-Okollo County to comprise of Okollo, Ofaka, Anyiribu and Ulepi sub-counties and the Lower Madi County to comprise of Pawol, Ogoko, Rhino Camp and Rigibo sub-counties. 

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has accordingly revised the certificate of financial implications to accommodate 43 new counties. All the proposals I am making are backed. I have a resolution of Gulu District Council backing the creation of Tochi County, a resolution of Arua District Council backing the division of Terego County and the division of Madi-Okollo County. I beg to lay those documents on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MWESIGE: I therefore beg to move, Mr Speaker, that this House now proceeds to consider the motion as moved on its merits. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the report from the committee was received but now there are new situations that have arisen that would require the chairperson, if she has done any study on Namutumba, to address Parliament on what their findings are. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. The procedural issue I am raising is that in a few minutes, more counties have been created. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, not yet; They are proposals. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: There are more proposals. I am sure that as we are talking, more people are raising proposals. We left on Thursday without an idea and I am sure that Sironko, Mbale and Manafwa are now sitting and they are about to bring their proposals. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we allow all the districts to bring all their proposals so that the committee looks at them? There must be criteria upon which to create constituencies so that the committee can consider them and bring one comprehensive report. This is- instead of looking at only Namutumba and the three, which have been created while leaving others, which are also waiting. Wouldn’t this be procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I could be sympathetic to that procedural point but our rules are very strict on proceeding on anticipation. We cannot anticipate what will come because the rules do not allow that. We can only deal with what we have. That is what the rules say.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee recommended that two more counties be created; Namutumba County and Ruhinda Central County. The reason the minister gave was that finances were not sufficient to cover the creation of one more county. Now, the minister goes and creates several more. Is it procedurally correct, Mr Speaker, for the minister to disregard the recommendations of the committee for Mitooma District and bring new counties?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was the minister’s motion and he has opted to amend it. I do not know whether he has adopted the recommendation from the committee but that is for this House. The minister has amended this motion, but as I said the other time when the Member for Bujenje raised the issue, we have some restrictions on how private members or even committees of Parliament can make amendments to motions that have the effect of conflicting with Article 93. However, the minister is here.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, in protection of the Constitution of Uganda, I am raising a procedural question. Much as it is constitutionally in order for counties to be created so that they form constituencies, there is also a big advantage and a precedent, which this House is creating. Since I joined Parliament, I have not seen a situation where, after the pronouncement of a given number of counties created, all of a sudden or simultaneously, new counties are added unceremoniously as if we are in a speculative atmosphere. 

Are we creating a precedent with which we can live under these kinds of circumstances? Can we live by the precedent we are creating today? I am serious about this question procedurally. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you said unceremoniously. What ceremony should have been performed, if you could guide us so that we can know how unceremonious it has become?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Last time when this matter was brought here, I raised it and you advised that it was premature. Already, we can see the mess that we are in. The minister is proposing to create constituencies whereas the committee had their own proposals. We seek to know the criteria that we are using to create new counties. Let it be laid on the Table so that we know which qualify as per that criteria or which are just being created because they must be created.

They are many areas that I know of, which have bigger populations but have not been given counties. What are we supposed to tell our people who sent us here as to why their areas are not being parcelled out into constituencies while others have been? Before we proceed, I would like the chairperson or the minister to give this House the criteria they are using for creating new counties or constituencies. It is very clear in the Constitution, Mr Speaker.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, we have come a long way. I articulated the criteria for creation of new counties to the committee and the committee, in its report, devoted about two or three pages outlining the criteria for creation of a county. It is in the report, so if you are not attentive or if you do not bother to read, it is not fair to drag the House into repetitions. I thought I should make that observation, Mr Speaker. (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has raised a very legitimate point about the criteria for creating new counties. In the report, the chairperson told this Parliament that if we are going to follow the criteria that the minister laid down of one constituency districts, we will end up creating 65 new counties. 

What the minister needed to tell this Parliament is why. If the justification is that you can no longer have a one-district county, it means that every single district with one county automatically becomes. If it does not become then the minister must come and, instead of dismissing the Leader of the Opposition as someone who did not read things that are in the report, he should justify why he is creating half and not all of them.

Is the minister therefore in order to suggest that the Leader of the Opposition did not read and therefore, the minister needs no justification as to why he cannot even follow the criteria he himself read before the committee and before this Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To say that the criteria was laid before this House is correct but to say that the Leader of the Opposition did not read was not a necessary statement to make.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have no problem with the creation of counties. My point of procedure is that it looks like there were proposals of counties from above and districts were simply ‘ratifying’ those proposals. Districts were sitting to consume the proposals and own them and these are the most recent proposals. 

Mr Speaker, the district I come from, Nebbi, has had a struggle to create a county called Alala County right from 2001 and it is in the records of Local Government. The point of procedure - I see my Woman MP, hon. Christine Acayo clapping. The point of procedure I am rising is, would the minister be very correct in ignoring those past requests, which are in the records of Government and therefore in the public archives and consider the new ones necessarily? That is the point of procedure I am rising on. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would not know what is in the archives of the ministry so it would not be a procedural point. I think you will ask clarification from the minister.

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, can I seek for clarification from the honourable minister? Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, you made a proposal here and laid a motion on the Table. The committee went and had public hearings, as you have said, and recommended that among the counties to be created, Ruhinda Central County should also be created. The reason you gave us here was finances. 

Certainly, it looks like each time you are convinced that a county should be created and you go and convince the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, finances are availed. So honourable minister, could you clarify to this House as to why Ruhinda Central County has been denied, among others?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I think we should be honest with ourselves and honest with the House. The honourable member insisting on Ruhinda Central Constituency came to me and told me that as far as she is concerned, the leadership of Mitooma District had abandoned the request of Ruhinda Central constituency. (Interjection) Yes, she came and told me. Therefore, Ruhinda Central constituency is not among those that I am introducing for amendment. (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please. Order, Members! Can we have some order, honourable members? 

3.17
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a good move; we are in a representative democracy and this Parliament is full of representatives of the people.

Mr Speaker, I am encouraged by the honourable minister’s proposal for amendment. The basis of my encouragement is pointers to the fact that the motion is amendable. (Laughter) I have no worries about the proposals made by the committee, especially those of other counties that the committee recommended, including West Budama Central and another one from Omoro.

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the minister whether tomorrow, we will have any further amendments. If not, I would like to move, under Rule 50(1)(a), for a motion without notice to amend the minister’s motion to include, among others, West Budama Central. I am aware about the constitutional requirements and the Electoral Commission, as captured by the committee, indicated no hindrances to this. This further amendment is a clear indication that this motion is amendable, including by this Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I know that a Member from Bujenje was supposed to move this amendment and I know that a colleague from the region had gotten an assignment to do that. If I am accorded the opportunity, I would request that the proposed amendments by hon. Kabakumba be accorded an opportunity on this Floor and we debate it. This will enable the people out there to know that we are not delegates here but representatives.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I am aware that the Members seated in this House are not delegates but representatives. I am also sympathetic to the concerns and aspirations of hon. Oboth. (Interjection) I said, “aspirations” and I was very clear. We noted the recommendations of the committee on other requests. Government has assessed all of them; it has not dismissed whichever recommendation that was made. However Government, for the time being, has chosen to make the amendments that I have moved on its behalf. 

I am afraid, Mr Speaker, that the amendment being moved by my learned brother, hon. Oboth, offends the provisions of Article 93 and I accordingly oppose it on those technical grounds.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I stand here on a point of clarification on two fronts. The first one is the illusion of the Minister of Local Government that when Members amend the motion brought by Government, this offends the provision of Article 93. That would tantamount to taking away Parliament’s power of legislation because most of the Bills and motions, including the Budget process, are introduced by Government and we keep amending figures; reallocating here and there and adjusting. I am very happy that the Vice-President, hon. Edward Ssekandi, is here and he is a former Speaker of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, we need the Clerk to compile Speakers’ rulings. According to Commonwealth practices, a Speaker’s ruling forms part of our Rules of Procedure. At one time, hon. Edward Ssekandi, the Speaker then, ruled that if a patient is taken to the hospital to treat cough, it is the doctor’s responsibility to examine the causes of that cough. A good doctor will not say, “I am not going to treat this patient if the client is willing.” A good doctor would examine what has caused the cough and whether it is malnutrition. He would then recommend the treatment and give the necessary treatment. Is it malaria or a different complication? 

The Speaker then ruled that once a motion is brought by Government, it is Parliament’s responsibility to digest and change it in a manner that it decides because that is the legislative power that we have. That has formed part of our practice. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think you need to ask the minister to reconsider his statement because that sets a new precedent, which is not proper.

The second clarification, which I raised last week – You quoted the Constitution that Members of Parliament are elected to serve for five years and that is right. However, we are not elected to serve for five years in a vacuum. 

I would like to say that today you are the Speaker of the Ninth Parliament but if this Parliament is divided into three or four Parliaments, will you remain as a Speaker receiving salary? Of which Parliament will you be a Speaker? These are fundamental issues. We are representatives of the people and we are elected in a given geographical area to serve for five years. Therefore, even the committee’s recommendation and the motion of the minister that these counties become effective before the term of this Parliament dissolves is null, void and defective.

Therefore, as legislators who swore by the Bible to defend and protect this Constitution, this is the moment to rise up. We need the counties – there are those who do not want them – but let us do things neatly, at least for once. History will judge us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member for Tororo County has asked me to advise the minister to change what he has said. Let us just look at Article 93 again. Can we have some order? 

Article 93 says, “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government- (b) proceed upon a motion, including an amendment to a motion, the effect of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes specified in paragraph (a) of this article.”  That is: “(i) the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction; 
(ii) 	the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction; 
(iii) 	the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda of any monies not charged on that fund or any increase in the amount of that payment, issue or withdrawal; or 
(iv) 	the composition or remission of any debt due to the Government of Uganda…” 

This is what the constitution says. I am not sure of the circumstances under which the ruling was made but the ruling could not have been in violation of the provisions of this Constitution and I am certain of that. 

The circumstances may have been different but the full impact of the ruling would not be to negate Article 93, which I have just read. That is why it would be proper for the minister to accede to some of these things and present them himself. It would be easier for all of us if those interests are taken care of. 

However, for a private member to bring an amendment to this kind of motion – The implication would be what is prohibited under Article 93. It is as clear as that.

There was also a second issue that you raised and the minister needed to respond to. (Interjections) Please, let me finish with this. There was another aspect to what hon. Ekanya raised.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, you also ruled on that long ago. You said that every Member of Parliament who was elected and who is in this House has a term of five years guaranteed by the Constitution. Nothing, including a motion to create a new constituency, can change that constitutional prescription. You ruled on this and I support your ruling. I thought that the Member was in the House to receive that ruling.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that if there are issues that we need to settle, we need to find another avenue for settling them because the way in which we are proceeding now is as if there is no motion, which has been reported on and a discussion held and yet a decision is awaited from the House. I can see honourable members rising when the Speaker is still speaking but I think that it might be because the matter is so burning that the chair is too hot to sit in. Certainly when the Speaker is speaking, you should respect the decorum of the House and resume your seat.

Honourable members, I think we need to proceed on this matter and if there are no further debates, we should take a decision.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the spirit in which the minister brought the amendment. I am only wondering whether we would be proceeding correctly for us to make an addendum to the previous proposal without necessarily referring them to the committee so that the committee reports on them to assess the viability of the constituencies being created. It seems that whereas the committee looked at the first proposals, we seem to be going to debate and take a decision on those which are being introduced by the minister without the committee looking at them. Would we be proceeding correctly? Thank you.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was no requirement to refer this motion to the committee but we did it to involve people. It was, in the wisdom of the Speaker, to say that there should be wider consultations on this matter. However, the matter is back here and I think that we should proceed. Order, Members!

Honourable members, we are dealing with a motion for the resolution of Parliament moved under Article 179(4) of the Constitution of Uganda providing for the creation of new counties. That is the motion that I propose for your debate and that is the motion that we need to decide on. 

There were reports that were prepared on this motion and majority of the committee presented an opinion. There was also a minority opinion on this matter.

By adopting this motion, one way or the other, if we do, we would have taken a decision on both aspects of the report; whether majority or minority. The debate of the House was informed on how we should proceed on this matter. Therefore, can we proceed and take a position on this? There is procedure from the Member for West Budama South.

MR OBOTH: Whereas I agree entirely with the ruling and I do not intend to arm twist the Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you mean the minister? 

MR OBOTH: Of the minister, yes. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I would like to know how we are proceeding. For the few years that I have been here, when a matter has been referred to the committee, the committee writes the report and we debate the committee report.

I would like to seek procedural guidance because the motion generated the committee report. Are we now looking at the motion without the committee report as if the committee did nothing on behalf of this Parliament? How are we proceeding? Is it that we only look at the motion, which can be amended at any time without regard to the very able committee of this Parliament that had the opportunity to look at and receive petitions? Are we setting precedence that I am not aware of or are we adopting a new strategy for doing work a little faster? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the issues have been presented and considered. Some of them have been adopted while others have not and that is the position. Those that have been adopted will require confirmation of the House and that is where we are. As for debating the report, I thought we debated this matter. Have we not debated it? We debated this matter. Member from Mubende District -

3.35
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. It is very true that last week on Wednesday, we debated the report of the committee. We do appreciate that when you opened debate on this particular report, almost everybody who was in the House stood up. That shows how interested members are. As you clearly put it, we are representatives of the people and not delegates. That means that we are expressing the interests of our people.

If I can quote from my own district of Mubende, we requested for a county in 2009. It got a district minute and everything was submitted to the Ministry of Local Government. In the year 2010, that county was pledged by His Excellency the President. In the year 2011, he re-echoed the same. It is very surprising that today, a county, which was promised more than five years ago, does not appear anywhere.

As a representative of the people, if we pass this motion without me letting the Minister of Local Government know that the people of Mubende and Kitenga proposed county in particular are disgruntled, I would have done a disservice to the people of Mubende.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request that you allow MPs to continue deliberating on this debate and the Minister of Local Government takes note of all this because these are the feelings of our people and the minister knows this. For the last two or three months, the people of Mubende have been camping at his office and making him very uncomfortable. They are also making us, their leaders, very uncomfortable.

I would like the minister to pronounce himself on the issue of creating Kitenga constituency or Kitenga County in Mubende District, which is both a presidential pledge and whose documents you received several years ago. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems that members would like to continue with debate on this matter. If that is the desire of the members then we will continue with the debate. Each member will use three minutes, like I had ordered before. For those who have debated before, the rules prohibit them from making any further contribution on this matter. Therefore, can we proceed? We are debating so there is no procedure at this point.

3.40
MS JUDITH MARY AMOIT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the government and especially the Minister of Local Government as well as the committee for the elaborate report that was presented to us.

Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion. I would like to inform this House that this is a very popular motion. Our people are impatiently waiting for your support today. The people I represent have already sent a message to Parliament congratulating you for the good work you are doing. They are lobbying you to approve this motion.

This motion is a people-centred motion and it is going to address a lot of challenges in our constituencies. It is going to demonstrate that we are leaders who are sensitive to people’s requests.

I would like to inform this House that the people of Pallisa have always demanded for the creation of this constituency called Kibaale County. These people have lagged behind politically, economically and socially and today, I would like to request everyone here to approve this motion and create these constituencies in good faith to address these challenges that are with our people.

The creation of counties is going to create a lot of peace and harmony in our areas. It will also improve on the development in our areas. I pray and lobby all the members to support this motion unanimously. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MUGABI BAKKA: Mr Speaker, if I heard the minister right, he said that the chairperson would be presenting a report on the addendum on Namutumba to this House. I have a lot interest in Namutumba and I wanted to know at what stage she will present that report so that we can be part of the debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have that report, that was an omission. Sorry. Please present on that.

3.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Grace Freedom Kwiyucwiny): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On Thursday when I reported, I mentioned that on Namutumba District, we considered the petition and we did not consider the resolution of the district through the Minister of Local Government because the amendment had not reached us. We thought that we should listen to both sides so we made a trip to Namutumba District yesterday and we have a brief report signed by the members who went to Namutumba - six of us. We have a list of attendance of the people we met in Namutumba. I beg to lay it on the Table –(Interruption)

MR NGANDA SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, we received a report from the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, which the chairperson presented to this Parliament. We actually debated that report. Now, the chairperson says that there is another report that they have made as a result of a visit yesterday. This is unprecedented in this House because usually, such reports are made when this whole House has directed the committee to go back and do that kind of work. 

The chairperson is saying, “Yes, we gave you the other report and you debated it but yesterday, even without a reference from this Parliament, we did another one.” Mr Speaker, that is unprecedented in the history of not only the Ugandan Parliament but everywhere where there is a Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, is the chairperson of the committee procedurally right to refer matters to herself, go and conduct extra work not referred to the committee by this Parliament and then show up in Parliament to give us another report, which she has not even circulated anywhere? Is she is proceeding properly?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a motion and then there was a proposal to amend the motion by the same minister who brought the motion. The committee also reported on the amendments and said that they had not completed the work so they took off time to complete the work. That is what the report said. I listened and I always listen when they are presenting. They said that they had not completed the work on Namutumba since the amendment came late. 

However, they had now gone to look at it. I do not see any harm. The issue is, would that procedure hurt any process of this House? There is a proposal and the minister has moved to amend his motion. Would it not be proper, if we are to assess, to see what has happened? Would it be very wrong for this House to listen to what has happened in Namutumba? If it is so bad then we can leave it and proceed with the debate.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I appeared before the committee, they did not even quote me in their report. This committee now selectively chose Namutumba. They should have gone to all districts and all counties because with me here are resolutions of Tororo District, which is defective with so many disagreements. What criteria did the committee use to select Namutumba and not to go to Tororo, Omoro, Oyam or Bujenje? Is the committee being biased and selfish?

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I sit on the Committee of Public Service and Local Government and in addition, I am the shadow Minister for Local Government.

Mr Speaker, in a situation like this one where the committee is bringing an addendum to the report that we produced here, there should be an avenue for members who are dissenting and saying that the procedure that we are following is not proper, to be accorded time to also to come up with another addendum of a minority report. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I have talked to hon. Mugume and he would also like to join me. We had so many constituencies where we got counter petitions, for example, the issue of Mitooma, true Namutumba and Tororo County. I think that to be fair, we would have visited all these areas, plus those areas where members came with ideas that we should also create counties in other districts. Butambala here is a one-county district. Maybe they would prefer to have another county. 

The procedural issue I am raising is, would it be procedurally okay for my chairperson to keep the addendum report away from the members of her committee? We should have been given an opportunity to see the addendum and either consent to it by appending our signatures or disagree with it and be accorded time to produce a minority report. (Hon. Isiko rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Isiko, do you want to rule on the procedural point? (Laughter)

Honourable members, the Member for Mukono Municipality raises an important point but the point she raised was that there is no procedure for creating counties because counties were abolished. Even if there was a matter to come now, that objection would still apply to it. Therefore, you do not need to write another minority report to cover - Every time a member comes with an amendment, you do not need to say, “No, I have to write a minority report.” That would bog down the work of Parliament. 

That said, honourable members, even if we are to disregard what the committee has done this far with Namutumba, as I said earlier, the committee was supposed to advise us because of the circumstances but there is no requirement for this House to refer this matter to the committee. (Applause) Therefore, we can treat it as if this is a matter that is before the House and deal with it and finish it.

The matter is here before this Parliament and this Parliament, under my leadership, is not going to run away from this responsibility. We have to decide on it one way or the other because the matter is here before us. If you do not want it, you should say so and vote against it. If you want it, vote for it and pass it. 

Right now, what had happened is that we had allowed debate. I had extended debate, which debate we had conducted last week, quite extensively by the way. I have just confirmed the record of the members that contributed in that debate. Let us not say there was no debate. There was a debate last week but for now, let us continue with the debate. Let us leave Namutumba but let us debate.

The motion that is before us is a motion presented by the minister for 39 counties. That motion was amended to accommodate Bukono County in Namutumba District. It has been further amended – the proposal for amendment has been made to accommodate Tooki County, Terego County East and Upper Madi County. In the case of Terego County East and Upper Madi County, they are altering the border of Madi-Okollo to reconstitute two instead of one. 

In the case of Terego, they are re-drawing the boundary also to create one additional county to be called Terego County East. That is the motion that is before us now. I am going to put the question to the amendment of the minister’s motion. That is what we should do.

I will put the question to this amendment. If we allow it then we debate it. The motion will stand amended then we can go on and debate it. I put the question to the amendment proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is now amended. The current position of the motion is now 43 counties from 39 counties. Let us debate.
 
3.54
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhanguzi County, Hoima): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to move a motion under Rule 50(1)(a, Motions without notice, on the motion by the Minister of Local Government for a resolution of Parliament moved under Article 179(4) of the Constitution of Uganda providing for the creation of new counties. 

“AWARE that the minister has moved for the creation of now 43 new counties;

FURTHER AWARE that other district councils had earlier on passed resolutions for the creation of new counties;

NOTING THAT the Committee of Public Service and Local Government received petitions regarding district resolutions;

FURTHER NOTING THAT the Committee on Public Service and Local Government processed petitions and recommended that resolutions be handled together with the minister’s request for the creation of 43 counties now;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by Parliament that the following counties be created in addition to the minister’s motion, as recommended by the committee, particularly in Category A.
    1) Oyam Central out of Oyam North
    2) West Budama Central out of Budama County
    3) Kilembe County out of Busongora County
    4) Buhweju East County out of “–(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are constituencies that we represent and there are districts that we represent. I know my district better and, therefore, I can authoritatively talk about Kasese better than hon. Junjura.

Mr Speaker, the point of order I am raising is in regard to Kilembe County, which he is referring to. There is no district council minute, which gazetted that as a county. The one that I am aware of and which the petitioners wrongly submitted to the committee is one for the creation of a district. Hon. Kafuda and hon. Mbahimba erroneously submitted wrong documents to the committee. Here, hon. Junjura is alluding that Kilembe County should be created.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, is he in order to bring issues of Kasese, which do not concern him yet there is no district council minute that created the Kilembe County that he is speaking about?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, first of all, I would like to advise hon. Nzoghu to drink some water. It helps to calm down tempers.

In the report of the committee on page 17, there is an indication that there was minute No.168/GOU/KDLA/2011. I suppose that is the year 2011. “Resolved that Kasese District be split to create a new county called Kilembe County, which will consist of Kilembe sub-county, Mahango sub-county and Rukoki sub-county with a population of 81,100 people. Busongora County South will remain and consist of….” 

Therefore, there is a record of this House that was read. If you are challenging the record then you will be challenging the record. Now that I have, as the record of Parliament, this particular position, I cannot rule the member out of order.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, all along I have been asking myself as to how the documents, which the committee received, can be vetted. I know what I am talking about. If it is the resolution of the district council to create a county, it has to be spelt out and it has to have a heading reflecting that. The title must read that.

Why can’t the chairperson of the committee read the title of that resolution to this House, Mr Speaker? Therefore, is it procedurally right for us to actually engage in an illegality? I know Kasese more than hon. Junjura. Should we impose on the people of Kasese a county which they do not want? I was in Kasese yesterday consulting the people and they are saying that they do not want a county. Why should we impose a county on them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that sentiment expressed by the honourable member for Busongora North might be the reason why the minister has made the position he has made. Why don’t we respect what has been stated as clear and leave out what people might not be certain about? For as long as people are not certain about something, we do not know the implication of what is there. Honourable minister, is there a way that this matter can be resolved so that we can make progress?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, as I have submitted before, the government has received very many requests. Those requests were subjected to a study and a submission was made to Cabinet. I said at the beginning when I moved this motion that this motion was not a personal motion. It was a motion moved by me on behalf of Government. Cabinet discussed this matter extensively and took a decision on the new counties, which I brought to this House and presented, including the amendments.

This is not to say that areas like Kasese were not considered. They were considered. There are many reasons, including what the honourable member is talking about, as to why Kasese does not appear in the motion and, therefore, is not part of the government motion. 

Mr Speaker, you had ruled already that the principles enshrined in Article 93 must be respected. Therefore, we do not expect any honourable member to behave in a manner that is in breach of your ruling. In view of what I have said and with due respect to hon. Junjura, he did not even have the courtesy to discuss his motion with us in Government. 

I would like to say, with respect to hon. Junjura, that Government does not adopt the proposals he is making.

MR MUGABI BAKKA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. We have a motion that has been well drafted but was cut midway. We do not know the contents of the motion. I think procedurally, it should be right that we allow him to present his motion and then we see what is contained therein. If there is anything fundamentally wrong with the motion, we shall reject it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is up to the Speaker to guide and avoid taking this House on a road that can lead to problems. When the Speaker senses danger, he stops the proceedings and I have that right to do so. That is why I did not allow that motion to continue. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We must thank you for your patience because under normal circumstances, when there is heat in the House, a question will always be put.

Mr Speaker, I can see that our country is over represented and it is this over representation that we are still clamouring for. We put regional tiers in our Constitution but we have not yet implemented this. Now we want more constituencies, more districts and we also need an upper House. All these are coming because we want to be represented and yet we are already over represented.

Mr Speaker, nobody can say that you are taking services nearer to the people because a constituency does not provide services to the people. I have never seen a road for an MP. There will be roads for the Central Government, for districts, sub-counties and the community. There will never be a road for an MP.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we are trying to justify why we need more constituencies and the Minister of Local Government is trying his level best to make sure that we accept his proposal. However, there are two things that I know: the budget for these constituencies was never passed in the Budget for the Financial Year 2015/2016. Since we never passed it in the Budget, the certificate of financial implications that you are bringing is for the sake of it. 

Other members have the right to demand because recently, we created a contingency fund and we moved 3.5 per cent of our Budget to the contingency fund to take care of emergencies and demands of the population. When these members stand up, they know that you are going to get money from the contingency fund. If you are not aware, we have enough money there, for now. 

Therefore, it would be good for you, Mr Minister, to go back and sit down. I have noted so many mistakes that you have made. There is a sub-county called Nawaikoke in Kaliro. You have quoted three times that the population in that area is 113,082. I have statistics from Uganda Bureau of Statistics, which say that Nawaikoke has 63,583 people. This is double what you have said so that you can tell Parliament that Nawaikoke qualifies. 

When you look through, there are more figures, which are bringing problems. You are trying to justify a situation, which is not right. I would be happy if you did the right thing and gave reasons as to why you are creating certain constituencies. It will be good. For example, there is a constituency you have created of 1,655 voters with a population of 6,255 people. The justification you are giving is that those people do not know English and they have only one educated person. I would suggest that we treat them as disabled persons and they bring somebody here so that we use sign language to communicate. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, this country belongs to all of us. We are going to create 43 MPs and more. That is why I have said that the contingency fund is there and we would need to create more constituencies because that is where we are going. 

As we talk, I am fighting to sit with honourable minister Okello Oryem. In fact, we are sitting outside Parliament while others are standing because there are not enough seats the other side. 

Mr Speaker, the cost per MP on average is about Shs 25 million per month. If you multiply that amount of money by 65, you will be talking about Shs 1.8 billion per month. Multiply that amount by 12 months times five years. In addition, when you divide the total budget of Parliament, excluding salaries, an average of Shs 600 million is needed to maintain a Member of Parliament. For the 65 Members of Parliament, you will need not less than Shs 240 billion for five years. Why not create districts, which will take services nearer the people than bringing 65 more MPs where we will lack where to sit and where we will have more problems with water, toilet paper and power? (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the issue I am trying to raise is that the minister has not been very clear to us on how best he is coming up with these constituencies. If it is about population, we have here Kyadondo County North and Kyadondo County East where hon. Ssemujju comes from. Let us leave out Kampala; we shall come to it later. Kyadondo County East has a population of 469,000 people and with 228,000 voters. That is only one constituency. 
If you go to Kawempe, it is the same thing. We are not dividing those ones but we are going to the other ones. I will go to Bungokho, which I am familiar with because I am the Chairman of Bugisu Cooperative Union and I have my MP here. If you combine Bungokho North and South and Sironko, Bungokho North alone has a total population of about 300,000 with 85,000 voters.

Mr Speaker, let us be fair to Uganda. It is now time to bring back the district issues because that is where we are going to take services nearer to the people of Uganda. As a Member of Parliament, you will never take services to the people of Uganda. (Applause) You only represent them. 

That is the reason I am standing here to ask all colleagues in this House - I stood up on a procedural point but I want to thank the Speaker for allowing me to speak to you. Together, we can move this country by doing the right thing for our people instead of doing wrong things that serve our interests. 

I have talked to one of my friends here – (Interjections) - I know my sister hon. Amoit, relax a bit - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, now that you have blown your cover, you can resume your seat. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have called for debate. There is no debate. People are rising on procedural points. I am going to put the question to this motion. (Applause) We cannot go on like this. 

4.17
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity you have granted me to debate. I have a resolution of Tororo District Council. According to the resolution here, we the people of Tororo District, for many years, we have been advocating for a district. We have been patiently – (Where upon some members withdrew from the Chamber)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, do not go. We need to take a decision on the motion for second reading of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015 so that we can move forward with this. We are not properly constituted. 

MR EKANYA: For many years, the people of Tororo District have been requesting Government to grant them a district status. To our surprise, as per the county boundary of 1947, the district council sat purportedly on 23 April 2015. The motion, which was passed was for creation of a constituency. I have the extract here. This motion- (Interruption)

MR MUJUNI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We all have sentiments in this House. The minister moved a motion. I am one of those people whose district Rwampara was supposed to get a district status. I have been listening in quietly for reasons. If we are to move by sentiments, this House will not move. You rightly ruled that in the event that the motion has something on the Consolidated Fund, any person’s amendments cannot stand. 

Is the honourable member in order to drive us back into the gymnastics of demanding for districts and constituencies? Clearly, the minister has already said he is not willing to take any more. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am very sympathetic to hon. Ekanya. You know what people had to do there to ask for districts. (Laughter) That is part of the consideration as to why I have allowed him to say this. I do not want him to abuse that. This is debate. Please, present your case properly. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My brother, unfortunately, has not been attending the sittings in the House. The motion, which was moved by Tororo District Council was for creation of constituencies. I have the motion here.  

According to our Constitution, constituencies are created by Electoral Commission. The Minister of Local Government has the power to create counties. This motion is not even signed. I have a copy here. This came from the Minister of Local Government, given to the committee and laid before this House and it is for creation of constituencies. 

Under what criteria is the minister proceeding to divide Tororo County, which will automatically deny us Tororo Municipality for a purpose of getting a district. The people of Tororo County want a constituency within Tororo County. We are ready to wait for Electoral Commission next year to give us a constituency, not a county, which is an administrative unit. 

We also want things to be done neatly. We want a resolution endorsed by Tororo District Council, not a fake resolution, which is not even signed by the speaker. I have what is purported to have been signed by the speaker; it is an extract of the minutes, which are not signed. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I beg to request that for the case of Tororo County, this matter be withdrawn. This is because it is not in line with the Constitution and our rules. We are ready to receive a constituency for Tororo County North. Tororo County South should be created by the Electoral Commission according to the rules and Constitution. I rest my case. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what do you say to that before we continue with debate? 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, there is no proposal, which I brought to this House that is not backed by a resolution of the district council. I am alive to the provisions of Section 7 sub-section (7) of the Local Government Act, which says in part, “…the power to create new counties lies with district councils with the approval of Parliament.” The starting point is the district council. 

It is true that at first, Tororo District Council had passed a resolution to create new constituencies. The ministry guided them that the power they have is to create new counties. The Chairman and the Speaker of Tororo District came to my office and forwarded to me a resolution of Tororo District Council creating a new county out of Tororo County. I proceeded to make the motion based on that resolution. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, this matter is serious. Can the minister lay the resolution of Tororo District Council signed by the speaker and the clerk? This is because I have a copy here, which is not signed. It is the one which the minister tabled before the committee. Can you lay the alternative? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Minister, consult on that and advise us. 

4.23
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and the minister for the new counties that have been created as well as the amendments therein. 

When we saw those counties that were created - and even the committee observed others have only one sub-county. (Interjections) Others-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order members. 

MS ONGOM: Some of us traversed 13 sub-counties, while others here have almost 17 sub-counties. Yet, one county has one sub-county, which is not realistic. 

He based his argument on the population, the governance and the cultural diversity. I would like him to assure us of the population of Kachumbala, for example. (Interjections) Do not argue. We are for Uganda. We want to know what it is. 

He stated it rightly that creating counties generates from the district councils. I would like to put it to the Minister of Local Government that Lira District, for example, brought a resolution from the District Council on the creation of Erute Central County. When you were presenting the 39 counties, you said it that it was basing on one county district. We were happy with that but when we observe some of these districts, some of them have got two constituencies and two counties. What was the criterion of selecting these and leaving others? We had Erute Central sent to you, it has a population of 90,000 people and it has not been considered. 

I was proposing, Mr Speaker, that if the minister could include some of these counties -  and he has sent the first 45 or 46, effective 01 July and the rest should be accepted and then considered in a phased manner. I think this House would be happy with him.

We are not happy with a situation where you are picking others with two constituencies and others are not being considered, moreover, they have a big population. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.26
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand to support the committee report and the addendum brought by the minister. 

The reason I would like to support this motion is one; Agago County, for example, is one of the very few counties that have remained undivided or not split since the colonial times. The reason I would like to support the creation of new counties, especially out of Agago County, Pader, Aruu County and Omoro County, it is because the whole of Acholi sub-region as we speak, has never had the counties split since the colonial times.
 
I, therefore, would like to support the proposal and also would like as a whole to support the overall proposal for the creation of the 43 counties. (Applause)

I know that the other counties that had been proposed would deserve the split but as you have heard the explanation from the Ministry of Local Government and from Government, because of the financial implications, it would not be possible to split these counties at once.  

I, therefore, would like to request this House that we are considerate and create counties that have been proposed now and also expect the minister, in due course, when the finances are available, to also come with the other proposals to ensure that the one county districts are also split.

Mr Speaker, I would like to implore this House that we do not cause commotion; we agree and pass the motion. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.29
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. My reasons are that constituencies or counties are initiated by the people who vote for us to come here. That is why there is that bit of council resolution before it is channelled to the Ministry of Local Government. 

Having said that, I would like to advise my beloved friend, the Minister of Local Government, as a former teacher, when I would take a decision, I would stick and stand by it. When you take a decision, do not come round and appear as if you left loopholes to be filled. Last time, the minister told us that he presents what is given to him by the Cabinet. He convinced me but when he comes today and brings in a loophole that he has again brought in three or four more, that to me gives space for people to continue arguing.

However, I would like to advise Government that when you read the committee report, it had suggested that 55 counties needed urgent consideration and categorised them into category A and B.

Since the minister has shown us that we can easily find money - because money was found for the four, I would like to say that why don’t you, having passed today, if we are going to pass them, try to convince Government to work around the clock and bring the remaining 12 counties aboard? 

4.32
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not in any way intend to stand in the way of the minister’s motion because I also believe and trust in the spirit of Government, of creating counties to enable furtherance of services to our people.

My interest and concern is the manner in which certain counties that were correctly and rightly observed in the committee of Local Government, as being qualified to be included among those that the minister had proposed to be created - if we take the case of Manafwa; we have a population of over 430,000 people. Bubulo East alone that I represent has a population of over 242,000 people. We have over a period of about 10 years been communicating with the Minister of Local Government, over the issue of division into counties and also in the same spirit, pursuing the matter of the creation of the district. The minute of the district was made in 2008, for the creation of two counties in my district. 

In all this, my people are not happy that the minister did not find a way of including Manafwa District among those prioritised to be considered now. It is actually in the interest of my people and the minister as well as Government in general, that something be done.

I would, therefore, like to plead for them as well as Manafwa in particular, that honourable minister - I know you are doing this in good faith, you would like to further the governance of this country as well as you do and as well as we want - please, do consider Manafwa District, as among those that should be considered this time round.

You have made adjustments; please, make adjustments to include Manafwa District - (Interruption) 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Mulongo, for giving way. The committee, in their own wisdom, put category A and said that it is for immediate consideration. Looking at the ordinary meaning of the word “immediate” include “as soon as possible”, “immediately” could also mean “quickly”, it also could mean “now” and “then or there” a quick looking.

These were very instructive to the honourable minister and I see the Minister of Local Government smiling, you never know. (Laughter) 

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, as the way my colleague has said, we have the numbers, the terrain, history and we have fulfilled the requirements as stated by the minister. I beg that the minister reconsiders his motion. Thank you very much.

4.36
MR KENETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the motion and the committee for the report that is before us. I have a few issues. 

The first is clarification from the chair of the committee. On page 12, you indicated that the name of the county to be created out of Bulamogi County should be Bulamogi West County as it gives bearing and the sense of belonging to the people. However, when you continue down, on the next page, you maintain the name, that is on page 13 (11) that the new county is Bulamogi North West County.

I would like to suggest that the first name, which the committee found appropriated of Bulamogi West County should be adopted since it is just a question of direction and the location of where this county is. I would like you to clarify so that we adopt the right name for this county.

Hon. Nandala- Mafabi has submitted on issues of population and many more. He particularly talked about Nawaikoke, which is in my district. I would also like say that in 2001, Nawaikoke constituency - the population was 62,000 people and in 2014, it is reported according to hon. Nandal-Mafabi that it is 63,000 people. This is inaccurate and it is not the right number of people. Even if we are to take - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have a document saying, “National Population and Housing Census 2014”. Even my sister hon. Mariam Nalubega can see it. (Laughter). It says: “Census November 2014 Revised Edition.” 

I would like to say that if I am wrong, I am ready to be expelled from this House.  On page 37 – Kaliro, Bulamogi, the last sub county is Nawaikoke. It has the following;
Households    – 11,390; average size – 5.6; the male – 30,839; females – 32,746; the total is – 63, 585. That is the population. The voters are 18,112. 

Therefore, is my colleague in order to say that I lied when I am relying on Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) results, which are here and every member has a copy? I am even ready to lay it on the Table. Is he in order to allege that I lied?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is the information that has now been given to the Member of Bulamogi.

MR LUBOGO: Mr Speaker, I was going to state that even if we were to take the population he is talking about the right figure, which is actually not the right figure –(Interjections) - this House should be informed that we have a whole district here in Uganda – Ntoroko District, with a population of just 64,000 people and yet, you are now talking about a county of 63,000 people and you think that is small number?

We also have Lwemiyaga County represented by hon. Sekikubo. Its numbers are just within the borders of 63,000 people. I do not want hon. Nandala–Mafabi to think that this is the first of its kind that we are having a constituency of such a number of population.

Again while hon. Nambooze was submitting to this House, she stated that the Minister of Local Government had no locus to bring this motion. I would like to argue on that. First of all, we believe that the Local Government Act could not be used to amend the Constitution. The Constitution still provides for the counties and they should be approved by this Parliament. Somebody has to answer to a question, Who is supposed to bring them here for approval? 

Therefore, we cannot say that because we amended the Local Government Act, the minister has no basis for bringing the county, which is a creature of the Constitution and in any case, can we amend an Act like the Local Government Act and we say we have amended the Constitution by extension? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the contributions on this debate are long. I have been advised that we have the numbers to take a decision on the motion for second reading of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015. Please, call item No. 4. We suspend debate on this and we can come back to it. We still have time. We will handle everything today. - Do not worry.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question again that the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015 be read the second time. Voting, as you know is by roll call and tally. I now ask the Clerk to proceed with the voting.

Roll Call

    1. Hon. Alex Aadroa Onzima: 
    2. Hon. Jesca Ababiku:
    3. Hon. Christine Acayo:

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, the Constitution requires you and us to establish the number of people in the House voting and there must be two thirds before we proceed with the voting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am advised that there are more than that number except that people cannot fit and they are outside – and it is by roll call and tally; not voice voting. If the numbers are not enough, then there is likely to be a problem. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, the procedural question I am raising is that before we go to a vote, there must be the required number. Therefore, you must ascertain that members who are seated in this Chamber are two thirds and thereafter, we go to vote. That is the procedure. This is Constitution amendment and a fundamental issue before we go to vote; not the other way round.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this being a matter that voting will be done by roll call and tally, I am going to order free sitting. Members can sit on any side of the House so that we take this vote because I see that members are not properly seated and the House cannot accommodate them.

Please, can we have the members who are outside come to the Chamber so that we establish the number and proceed?
	
Honourable members, it is free sitting; please, get seated; do not stand. There are enough seats. 

Honourable members, you would help the tally people if you sat and you were visible. Please, get seats so that you can be seen properly. 

Clerk, can you do a final count, there are members who have come in.

Honourable members, we require 250 members to take the vote. That will be not less than two thirds. We have 211 members - 

Honourable members, I am going to seek your indulgence. I will suspend the proceeding for five minutes. When we come back and the numbers are not enough, I will do a roll call just to see which members have signed and are not here. I am suspending for five minutes.

(Proceedings were suspended at 4. 58 p.m.)

(On resumption at 5.06 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When I suspended the House for five minutes, it was to allow us see if we could raise additional numbers of members to enable us transact business. If the three members who have just entered were not counted, that means from the number that we had of 211, we are now down by 23. (Laughter) So, the suspension has enabled us to lose 23 members and that is not helpful.


Honourable members, I still believe that part of the discussion that we are having is because we still have these two urgent items. I am suggesting that we handle item No.3 and finish it. Then we wait for this and see if we can mobilise for tomorrow; tomorrow we will be sitting in the afternoon, instead of morning so that we take off time to make enough phone calls. The whips, please, help.

Honourable members, we need to take a decision on this motion. And I am going to put the question and we take a decision. I now put the question on the motion for a resolution of Parliament moved under Article 179(4) of the Constitution of Uganda, providing for the creation of new counties. I will call the counties one by one and after which, you will take a vote. 

Can I take the vote now? Leader of the Opposition -

5.29
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula-Oguttu): Mr Speaker, I still stand by the position of the minority report and I would like to make a few comments on the subject we are discussing. Although the minister has clothed what we are doing with a “county” attire, we all know in this room, that we are creating constituencies. We also know that the creation of constituencies is the work of the Electoral Commission. 

We do not have any report in this House from the Electoral Commission. We also know that it is the work of the Ministry of Justice; we have not done that. I do not understand why Government chose this route – they would have reasons – but it was very safe and smooth for them if they used the Electoral Commission because you have done the census and the law requires that within 12 months after the census, the Electoral Commission will propose constituencies, which was not done. And even the Ministry of Justice never did anything like that. 

I have been in the village in the last few weeks and I heard some people have picked forms – and have been nominated – for constituencies that do not exist. NRM members have been nominated – (Interjections) – Or they are about to be nominated.

Mr Speaker, I have looked at all the constituencies; you have very huge constituencies, which have not been split. I will give the example of my own constituency with a population of over 200,000 people. It was not split but a small constituency called Kibale in Butebo, which is five kilometres away from the district headquarters and the farthest point of that county is 20 kilometres from the headquarters - we have created this and yet in that same district – (Ms Amoit rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let us finish this thing.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: In that same district, we have a sub-county called Gogonyo, which is a hard-to-reach area, which is a peninsula – full of islands and is backward – (Interjections) - It was mentioned by the report – which has a bigger population, which is not being considered for a county, yet you are considering Kibale with 33,000 people as a constituency. These are some of the examples why I think we needed to have a criterion, which is acceptable to all of us. Then we would not be bickering here; we would be scientific and smarter. But we are doing it because it is politics and because the President promised people some of these constituencies.

The President should be persuaded to stop offering constituencies because it is not his work; he can offer them through the Electoral Commission and through the Ministry of Justice, not by him offering and then we are stampeded here, in Parliament, to make those constituencies to please him. It is not right for our country; we have broken down all institutions and we do not care about the laws. We have even attempted to do it here in the House. I would like to implore you, Members of Parliament; you came here to make laws and you should obey those laws. Do not make laws and then break them yourselves.

Mr Speaker, some constituencies are created for friends. Some members of the committee have created constituencies for themselves. (Interjections) I can name them if you want. This actually reminded me, Mr Speaker – and hon. Kiyonga will agree with me. In 1980, a person called Yoweri Kaguta Museveni was standing in Nyabushozi against a one Sam Kutesa and they created a constituency there which had no shape – that is the first time I heard the word “gerrymandering”. They created a constituency; they were cutting off all his supporters from around his home so that he could not get votes. This is what we are attempting to do in some respects with this motion. It is unfortunate that we are doing exactly the same thing which took Yoweri Museveni to the bush and caused a lot of bloodshed.

Mr Speaker, this country cannot afford the number of constituencies that we are creating. In the Constitution, Article 63 tells us how to make constituencies and there is a quota provided in the Constitution, which is the population divided by the number of constituencies and that is the population quota that we should use for making constituencies. None of the constituencies we are creating follows this procedure.

The President proposed that we use 80,000 voters per constituency but none of the constituencies created has 80,000 people. Most of them have – (Interjections) What I am saying are verifiable things. We have created constituencies with 1,000 or 6,000 voters with the average being 20,000 voters. However, there are constituencies that are much bigger. There is also something that I have said before – in this process, the Minister of Local Government has not respected the various petitions of several districts and I give Kitgum District, as an example. 

In Kitgum District, they made a resolution in December 2010 that they wanted a municipality in Kitgum. Instead, the minister has decided to create for them a constituency in the interest of a Member of Parliament whom we know and is inside this House. So, all these things cause animosity, rise temperatures and can easily cause conflict. 

I would like to end by appealing to you members. I know those of us getting new constituencies are excited. I know what happened in Namutumba, which is my neighbouring district where there was conflict when the committee visited. But you have not seen anything yet because the system that you have used is not fair and I hope the minister is going to consider the many constituencies, which are too big for the members. At the same time, we must know that this country cannot afford the very many constituencies that we have.

We would like to propose that we make the population quota for a constituency to be about 144,000 people because it will give us a reasonable Parliament. The 80,000 or this unknown number that we are using is all politics and this country cannot afford. We shall not support constituencies that are created not based on science and thus burdening the Ugandans and making an extra-large Parliament for our country. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable members, I will put the question one by one and we take a vote.

I now put the question for Agago North County out of Agago County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Oruvu County out of Amuria County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Lutseshe County out of Maniya County, Bududa District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Kachumbala County out of Bukedea County.
               
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Bukomansimbi South County out of Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Elgon County out of Bulambuli County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Dokolo South County out of Dokolo County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Gomba West County out of Gomba County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Kilak North County out of Kilak County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Iki County out of Dodoth County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Bulamogi North West County out of Bulamogi County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Kagweri County out of Kibuku County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Kashongi County out of Nyabushozi County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Kibanda North County out of Kibanda County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Chwa East County out of Chwa County in Kitgum District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Kole North County out of Kole County.
             
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Kanyum County out of Kumi County.
                
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Butemba County out of Kiboga West County.
                
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Kyaka South County out of Kyaka County.
              
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Mwenge Central out of Mwenge North Constituency.
         
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Luuka South County out of Luuka County.
             
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Maracha East County out of Maracha County.
               
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Kashari South County out of Kashari County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Ruhinda North County out of Ruhinda County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Tepeth County out of Matheniko County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Aruu North County out of Aruu County.
               
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Buyamba County out of Kooki County.
                 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Mawogola North County out of Mawogola County.
             
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Dakabela County out of Soroti County.
                 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Oraa County out of Okoro County in Zombo District.
                  
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Kibale County out of Butebo County.
           
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Tororo North County out of Tororo County.
           
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Kibale East County out of Kibaale County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Aringa North County out of Aringa County.
          
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Aringa South County out of Aringa County.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Kigorobya County out of Bugahya County.
     
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Koboko North County out of Koboko County.
         
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Bukuya County out of Kassanda County in Mubende District.
           
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Adjumani East County out of East Moyo County.
         
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Bukono County out of Busiki County in Namutumba District.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for Tochi County out of Omoro County.
                
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And to alter the boundaries of Terego County as follows: Terego County East. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we have to put a question again for the other one?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is already a county being divided into two. Second is to alter the boundaries of Madi-Okolo to form Upper Madi County and the other will be the original one, I suppose. I now put the question on Upper Madi County.
                 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the proposal is that these counties take effect – unless I have missed out any. Have I gone through all of them?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And to the proposal that the new counties take effect from 01 July, 2015. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have one urgent item and that is the item on constitution amendments; we will not be able to proceed with that business today. This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(House rose at 5.35 p.m. and was adjourned to Wednesday, 5 August 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

