

Wednesday, 17 August 2016

Parliament met at 2.38 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. The Parliament of Uganda will hold a Research Week starting on 23rd and ending on 25 August 2016 in the South Wing car park from 9.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. Honourable Members of Parliament are invited to attend the same so that you can showcase what is happening here and in other research institutions. Find time to attend, honourable members, because it will be going on for three days.

Secondly, I would like to nominate hon. Fred Baseke, MP Ntenjeru   County South - Yesterday, he was omitted during designation of the Independents to committees. He now belongs to the Committee on Health. I put the question that hon. Baseke serves on the Committee on Health.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LEADERSHIP CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Fr Simon Lokodo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by members of the Cabinet. 

FR LOKODO: Madam Speaker, I also would like to lay on the Table the updated Certificate of Financial Implications for the same Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the relevant committee for expeditious perusal and report back. I would like to remind Members that it contains something that has been missing in the Leadership Code, and that is the Tribunal. This has affected the work of the Inspector General of Government. Therefore, I would like to appeal to Members to look at it expeditiously. Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL HEALTH LABORATORY SERVICES BILL, 2016

2.43
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Bill, 2016” be read for the first time. I beg to lay it on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by several Members. Honourable minister, you are supposed to bring a Certificate of Financial Implications as well.

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, I request that you allow me to bring the certificate in a few minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we will defer the First Reading until you bring the Certificate of Financial Implications. Let me know when you get it.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not here. Let us defer this item.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I propose that we proceed to item No.6. When the Prime Minister comes, we shall go back.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 31 MAY 2016

(Debate continued_)

2.46
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe South County, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity given to me to place on record my thanks to Government for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy in the State of the Nation Address.

Madam Speaker, Article 101(1) of the Constitution obliges the President to give a State of Nation Address, which is an appraisal of our annual performance, based on the targets and goals set in the previous year. It also gives him the mandate to give us the strategic direction on where he wants this country to go and how he expects to do it.

Madam Speaker, in their submissions, some Members of Parliament gave an impression that this country must achieve what it ought to achieve within a single year. That is an assumption. What the President did was exactly in line with his obligations to give us a clear view and analysis of what the Government has achieved in the past one year and the direction we are heading to. I would like to place on record my thanks for the precise way he did it.

The President took trouble to tell us about the performance of Uganda’s democracy. Some of us who have been raised here will give testimony that the last one year registered immense successes in democracy. This represented the ninth election dating back from 1989 when we had the expansion of the NRC. 

Honourable members, you will agree that the democratic processes created by this Government are the basis on which we can peacefully sit here as Members of different shades of opinion and happily deliberate on the issues of the state. There is no way this can go without registering serious thanks to the President for a job well accomplished.

On the issue of the economy, the President, in the State of the Nation Address, set serious targets in developing the road network infrastructure and energy. According to this current State of the Nation Address, serious achievements were recorded in these two sectors, which we must appreciate.

The strategic direction that was given by the President on investing in the tourism sector as one of the key contributors to forex is a step in the positive direction, and so is the investment and recapitalisation of Uganda Development Bank (UDB). We appreciate that Ugandans are going through a hard time getting investment finances from commercial banks, which is quite expensive -(Member timed out.)

2.50
MR ODRIA ALIONI (Independent, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to appreciate the President for the State of the Nation Address.

My submission concerns the 2020 middle-income status. I appreciate the industrialisation strategies that the President mentioned. The President mentioned that we need to put up industrial parks, and if you look at the history of India and China, you will find that India has a place for industrial parks. However, in the State of the Nation Address, the aspect of agricultural parks is missing. I wish to submit that as we consider setting up industrial parks, they should be regionally balanced. 

At the same time, we need to consider agricultural parks within the industrial parks that are going to be set up. Three-quarters of the setup should be for industrial parks and the other quarter should be for agricultural parks, so that the agricultural parks become collection centres for the produce from our farmers and at the same time provide raw materials for the industrial parks. 

As we consider setting up industrial parks, there should also be an investment policy where at least 40 per cent of the investment is owned by locals and 60 per cent, if possible, should be for the investors who may come in. Thank you very much.

2.53 
MR JOHN NTAMUHIIRA TWESIGYE (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Madam Speaker, it is a pleasure for me today to make a contribution on the State of the Nation Address by the President. In the address, clear policies were highlighted. They give clear direction of the way this country should take, especially in striving to achieve a middle-income status in 2020.

Madam Speaker, allow me to highlight two areas. The first one is corruption. The President clearly showed how corruption will be tackled. He mentioned what was registered in the previous years and he presented what will happen especially if the current policies are strengthened to ensure service delivery by Government. However, we need to work as a team with all the institutions of Government to ensure that what we need is realised for the benefit of our people.

The second area is jobs creation. It was well articulated in the State of the Nation Address with examples; for instance, if all the vehicles that are imported here were assembled from here, it would create about 45,000 jobs and that would benefit our country, especially the youth.

In the response by the Leader of the Opposition to that statement, she stated that the Government is harnessing the youth into patronage networks as tools for regime sustenance in power. I would like to dispute that by saying that Government has put in place policies that help our youth to get employment; for example, there is the Youth Livelihood Fund, where money is being given to the youth. 

Although it was stated otherwise in the response by the Leader of the Opposition, it is clear that in some districts like Rubirizi, sensitisation was done; the youth got the money and it was utilised. However, in areas where there is a problem, we need to work together as a team to ensure that the intended objective is attained. 

Secondly, there is a non-formal skills training programme under the Ministry of Education and Sports that focuses on helping the illiterate youth, mainly those without skills, to do something that can benefit them. The programme was implemented and it has been effective. The few shortcomings that come with such a programme, like failure to give people start-up kits, can be worked on by the relevant ministry - (Member timed out.)

2.57
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the President for attempting to fulfil his constitutional responsibility. However, honourable members, let us not stop at this simple thing of citing the law - according to this or that Article in the Constitution - but let us go behind the spirit of the Constitution. Why did the framers of the Constitution say in Article 101(1) that the President should make a speech called the State of the Nation Address? It is to give you an update on the condition of the nation as at that time, when you are transiting from one financial year to another.

Comparing the two documents I have here - the State of the Nation Address of 2016 and the one of 2015 – the one of 2015 is better than the one of 2016 because at least the President attempted to tell the people where Uganda was and he cited what that particular address was about. It was more about accountability. However, in the second one, the one of 2016, the focus of his presentation is not very clear; he kept meandering. 

I would like to draw your attention to one aspect, which should have part of the President’s State of the Nation Address, and that is physical planning and implementation - the status of Uganda as of now and how we are developing; is it according to plan? Everyone lives at a locality in a town or city like Kampala. However, there is chaos around Kampala and also where we live in our towns, even in a small town like Obongi. 

I am already worried about Obongi in 25 to 50 years to come. If the subcounty local authorities are not given physical planners, if the district office is not given resources for physical planning, if the physical planning board is not given resources, we are going to produce a chaotic middle-income country. Income can be got from anywhere - in the bush, in a mine or even in a forest. If you want to measure the development of Uganda on the basis of income regardless of whether –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I would like to inform the Government that on Monday, I had a meeting with the Director of Physical Planning of KCCA and I was shocked when he said that we have never budgeted for physical planning over many years. The chaotic slums we are getting and people building on road reserves - Prime Minister, you better take interest in that for this coming budget.

MR FUNGAROO: Just a way forward - It is very critical, as you have said –

THE SPEAKER: But I said it for you. (Laughter)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. These are things everybody should be concerned about. There must be standards of roads. How wide should a road be? There must be standards of road reserves and the local authorities must be educated about this so that they educate people every time. 

There must be money for monitoring the extent to which road reserves are protected. We are going to be a modern economy where we need electricity, drainage channels and all these things. Documents presented must be, therefore, brought out and people should be sensitised. It should be like a health centre IV – (Member timed out.)

3.01
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In his State of the Nation Address, the President talked about extension of electricity lines to all parts of Uganda for rural lighting and urban industrial development. However, in most of the rural areas where power is supposed to reach, especially the health centres, schools and Government institutions, power has not reached. 

In urban areas, you will find that the power supply is never steady. In a place like Moyo, where I come from, we always get power for about three hours and after that, it goes off for two days. This cannot encourage industrial development. I would like to urge the Government to develop steady power for rural electrification and industrial development.

Secondly, in the State of the Nation Address, the President talked about tarmacking of roads. In Moyo District, we have a stretch of roads between Moyo town and Adjumani in a place called Metu Subcounty; the road always becomes impassable whenever it rains. If you will recall, in 2010 there was an accident that claimed 30 lives of the people of Moyo. I will be very happy if that road between Afodi via Moyo, Adjumani up to Atiek is tarmacked. It has always appeared in the budget since the 1990s but up to now, it has not been effected.  

Thirdly, health is wealth, but the speech of the President did not emphasise the issue of health. Hepatitis B is claiming lives of people especially in Moyo District. We will be very happy if people are tested and medicine is taken there –(Member timed out.)

3.04
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard this talk of a middle-income status by 2020, but for a country to achieve a middle-income status, you must improve the livelihood of her people. 

Seventy per cent of our people live in the rural areas and they are involved in agriculture. Years back, the President talked about modernisation of agriculture but this time in his State of the Nation Address, he did not talk about it. He did not mention tractors, irrigation and extension workers. The President even goes further to talk about exporting pineapples, mangoes and oranges but I kept wondering where these oranges and pineapples are, in Uganda. 

When I was working at a mission abroad, I tried to market Ugandan pineapples, but the chain of supermarkets wondered whether Uganda could supply tonnes of pineapples twice a week. There is nothing! Look at Ghana and Gabon that exports pineapples; they have square miles of pineapples. This country does not have that. 

We cannot achieve a middle-income status of $10,000 per capita income per person like Gabon, Angola and the Seychelles because of the poverty in this country. Our people cannot even live on a dollar a day. Poverty is biting in the countryside and our people are suffering and yet you are talking of middle income, which is not possible. 

The President laments about exports and I would like to agree with him; we have nothing to export in this country. Look at the exports we send outside and look at the imports. Definitely, the macroeconomics of this country cannot allow us to do that. Look at electricity - the Bujagali agreement where Ugandans are paying 11 cents per kilowatt hour. That was a very bad agreement. 

Thirty years of Public Private Partnership (PPP) and the Aga Khan with their partners are producing 250 megawatts of power and yet you must pay for this power, whether it has gone on the grid or not. The money used to build that dam was about $550 million, but they exaggerated the figure to $950 million and Ugandans’ hands are tied. 

The investors that I helped to bring to this country are in Namanve, but the Government is only supplying 10 per cent of electricity and 10 per cent of water to them and there is no waste management. We need about US$7 million. For Uganda to achieve that, we must work on the corruption and roads –(Member timed out.)

3.08
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I join the rest of my colleagues in thanking the President for the State of Nation Address. However, I have some issues to raise. I am concerned about the percentage of households still using subsistence farming under agriculture and yet we want to move to a middle-income state. For this, I have the following proposals:

1. 	We should address the food insecurity in the country, review the policy and concentrate only on three enterprises. We need to balance it because growing coffee, tea and citrus fruits is not possible in every district.

2. 	Review the policy on seed distribution under the Poverty Eradication Programme.

3. 	Make assessments on poverty levels because every district needs to cross into a middle-income state.

4. 	We need to spread the role model team to every district.

5. 	The President talked about financing agriculture, but we still also have running programmes under microfinance. They do have offices in our sub regions but our people are not benefiting from it. We need to revive cooperatives and I request the minister to engage in numerous outreaches. The minister has not visited a lot of these districts and yet we need her support.

6. 	On investments, every district needs to have good roads, and I request that in the Madi sub region we look at Atiak-Moyo Road that has been over promised but nothing seems to yield. This affects our mobilisation as leaders.

7. 	On education, we need to have seed schools.

8. 	On health, hepatitis B is killing our people. We need to review and have a new strategy.

9. 	On rural electrification, Adjumani has been blessed because some of the areas have been worked on but the rural areas have been left out.

10. 	In the fishing communities, famine is a problem and I request the President and his team to prioritise irrigation because there is drought and the soils are poor. I pray that the Government handles this crucial issue of irrigation as a priority -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you, honourable members. We deferred some issues earlier because of the absence of the finance minister. When we resume, we shall start with hon. Baba Diri, hon. Joseph Kasozi and the others will follow. Let us go back to item No. 4.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table a request of Government to borrow up to 150 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to support the Agriculture Cluster Development Project (ACDP).

THE SPEAKER: The request is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

MR FUNGAROO: I would like to know whether the 150 million is shillings, goats or something else. What are we borrowing? I need guidance. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Hon. Fungaroo, you know it is US dollars. I thank you for the correction.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table a request of Government to borrow US$ 11.32 million from the Kuwait Fund For Arab Economic Development to finance the construction of the 33KV and 11KV distribution project in six districts of Uganda namely, Kiryandongo, Kibaale, Nebbi, Bushenyi, Kasese and Rukungiri.

THE SPEAKER: The request is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

We shall now go to the Prime Minister’s Question Time. The Members who asked questions last week will not ask today, so that we give other Members the opportunity. I would like to appeal to Members not to go into preambles because that takes time away from other Members. Please, just go straight to your question. The first Member will be hon. Ssekikubo.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.14
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. 

Government, in an effort to fight poverty in the rural areas, spearheaded the creation of SACCOs as a way of promoting savings. However, it has come to my notice and to the notice of Members that the Uganda Revenue Authority has imposed taxes on these very SACCOs that were meant to be promoted.

In view of the many cries to the President, on 23 May 2015, His Excellency directed the Prime Minister on the taxing of dividends, surpluses and interest on savings for SACCOs by the Uganda Revenue Authority. He directed that this should be summarily abolished.

May I know from the Prime Minister how far the President’s directive has been implemented in view of the widespread cries from these SACCOs that are aimed at generating a savings culture in this country, promoting investment and enabling Uganda attain a middle-income status by 2020? May I also know what stage these proposals, which you promised to table before Cabinet and Parliament, have reached?

3.16
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I do confirm, as quoted by hon. Ssekikubo, that His Excellency directed on interest by SACCOs and a number of SACCOs have already benefited from the presidential directive. However, the full implementation of the directive is being studied by the finance ministry. The ministry is expected to bring to this very House a report on the implementation of the presidential directive on interest on SACCOs.
 
3.17
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, the Uganda National Roads Authority has indicated in its plan to tarmac 1,200 kilometres of roads between 2016 and 2020. I have perused through this plan and I have not seen even a single road in Lango sub region, which comprises eight districts, captured to be tarmacked. 

There are many roads within the region: Lira-Alebtong-Otuke- Abim Road going to Kotido; Apac-Lira Road; Apac-Kole-Oyam Road; Dokolo-Amolatar Road, and soforth. May I know from the Prime Minister why we have this inequality in the tarmacking of roads? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the Lango sub region is one of the sub regions of Uganda that have significantly benefited from tarmacking of roads. This is a well-known fact, and the roads concerned can be enumerated. 

Nevertheless, on the point made by hon. Obua, roads are tarmacked on the basis of their economic viability and sometimes on other considerations like connecting Uganda to her neighbours, promoting regional trade and cooperation, security and other considerations. Therefore, these should be able to cover some of the roads in Lango. 

As for the details on the programme of implementation of tarmacking roads, the minister responsible for works can give a detailed roadmap on the roads to be tarmacked. Within a couple of weeks, the minister should be able to make this information available to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week several members wanted to ask questions so I recorded their names and they are the ones I am starting with. Those who asked last time, do not ask today.

3.20
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government has tried various interventions to uplift people from poverty, the most recent one being the NAADS programme which failed. Actually, the President realised the failure after meeting the wanainchi during his consultations with the people and we are now operating under Operation Wealth Creation. 

My question to you is: Has Government got any mechanism to evaluate the performance and success of such programmes? Are you aware if Operation Wealth Creation is making an impact on the population? If so, at what rate is it succeeding?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the innovative programme of Operation Wealth Creation already has a very positive impact. It is being monitored and reports on its performance will be shared in the House so that honourable members can remain fully acquainted with the progress that it is making.

3.22
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have observed that whenever we are travelling, yellow fever vaccination is a must and it is charged at Shs 100,000 at KCCA. Isn’t this a disease that we should be preventing as Ugandans or is it something neglected? Why are we charged a lot of money to be vaccinated? Some Ugandans cannot afford this money. 

We, the MPs and some others, can afford this but our peasants cannot afford this. That is why many Ugandans have not gone for this vaccination. You are always encouraging vaccination against measles, polio and others diseases; what are your plans to have a very big campaign to vaccinate all Ugandans against these killer diseases?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government has no plans to carry out nationwide vaccination against yellow fever. When there is an upsurge or an epidemic, Government contains it. 

At the moment, if you want to travel, some countries still ask for a yellow fever vaccine certificate. Therefore, it is advisable to pay some little amount of money, about Shs 30,000, at a health facility at KCCA or sometimes at the Entebbe International Airport in order to get this certificate.

On the question of the Shs 100,000, I think there must be a problem and we will find out why this is the case. It should not be the case.

3.25
MR MICHAEL TUSIIME (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Eleven years ago, there was strategic intervention by Government to help the people who were water stressed, particularly those in the districts of the cattle corridor where Mbarara District is located. The relief was in form of giving equipment to de-silt community dams. However, the neighbouring districts have benefited and for reasons unknown to us, Mbarara District has never gotten the benefit of this facility.

The matter worsened to the extent that on 11 October 2011, there was a presidential directive to the Minister of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry to provide that machinery. It is sad to note, however, that the districts of Kiruhura, Isingiro and Kibale continue to benefit from this facility and yet Mbarara District in particular has never got an opportunity to have this machinery.

May I therefore know, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why the Minister of Agriculture defied the order or the instructions of the President and why Mbarara has never benefited from this facility?

THE SPEAKER: Again, Members, let me appeal; just go to straight to the point because a lot of time is being taken on introductions and the rest of the things.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government is determined to provide water for the wanainchi especially in the cattle corridor. There is some limited equipment for making valley dams, but the Government has decided to import additional equipment in order to meet the great national demands for water for the wanainchi and for the livestock. Mbarara and other areas of the cattle corridor will benefit from it. 

3.29
MR GODFREY WATENGA (Independent, Lutseshe County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, my query has been handled; it concerned the yellow fever vaccination. However, I am not contented with the Prime Minister’s response. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, go ahead and ask if you are not. (Laughter)

MR WATENGA: It bothers me also because of the Ugandan peasants who are upcountry. In fact, we recently paid Shs 100,000 at KCCA for vaccination. I wonder if the peasants in Lutseshe who are getting little money can afford to pay for this vaccination. Whereas the Prime Minister responded, I am not contended because people cannot raise the Shs 100,000 for vaccination. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, since this is a matter that is raising substantial concern, I will ask the Minister of Health to make a statement on the matter next week.

3.30
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine	is a supplementary question to what hon. Ssekikubo asked about the SACCOs and the URA revenues. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have told this House that some SACCOs have benefited. However, I am seeking clarification on how many SACCOs have benefited. This is because in Mitooma District, we have 13 SACCOs and URA has written to six of them demanding for that money, including Mitooma People’s SACCO, where Shs 180 million is demanded. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance will make a statement on this matter so that the air is cleared –(Interjections)- He will do it next week, and some Members like Ndugu Tinkasiimire are expected to be orderly. (Laughter)

3.31
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, does the Government have a specially designed development programme under Operation Wealth Creation for peri-urban centres like Busia Municipality?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the programme of Operation Wealth Creation is in its early stages and it is targeting both the rural and urban areas. However, specific programmes suitable for particular areas are being considered. So it actually includes the urban areas.

3.32
MR ALBERT LOKORU (NRM, Tepeth County, Moroto): Madam Speaker, my question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister concerns support to the education institutions in this country. I remember one time when Moroto High School was celebrating its 50th anniversary, the Prime Minister presided over that function and promised a bus for the school to facilitate learning. However, to date, the bus has not arrived. When will the bus come? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I do not remember making a promise of a bus to any school in the last several years. It is possible that a promise may have been made by one of the Government officials. We would be interested in getting details so that this can be looked at and the practicability of implementation considered by Government.

3.33
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware of the fact that there is a high demand for salary increment. Also, there are a number of strikes by various civil servants like teachers and doctors. You are also aware that the Ninth Parliament made a resolution that the Government should come up with a salary commission. When is Government going to establish the salary commission to address this problem? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I agree with my sister that there have been a number of salary demands and it is true that Government committed itself to coming up with a salary review commission. The Ministry of Public Service is making arrangements to make the requisite papers available for Cabinet’s consideration before the matter comes to this House.

3.35
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a suggestion to the Prime Minister; in the agriculture sector, where we want to create wealth, can’t we have a policy through the Ministry of Agriculture to do what we used to do in the Amin era, where every home had to have at least an acre of coffee? We could have any other agricultural product that grows in that particular area as a must. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, colleagues will know that the President has guided families, especially those with a limited amount of land, on how to use it. 

Coffee is one of the crops that have been advised to be grown. However, let me also say that there are a number of areas where coffee may not grow well. Therefore, appropriate crops as advised by experts in terms of bringing income to the wanainchi should be the crops to be grown. The criterion should be: What brings maximum benefits and income to the farmer? That is the critical criterion.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek guidance from you on the relevance of the Prime Minister’s Question Time. I have read the Rules of Procedure very clearly and according to my perception, the Prime Minister is mandated to tackle rising issues and questions on policy. 

For the time I have spent here, I have realised that Members of Parliament have raised questions that sometimes pertain to issues and problems that directly affect their constituencies, even those that happened the previous night. I believe the Prime Minister may not be well informed on those issues and at times, he is compelled to come and give either an opinion or an answer. I just would like to get some guidance on whether it would be relevant for the Prime Minister to answer such questions, even when we know they are not of a policy nature. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in my communication last week, I informed the House that I had instructed the rules committee to examine the management and content of the Prime Minister’s Question Time. Until they do that, we shall continue to operate as we are doing. Of course, all this is a learning process, especially for many of the Members. However, when the rules are clearer, we shall know where to end. 

3.40
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Kayunga-Galiraya Road has been earmarked for upgrading by Government for over 10 years. What could be going on with that road? 

Secondly, the Lake Kyoga basin is underutilised; I would like to know what plans are in place to develop it.

DR RUGUNDA: I am sure the Minister of Works and Transport has clear plans for the Galiraya Road and we could get that specific information from him. I, therefore, advise the honourable member to do so. 

On the Lake Kyoga basin, it may be of interest to colleagues to know that one of the papers discussed by Cabinet today was the revamping of water transport to promote trade and development activities. I am sure that the Lake Kyoga basin will be one of the beneficiaries of this revamped programme. 

3.41
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, in 2010, the Eighth Parliament passed two important laws - the Town and Country Planning Act and the Kampala Capital City Act. Unfortunately, the operationalisation of the Town and Country Planning Act seemed to be in vain because of the increasingly growing slums. The KCCA metropolitan law was also insufficient as it did not include Wakiso, Mukono and the neighbourhood. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when are you going to implement the Town and Country Planning Act as well as the law that brings on board the metropolitan city? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, hon. Stephen Mukitale has raised a major point. It is true that we have fragmented legal and policy instruments concerning KCCA, the metropolitan area and urban planning authorities. However, we now have a more holistic approach. 

The Ministry for Kampala in consultation with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development are now working together. There is already a technical team in place to look at both the legislation and policies so that we have one holistic integrated programme. This will make more sense for the development of the greater urban area of Kampala, including the Kampala Metropolitan Area. There will also be a ministerial meeting on the matter, two weeks from now, to consider the technical report that has already been produced on the subject matter.

3.44
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to address the issue of the zebra crossing along Development House. Whenever Members of Parliament are using the zebra crossing, they have to plan on how to cross the road, as if they are crossing the river while it is flooding. I would like to ask the Prime Minister whether a bridge is going to be constructed, so that you save us from these accidents. (Applause) 

DR RUGUNDA: The minister responsible will be able to give a programme for the flyover. 

THE SPEAKER: Probably to just assist the Prime Minister, the Parliamentary Commission has sought authority from the Kampala Capital City Authority. You know they are the owners of the road and we are just neighbours. We are, therefore, waiting for their response on what can be done in that area. 

3.45
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute South County, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In response to the high dropout rates of our girl children in school, President Museveni, while campaigning in my subcounty in Erute South, committed and pledged that Government would supply sanitary towels to all girls in primary school. 

The first term has passed and the second term is about to end; I would like to ask the Prime Minister when Government will start supplying or delivering the sanitary towels to our girls in order to rescue my colleagues and certainly myself, who are stepping in for the President. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: After the elections, Government set up a committee of permanent secretaries to work on the roadmap of implementation of the manifesto pledges and this is being considered at a political level. After it is completed, a report will be made to the House and the sanitary pads will be part of this report. 

3.47
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Is the Prime Minister aware that the Uganda Wildlife Authority is ferrying elephants and giraffes from northern Uganda, Murchison Falls, and taking them to Queen Elizabeth and Lake Mburo national parks in western Uganda? Is the Prime Minister aware that this is tantamount to cultural genocide? People in the north are not happy since tourists are being led to another geographical location, different from where God created those animals?

DR RUGUNDA: Hon. Otto, the Prime Minister is not aware. (Laughter)

3.48
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there have been reports in the media about shoddy work and cracks on Karuma and Isimba dams. When do you commit to come and make a statement to this Parliament on the status of Karuma and Isimba dams?

DR RUGUNDA: There have been some complaints about the problems at Karuma Dam. Investigations have been done and we expect a report to come out. As soon as the report is available, it will be shared with this august House.

3.49
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when will the people who worked in Mbale Municipal Council and Uganda Railways be paid their pension? Some of them have died without being paid.

DR RUGUNDA: For people who worked with some of the corporations like Uganda Railways Corporation, I know that there have been some long standing disputes, which are in courts of law. As soon as the courts of law decide on the matter, we will get the answers.

3.50
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware of the meeting that you convened in Mbale pertaining to the securing of the boundaries of Mt. Elgon National Park. In this meeting, a number of brilliant resolutions were made but as we talk, the relationship between the citizens that are living along the fringes of Mt. Elgon National Park and UWA has deteriorated severely. 

We have serious statements that have already been recorded at the police station at Bududa; the locals were tortured and a case of rape committed by an officer from UWA has also been reported. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, how long is your office going to take to enforce the implementation of the resolutions that were made in that very important meeting?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am fully aware of the meeting that we attended together with the wanainchi in Mbale area. Actually, there was a delay in implementation because of budgetary issues, but now that the new budget is operational, the ministry responsible will be able to execute the job shortly.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have used up our time. We now return to the State of the Nation Address. By the way, honourable members, you are entitled to ask questions to the Commission or any of the other ministers. Not everything should go to the Prime Minister. You can ask questions for oral answer through the sectors.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 31 MAY 2016

(Debate Continued_)

3.52  
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto Mid-West County, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion that thanks of Parliament be registered to the President for the State of the Nation Address. I would also like to applaud His Excellency the President for having fulfilled his constitutional mandate as enshrined in Article 101 of the Constitution. 

I would like to register my appreciation to the Government for consistently insisting on injecting massive funds into the energy sector, especially in electricity generation. As we all know, continued and adequate generation of electricity is a precursor to development. 

Madam Speaker, the recent population census showed that only 16 per cent of Ugandans have access to electricity and are connected to the electricity grid. Therefore, when Government insists, on page five, that we are about to generate 1000 megawatts of electricity and we are looking towards generating over 3500 megawatts, I think this is a step in the right direction. The President also recognised the fact that despite efforts to generate adequate electricity, the tariffs are still high. This was well elucidated in his speech and I would like to applaud him for that. 

Despite the interventions by the Rural Electrification Agency in transmitting power to the rural areas - you will find a number of lines moving across villages - the rural folk are not tapping electricity into their homes. This is because most of the folks are not connected to the grid despite the lines passing by their houses because of high tariffs. Those who initially tried to connect –(Member timed out.)

3.55
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to my colleagues in thanking His Excellency for his elaborate State of the Nation Address. 

In particular, I was impressed by the President’s statement on page nine, where he stressed that Uganda should actually graduate from being a supermarket for foreign products, and that it is a high time that Uganda became a manufacturing centre. This is good for our country, especially at a time when we have challenges of high unemployment and also limited market for our locally produced products. If this is to be achieved, Government should inject more funds in technology related areas and applied research. That is the only way to go. 

Even if the President established a ministry in charge of technology innovation, this ministry is still suffocating under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with very meagre funding and yet this is a sector, which can easily drive the country to a middle-income status. Therefore, I would request that this Government thinks of putting more funds in this very important sector. 

Regarding Uganda Investment Authority and related organs, I request that they follow up on foreign investors who come to Uganda. Many of them come under the guise of being investors but they end up competing with Ugandans in very small businesses like retail shops. I do not know if these people are followed up. Even the ones that are engaged in manufacturing always come with their staff and Ugandans are only employed as tea girls and office attendants. This is very bad for our country. Therefore, Uganda Investment Authority, together with the ministry, need to do a lot in order to reverse that unfortunate trend. 

On page 15 – If we are to pull 68 per cent of subsistence farmers into the money economy, Operation Wealth Creation should concentrate on value addition, providing extension services, agricultural mechanisation, building of silos- (Member timed out.)

3.59
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. 

I would like to comment on corruption that appears on page 10. Although we are committed to fighting corruption, some policies are corruption-friendly. When you go to the local governments, the contracts committee at the district is composed of heads of departments. Imagine an engineer who is a member of the contracts committee; he initiates Bills of Quantities (BOQs), inspects the projects, certifies and recommends payments. Meanwhile, the councillors at the subcounty are only paid Shs 20,000 as their allowance but they are supposed to inspect and see how the work is implemented. Corruption begins from there. 

How do you expect the district engineer, who prepared the BOQs, to assist the councillors who are supposed to be at the district for 12 days in a year? If they are supposed to install eight lines of culverts, they will negotiate to install two and share the cost of the six. Therefore, if we are to fight corruption, we should go to the subcounty. 

The subcounty chief appoints the signatory. The subcounty councils used to appoint the signatories but as I speak, the law says that the subcounty chief appoints the signatory. Imagine the accounting officer at the subcounty has to give a financial report to the district and to the financial officer and at the same time, he or she has to inform the council. These councils cannot meet when their allowances are not there. The chief says, “I will not come” or “I will not pay you now”. Do you expect them to fight corruption? 

Therefore, if Government is going to fight corruption, we have to empower the lower local governments to oversee where our money goes. They are not facilitated; they spend all their time fighting for the little resources from the Government. I, therefore, ask the Minister of Local Government to work with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to see how we can empower our local councils.

4.01
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether it is a common practice but I think we should give a round of applause to His Excellency the President, for this beautiful State of the Nation Address. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, while the President was talking, he said that we shall encourage the acquisition of ships and steamers that will transport people from the islands so that illegal fishermen do not hide under the cover of canoe transporters. He added that he has put a number of ministers in this sector to no avail. This is a big shame.

The President said that no boat will be allowed in the fish breeding areas and that if the illegal fishing law is not strong enough, the ministry must bring a stronger one. To my surprise, the Minister of State for Fisheries has not yet been appointed. It is my appeal that the President has the indulgence to look among us and appoint one -(Laughter)- I am very ready to offer my service. 

Madam Speaker, on page 23 the President said that he is a proud jajja. This proud jajja of mine was, the other day, commissioning an abattoir requiring 400 cows every day. I have raised an issue here before that cows are dying like flies. I am wondering where this abattoir will get the cows from. I am very worried. Now that he is our proud jajja and we are his grandchildren, if this proud jajja does not look at the problem of acaricides and fake drugs that are being supplied to our farmers, I am very worried - (Member timed out.)

4.04
MS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the time this debate started last week, there have been so many issues raised surrounding agriculture ranging from low production and productivity, agriculture financing, water for production, fake inputs, especially seeds and chemicals, to issues surrounding Operation Wealth Creation.

In his address, the President highlighted a number of Bills that will be coming to the Floor of Parliament related to the agricultural sector including the Agriculture Extension Bill, NAADS (Amendment) Bill, the National Coffee Bill and the Fisheries (Amendment) Bill. However, when I look at the calendar for this session, no Bill related to the agricultural sector has been prioritised and yet, as you have been following, there are so many issues surrounding agriculture. Many questions are being asked about Operation Wealth Creation, which questions cannot be answered; for example, how is it related to NADDS? 

Following the lamentations and issues that are being raised by Members, I would also like to ask whether Operation Wealth Creation is a replacement for what used to be NAADS. If so, I would like to add that it is like jumping from a frying pan into the fire. We need some of these Bills like the NAADS (Amendment) Bill so that we see what Government is proposing.

I would like to thank Members for all the concerns that they have on agriculture. From the ongoing talk, we hear that there is going to be focus on agriculture, which is the backbone of this economy, but can we really see Government walking the talk. I do not see agriculture being taken with all the seriousness that it deserves. I appeal to the Leader of Government Business; we want to see these Bills coming up during this session. They may not even come in the next session and yet we have so many issues surrounding this. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, honourable member, I want to reinforce your point; in the Ninth Parliament, no Bills came from that ministry. 

4.07
MR ANDREW MARTIAL (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me a chance to comment on the State of the Nation Address. 

I would like to direct my comment to page 16 of the State of the Nation Address where it says, “This struggle is about pulling 68 per cent of the subsistence farmers into the money economy.” This statement presupposes that these 68 per cent are not going to deliver themselves, therefore there has to be a committed team that will bring this percentage down to a minimum. 

Singapore is one of those countries that transformed from a third world to first world country. If I could borrow the words of Lee Kuan Yew who was the Prime Minister of Singapore; when asked about the biggest hurdle he met while transforming Singapore from a third world to a first world country, he said that his most difficult task was to get the people to understand, cooperate and support his vision. We know that Ugandans are not fond of supporting ideas that are not very well explained to them and which they do not understand. If these people have to be reduced from 68 per cent to maybe 30 per cent, what measures does the Government have to ensure the 68 per cent of peasants understand and cooperate with Government in order to be delivered to a middle-income country?

Lee Kuan Yew also said that before you become what you would like, you must first behave in a way that fits in that category –(Member timed out.)

4.11
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I equally appreciate the President for the elaborate speech that he made to this Parliament. 

I will start by addressing the House on page seven of the State of the Nation Address where the President, in the second paragraph, says that Government institutions, without exception, must buy locally made products provided they are of good quality and comparable price. Madam Speaker, the issue here is about buying locally made products but the President is especially addressing Government institutions. 

I think that this matter should cut across and come down to the people so that they also buy locally made products. I have been surprised many times when I enter into supermarkets and stores and find juices and eatables that have been imported from foreign countries. Some of the orange and mango juices come from Kuwait, Egypt and Iran. One wonders, how can Uganda import juices from a desert? How can we proudly consume products, especially foodstuff, from the desert? 

I think this calls for a change of attitude of Ugandans and not only Government institutions. By consuming such products, we are disappointing our farmers here. Somebody who grows oranges and mangoes is losing money to a company in Kuwait. Government must come up very strongly to address the issue of promoting domestic production. 

Madam Speaker, the President talked about Ethiopia and how they decided that vehicles must be assembled within Ethiopia. Those who have travelled there need to take serious interest in the way Ethiopians are doing their stuff. In Ethiopia, there are no foreign banks at all; all banks are local. In addition, you will not find huge supermarket stores. However here, foreigners come and establish big stores and they are killing our retail businesses - (Member timed out.)

4.14
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the President for the honesty with which he approached the state of the economy. The President is appealing to us to review our economic policy. When he says we should reconsider having Uganda Airlines, it is with a sense of remorse and we should applaud him for that.

The President questioned the cost of Karuma and intimated that he wished the Karuma Dam followed the Bujagali model. I do not know whether the Leader of Government Business and the Cabinet internalised the disappointment that the President was registering here. 

The President complained about high interest rates that are chocking businessmen, leading to bailouts, because of foreign banks. Are you bringing a proposal to put up a local bank or an agricultural bank? There is a lot of money in wealth creation scattered around; can we put it together and put up a local bank? 

The President went further to bring out the challenges of becoming a middle-income country and the challenge of transformation. From the very beginning, the President used to lambast backwardness among the peasantry. Therefore, we need to show how we are going to move from this backwardness. 

The President talked about land reforms. Are we about to see constitutional amendments brought early, not like it is usually done when amendments are brought six months to the end of a Parliament?  

The President also condemned renting by Government offices. When are we having a Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) arrangement to make sure that Government stops renting? 

The President mentioned challenges of water. I can see a policy reversal in Government here. I heard the minister talking about borehole maintenance and yet at one time we had said that we should stop the borehole syndrome and go for water supply systems. Therefore, there is need to harmonise these policies by the different agents of Government. 

There is now the pressure from people wanting more salaries. The First Lady met Ministry of Education staff while Ministry of Health staff were at State House. Can we have the salary review commission -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation from the Eastern and Southern Africa Management Institute (ESAMI). You are welcome. They have come to observe our proceedings. (Applause)

4.18
MS MARY BABIRYE (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two issues. When the President was addressing us, he stressed that foreign investors should be worked on as quickly as possible, thus promoting foreign investment in the country. Allow me to use Masaka as an example. In Lwera, the so-called foreign investors are carrying our sons from Lwera to a place that I do not know. However, I request that even local investors be helped. Our local investors who have invested in education, for instance, are facing many taxes yet foreigners have been given tax holidays.

Secondly, His Excellency assured us of steady economic growth, and that by 2020, the country’s per capita income will be high for everybody. I am worried because the new financial year has just started but every day, papers are being laid on the Table requesting for money; we want to borrow money from here and there. The other day they laid on the Table two loan requests. Today they have laid two loan requests. Who will pay for these loans? How are these loans going to be paid back? When will these loans be paid? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: For the record, on the Order Paper under business to follow, there will be a report from the minister concerning the performance of loans. 

Before hon. Aol comes up, I would like to alert the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives in relation to local investors. There is a local investor who I had to assist to get 10 acres of land in Namanve. It was a problem getting the land for him but he has been asked to pay a premium of $80,000 per acre. This is a Ugandan! I wrote to the Uganda Investment Authority to say that this man is a Ugandan and should be treated like a Ugandan. Up to now, they have refused to give him the clearance, yet they waive for foreigners. He runs Luuka Plastics. Hon. Werikhe, please take an interest in that matter.

4.20
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I felt very bad when His Excellency the President on page two was very proud of the state of democracy in Uganda, saying that it is the most advanced in the world, without considering transparency and accountability. How can we say Uganda’s democracy is the most advanced? Is representation enough to say it is the most advanced when most people do not speak out their minds? There is patronage. Until we clear this patronage, we are not going to help our country. I think we need transparency and accountability. Moreover, when we go for elections -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, has anyone stopped you from speaking your mind in this House? (Applause)

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, when you go to talk to people, they say, “That one is from State House” -

THE SPEAKER: Clarify, honourable member; I want to know whether anyone has stopped you from speaking in this House. That is what I want to know.

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, it is not only about me; it is about the majority out there. The majority out there is what we are here for.

THE SPEAKER: Then you should be clear about who you are talking about.

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, let me speak for Gulu. We need better democracy –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, this is a maiden speech. (Laughter) We need levelled ground for all and we also need transparency and accountability. 

There was proud talk about the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). In 1986, the GDP was Shs 6 trillion; in 2014, the GDP was Shs 74 trillion. We cannot be proud of this if we go deeper to analyse the change in the population. We can also be proud if the purchasing power of the money in 1986 and the purchasing power of what we have now is the same. If nothing remains the same, we cannot be proud. It is, therefore, important to take note of that. 

Concerning Bills, I would have loved to see something about health insurance. Our health system is actually going from bad to worse. If you go to the hospitals and health centres, after only two or three days you find that there are no drugs. We are not helping our people; we are not even prioritising health insurance for our people. 

For the youth, right now we know that there are no jobs and the youth are being exploited. When they are employed by some of these –(Member timed out.)

4.24
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the President for giving us the State of the Nation Address. It was very good. However, I would like to make a few comments.

My first comment is about the biggest problem we have in this country, which other honourable members have also commented about, and this is corruption. It is a cancer in this country. If, as a country, we adopted the Magufuli style of political leadership, probably this country would go a thousand kilometres. We have a big problem with bureaucratic procedures, especially in getting people who are corrupt. Using the court process to get a corrupt person takes a number of years. This has hampered service delivery to our communities and affected Government performance.

We also have problems helping communities receive Government programmes that are supposed to be given to them. A case in point is the problem of implementation. We draw the best budgets, have the best proposals, laws, policies and priorities as well as strategies but we have a big problem with implementation. The President gave a number of proposals that we are going to see being put in place this financial year. However, if we do not address the challenge of implementation of these Government programmes, we are also going to have a vicious cycle of more challenges in this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.27
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is about industrialisation. The President, in his State of the Nation Address, talked about exportation. If we are to export, primarily we must industrialise because we are all against exporting raw materials to European countries, Asia and elsewhere. However, when we look at industrialisation in Uganda, the minds of Ugandans are not yet industrialised; they still believe that a foreign investor can do much more on industrialisation. 

We need to therefore think about industrialising our people, especially the private sector. Some of them would like to industrialise but they do not know how to get the machinery. Some of them are not well educated and cannot get the machines and yet we have people who know but have not taken it seriously, most especially the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives needs to take this seriously so that these people know that they can be industrialised and they do the job they are supposed to do to ensure that this country moves to a middle-income status by the year 2020, which is almost tomorrow. 

Therefore, I would like to request the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to look into industrialising the minds of Ugandans so that the deficit in industrialisation can work very well in order for us to lift our community from this level to the next.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.30
MS SPELLANZA BAGUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of the many Members in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address and for also addressing real issues that affect our people. 

Particularly, I would like to thank the President for emphasising the issue of using the Uganda Development Bank to offer financial services to our people. However, that will not be a remedy to the grassroots person, especially the women who do not have security to access these services. I would love for us to have a deliberate effort in place to ensure that we do something to help the grassroots person to access facilities that can help them take a step in development, especially in enhancing household incomes.

Secondly, as I thank the President for the commitment this time round in fighting corruption, I would like to add that it is very important to put in place stringent measures against people who are found guilty of consuming what is meant to offer services to the populace of this country. Therefore, I would like to propose that we attach the properties of corrupt people, sell them and have the money refunded to where they swindled it from. That is my submission. Thank you very much.

4.32
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make a contribution to the President’s address to the nation. In the first place, this being my maiden speech, I would like to congratulate you for assuming the high office of the Speaker. This high office is an office of dignity and you have executed this duty with distinction. Congratulations. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, some of us admire your stamina, I must admit. You sit from 2.00 p.m. to 8.00 p.m. without any break. Your brakes must be tough. As a former Minister of Water and Environment, I used to be tempted and I often wondered whether the Rules of Procedure allow an ordinary Member of Parliament to give you water.  (Laughter) Madam Speaker, this is my maiden speech -(Interjections) - I am pleading – 

I would like to congratulate the Members of Parliament for being elected. This Parliament is a unique parliament - (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise to ask whether the Member holding the Floor is proceeding properly. At a time when he should be making contributions to the State of Nation Address, he is instead discussing the Speaker.  Is it procedurally right for him to discuss the eating, sitting and drinking habits of the Speaker instead of concentrating on the subject? 

THE SPEAKER: He is discussing democracy, honourable members, so it is okay.  (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. No doubt you have guided this House in a very elegant manner.

On a serious note, the President, in the State of Nation Address, focussed on three major dimensions. One was the dimension of democracy, and he said that Uganda is one of the most democratic countries in the world. Indeed, it is because when you think about the elections of LC I LC II, LC III, LC V, Members of Parliament and the President, where else in the world do you have all these representatives of the people? The whole sovereignty of the power of the people is reflected by their representatives at every level.  

The challenge we have as the Tenth Parliament – I regard the Tenth Parliament as a unique parliament in the history of this country because this is a parliament of destiny; it has been described as consisting of parents, grandparents and those who have not produced anyone. This is a unique parliament and we have a duty to deliver this country from a third-world country to a middle-income country in our time. That is the uniqueness of this parliament.

When it comes to democracy, democracy is not an event, it is a process. There are three areas in our democracy, which need to be defined and I would like to draw the attention of the House to them. The first one is the transition from the Movement political system to a multiparty dispensation. This matter is unsettled and if you want evidence of this being an area which needs fine-tuning, we have in this very House Members who are independent of political parties and yet they have party cards of the same party they are independent of. This indicates that transforming our Movement system to a multiparty political system is yet to be refined. If that was not the case, you would not have a situation where you are independent and yet you are a party member. Independence means you do not believe in any party, but you are. That requires independence.

The second area, Madam Speaker, is a situation we have had, historically - a leader of a major political Opposition party having a leader in the House and also outside. We must find a democratic way of addressing this issue. I saw it in the 1960s when we had the late Basil Bataringaya being the Leader of the Opposition in the House and Ben Kiwanuka being the Leader of the Opposition outside. Life became difficult for the Leader of the Opposition in the House, so he crossed the Floor and joined the Government. Much as we have banned crossing in the present dispensation, I have found the position almost untenable to have - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The challenge of economic transformation – Honourable members, when you have 68 per cent of your households practising subsistence farming and you need to lift them out of the subsistence economy to a cash economy, it is a challenge which requires the collective unity and purpose of every Member of the House, regardless of which side of the Floor you are standing on. 

We must lift our people from poverty. Only then can this country become a middle-income country. It cannot become a middle-income country if this House engages in defiance campaigns that undermine the confidence of investors and tourists. It will not happen unless we are single-minded. We can do it regardless of which side we are sitting on if we are united to make this country a middle-income one.

Madam Speaker, we support the motion and we thank the President for the excellent exposition he made to the House. Thank you very much.

4.40
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto South County, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the President for his detailed State of the Nation Address. 

On page 13, the President mentions bank interest rates. Actually, in Uganda, we have a problem because commercial banks overcharge the private sector. They charge a 24 per cent interest rate and add charges for delay of payment, so the interest rate usually eventually goes between 28 and 32 per cent. 

This is simply because we have only one development bank. If a person needs long term financing, he goes to a commercial bank, which has short term financing. Therefore, the alternative we have as Ugandans is to go to a development bank, which is not liquid enough. It needs to be recapitalised so that Ugandans can have enough facilities for medium and long term investments. Further still, the cooperative bank should be revived so that the farmers have a bank and cooperatives where they can go for farmers’ funds, which will be insured, and for a longer time than with commercial banks.

On page 14, the President directed that domestic arrears be cleared. Last week, during the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs meeting, I realised that the police and Ministry of Defence had Shs 98 billion and Shs 93 billion in domestic arrears respectively. These funds were borrowed from commercial banks but Government engages in domestic borrowing from the private sector and when it pays back, it does not pay with interest. Therefore, the private sector should also be given interest on domestic arrears, which are borrowed from commercial banks by the Government. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, on page 18, the President talks about fertilisers and irrigation for the farmers. This is very important. As I talk, in Lwengo, Bukoto South in particular, it has been very dry and we have lost entire plantations of cassava and coffee. We shall -(Member timed out.)

4.43
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to contribute to the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President.

On pages 16 and 17 of his address, the President emphasised the need to modernise agriculture from subsistence to a money economy. However, in my thinking, as we plan to commercialise agriculture to a money economy level, the President should have gone on to talk about how the Government is going to gain from the revenue that will be collected from farmers that will be able to sell their agricultural products.

The productive agricultural sector and the informal trade sector in Uganda today do not have a clear mechanisms through which revenue can be collected from such earnings. Indeed, many farmers in Uganda today earn a lot from the sale of products such as maize, beans and rice. However, there is no mechanism of collecting revenues, which should have boosted the economy of the country. Madam Speaker, we know that without improving the GDP to tax ratio, it is impossible for us to realise more revenue that would enable Uganda boost its level of taxes to be able to drive the country to a middle-income level.

The role of human resources is very critical if we are to achieve better service delivery and drive our country into a middle-income status. The President did not talk about staffing levels in the various ministries. In the Ministry of Water and Environment, for instance, the staffing level is at 48 per cent at the moment. Where gaps within the Public Service have not yet been filled, how do we expect to have better service delivery so as to be able to drive the country to our projected level of expectation?

In addition, there is the matter of the level of pay. In previous times, a public servant was able to get a house, have a subsidy for electricity, have a connected telephone line and also, sometimes, he or she was able to get transport from Government. These are no more and yet a public servant at salary scale U4 earns about Shs 540,000 net pay. 

The biggest part of our market that should drive the production and manufacturing sector that the President was talking about should have been gained from when public servants have disposable income. Madam Speaker - (Member timed out.)

4.47
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate this opportunity for us to reflect on the State of the Nation Address and to see whether the President, soon after the elections in February, has addressed issues that concern our voters.

Madam Speaker, I would like to address three critical issues: One, democratic governance and national unity; two, the myth of commercialisation of agriculture and three, hoping that you will allow me, I will deal with the issue of land ownership and compensation of indigenous owners of land, should the Government have the need to use the land.

Madam Speaker, last year when the President addressed the nation, he quoted for us a prayer from the Anglican prayer book.  He said, “What has been happening in the last 50 years is that the Government has been doing what it ought not to do and did not do what it ought to have done.” He actually attributed the failures of today to the governments that ruled in the last 50 years.

Madam Speaker, I really felt very bad that although in the President’s office and in State House we have skilled labour and professional people to handle the speech of the President, they forgot that in the last 50 years, the NRM rule, under the leadership of President Museveni, contributed to 30 years of those years. 

Therefore, if the past is to be blamed for the current evil, the one to be blamed most is the current regime headed by the same person. This is unfair to the President who is paying skilled labour to write his speech. However, for some of us who care to analyse, I thought this was an insult; giving the President the pistol to shoot his own foot. 

Madam Speaker, on commercialisation of agriculture, many of you and those who were not in the House have heard, for many years, talk about modernisation of agriculture and all sorts of mechanisms –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for the elder.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I have to get people to understand that I am now the commissioner –(Laughter) - and I am entitled to some extra allowances. Regarding commercialisation of agriculture, we need to focus on the leaders in Uganda because that is the pillar of our economy. Our voters are also very attached to anything that is related to agriculture.

Madam Speaker, the President talked about cotton in last year’s speech and I expected him to give us feedback on what he said about cotton last year. Last year, Shs 10 billion was given to a private investor and this year Shs 20 billion was given to the same investor to buy cotton to promote his own factory. What the President told us is that this factory was going to produce finished garments. I expected the President to say, “I told you last year and now I am here to tell you that this company called Fine Spinners has produced so many trousers, shirts and we are exporting and getting so many dollars.” Nothing -(Member timed out.)

4.52
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to applaud His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for having delivered a very concise State of the Nation Address. 

You may realise that Uganda is a signatory to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and when we are talking about SDG 1, ending poverty and hunger, the President was very clear on elaborating the strategies put in place to ensure that we uplift the economy of Uganda.

However, you may also realise that this is an ambitious goal with an ambitious target of ending poverty and zero hunger by 2025. From the President’s speech, I did not see proposals for addressing calamities that lead people to hunger like floods and droughts. As we speak, if we are to achieve this ambitious target by 2025, we should already be on our way there. 

In Teso and Ngora specifically, as we speak, people sleep on a cup of porridge. I would have loved to see how we are going to transform the waters being wasted during the rainy seasons so that this water can be well utilised, especially in the lowlands of Uganda like in areas of Teso, Karamoja and the rest. 

Madam Speaker, you will also realise that in this country we spend a lot of money on calamities related to avoidable diseases like diarrhoea and Hepatitis that are brought by poor sanitation and hygiene. I would like to commend my President for an elaborate speech on ensuring that we will have piped water and that everyone should have access to water. However, most of these diseases are brought about by avoidable situations in the planning process.

I have also not seen, in the State of the Nation Address, how we can avoid such diseases because there should be measures for us to address issues of sanitation and hygiene because Uganda is a signatory to the Sustainable Development Goal 6 on sanitation and hygiene for all.

Madam Speaker, I am sure that you have travelled this world and -(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the Pan African Parliament.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that you are one of my mentors because I have seen you and you have motivated me up to this level where I am. Therefore, debating before someone who has mentored you on television is something good. 

However, I know that you are well travelled and in any country that you enter - I was very proud of my President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni when he mentioned tarmacking Uganda. However, when I land in any country, the face of that country is the city. Today when I land in Uganda, when we are talking about tarmacking and infrastructure, I am very disappointed because I stay in Makindye; I am in the city. I would like to see a situation where our infrastructure starts from within the city.

When I am driving to Soroti, Arua, and Rukungiri, I am proud but within the vicinity of Kampala, I am disappointed. I would love to see that this is addressed. Madam Speaker - (Member timed out.) 

4.57
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to make a few comments as regards the State of the Nation Address and my concern will be guided from the accountability angle.

Madam Speaker, the President stated very categorically and keeps saying that this year is a year of no mchezo but in the State of the Nation Address, he did not seem to explicitly show us how he is going to do this.

We have many institutions in Uganda that are said to be fighting corruption but we even notice as the national assembly of this country that these institutions are grossly underfunded. We cannot be talking about stamping out corruption and yet you are cutting off the hand that should catch the thief. You cannot catch a thief when you have no limbs to do that.

I would have loved to see the President strengthening, or expressing a desire to strengthen these institutions.

We also continuously see interference in the working of these institutions. We are talking about stamping out corruption but we have many godfathers protecting wrong people in this nation.

As a Parliament, we have written reports and we identified certain individuals not fit to hold public offices but what do we see? They are being promoted and fronted internationally. Is that a country that desires to stamp out corruption?

When you talk about becoming a middle income economy, it amazes me to note that in the Auditor-General’s report, he realised that Uganda lacked an investment policy or a legal framework guiding Government on long term investment. How do we want to get there when we have no policies guiding us? What are we going to do? The very basic that we think would be our riding pads, we are not built on it. We are continually under funding agriculture?

We need to get serious as a country and say what we mean and not just say things that will tickle the ears of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, we are coming to the end of the first quarter since the purpose for which this address was delivered. If we had to do an audit on how far we have gone – what we continue to hear is that it is better than 1986. For God’s sake, 1986 is very many years ago. Where were we yesterday? Where are we today? Where do you want to be tomorrow? That is what we want to hear the President say. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause) 

5.00
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to comment on the State of the Nation Address by the President on 31 May 2016.

I would like to congratulate all Members of Parliament but before that, I congratulate His Excellency, the President, for being re-elected. I also congratulate you, Madam Speaker and my honourable colleagues for being elected to this honourable House. I also congratulate the local government leaders for being elected.

To me, this is a reflection of democracy that the President talks about on page 2. It further goes on to talk about the female Members whether they are directly elected or are women representatives.

When you educate a girl, you educate a nation. I realise that the girl child faces a lot before they get to the completion of their education. Many of them drop out because of early pregnancy, the long distances they have to walk to school and lack of sanitary pads.

I would like to request that when Government is building boarding facilities, it ensures that girls have dormitories. This will stop them from walking to school and also getting pregnant.

Secondly, reusable pads are also available. There is a foreign company that I have seen that produces them. I know that Ugandans also produce them and I am still looking for those. Can Government, please, think about that for the girls?

I would also like to thank His Excellency, the President, for his effort in ensuring the provision of seeds through NAADS. I would like to call for zoning so that we have specialisation according to areas so that when we find crops that are suitable to soils in a particular area, then those areas dominate in growing those crops. I noticed that in eastern Uganda, mangoes do very well and that would support a factory there.

If we looked at the soils that we had in a particular area, we would have factories coming up in these areas and, therefore, employment opportunities for the youth and our women.

I thank the President for the beef factory and I am calling upon Government to give sensitisation to the farmers who can give raw materials to this factory.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank the President for the democracy regarding the three arms of Government. Can we, as an institution, ensure that the three arms of Government are allowed to operate independently, so that each of them respects the other and that the criminal justice and civil justice systems are brought to the knowledge of Ugandans, because some of them do not seem to understand it and will go ahead to accuse lawyers, judges and the Police wrongly. I thank you very much for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 101 of you have contributed to this motion and I think that the Government now has the pulse of what the country is thinking. 

Therefore, I will ask the Government to prepare to respond tomorrow. I do not know whether the Prime Minister is going to respond to all. However, he can let me know what format he may wish to use before 11 O’clock tomorrow morning.

We shall now defer this debate for the replies from the Government. Let us go back to item No. 7 on the Oder Paper. But before we go to that item, I would like to follow up on what hon. Amongin was saying.

Some time back we passed a loan here for the municipalities and I thought that we had done a good job until I went to Jinja, Mbale and Soroti, I realised that we only gave them 10 kilometres. 

We did not do much and the municipalities are still suffering. We still need tarmac. We only did the main roads and not the hinterlands. Please, Prime Minister, take an interest in this.

I would like the Leader of the Opposition to expunge her statement on page 6 that says, “Governance related legislation: To ensure that we strengthen the foundation and build the pillars of our democracy. It will be a shame if Government and the Tenth Parliament conspired to block early political and electoral reforms as the 9th Parliament did.” I took exception because it is not true.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we make conclusions tomorrow, I will be giving information to that effect. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Yes, Madam Speaker. I am saying that I will let you understand the background to that information and I will be tabling –

THE SPEAKER: Did this House block early political reforms?

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, that is what I am saying, that I will bring the Hansard and the documents that brought the genesis of that statement tomorrow as we conclude the issue.

I will first bring in the issue and then possibly the Leader of Government Business can conclude. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether you should be assisted to improve your statement. You should have said it straight away because what you have said here is not true. I am the head of this institution; we did not block early reforms. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, please, bear with me because tomorrow –

THE SPEAKER: Can you justify?  What is it that we blocked? That is what I want to hear.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: There are documents that I would like to lay on the Table, substantiating the issue and I can only do that if I am given time tomorrow and I am ready to do it.

Madam Speaker, you said that I have to expunge the statement unless I prove. I would like to bring those documents tomorrow that are proving the statement and then, we decide whether we expunge or not, depending on the documents that I will have laid on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: No. Did the reforms come here and this House blocked them? This is what you have said. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: They came to a parliamentary committee and the committee is a committee of this House.

THE SPEAKER: Then you should have said it was the committee.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, but it is of this Parliament. It is doing work on behalf of Parliament and that is why I am saying –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition –

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I want you to say that in the First Session, reform proposals were brought here and this House declined to consider them or in the Second Session or in the Third Session; that is what I want to hear.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, the proposals were laid before a parliamentary committee by the hon. Abdu Katuntu and hon. Tashobya did even report to this Parliament as the then Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to say he received these documents but that they sat with Government and they agreed with the committee. The practice is that committees work on behalf of Parliament and if Government and the committee sit to agree on what to bring before Parliament, if it is not in the interest of the people, then it will have been that the Parliament has actually worked on the matter through the parliamentary committee.
That is why I am requesting you to just give me tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable member, did you bring a Bill here which the Speaker declined to put on the Order Paper? That is what I want to hear. Did you bring a Bill here in the First, Second, Third or Fourth Session?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, time is very important. I do recollect that there were proposals that were discussed by different parties and contributions were made. Unfortunately, the statement which was read on the Floor of Parliament as a response to the State of the Nation Address put the statement the way it was put because this implies that actually the proposal was brought to Parliament.

I think this an unfortunate thing; the proposal was not brought to Parliament; it had not yet reached Parliament. That is where probably the Leader of Opposition has to remove that statement because it did not come to Parliament and then, we will be able to amend and substantiate. (Applause) If you say it was brought to Parliament, then we may be not catching up with the spirit. The truth is, this Parliament did receive some documents and I remember even the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker made comment to that effect. Unfortunately, this House as plenary of Parliament never received the document and I think this is where the Speaker is pained.  At that point, may be the Leader of the Opposition could lay those relevant documents she is talking about.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you the hon. Ogwal for the information and actually, I have said it clearly that even hon. Tashobya and the Deputy Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah was in the Chair. The hon. Tashobya did mention clearly that there are documents that hon. Katuntu brought and presented a minority report and during that time hon. Tashobya made it clear that they sat with Government and agreed that these issues would be considered later. That is why we said that at that time there was a collusion. Possibly what we can say -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I want you to understand what you wrote. You said, “…conspired to block early political and electoral reforms”. Did this House block early reforms? What you are talking about came at the tail end and I am on record at every State of the Nation Address, I was asking the Government when they are bringing the reforms. The Hansard is clear; this is what you said; that this House blocked early political reforms. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I can say that the documents were given to a committee of Parliament. The committee does work on behalf of Parliament but these documents did not find their way on the Floor of the House. The chair of the committee did accept that these documents were brought and were discussed between the committee and the Parliament.

But I want to say that because the documents did not appear on the Floor of the House; we ask that this particular statement, possibly of that conspiracy be withdrawn with a prayer that these documents be allowed to surface in future to be part of documents of this House. I concede to expunging the statement talking about the conspiracy. (Applause) But I will also be allowed at an opportune time to present these documents so that you can see that a chairperson of this committee actually accepted that some documents were handed to him. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that that part which I have read be expunged.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We conclude the debate tomorrow.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPROVE THE CHARTER  OF FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY

5.14
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I stand here to move a motion for a resolution of this august House to approve the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. Under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I move as follows: 

“WHEREAS section 5 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides that the minister shall, not later than three months after the First Sitting of Parliament after a general election, submit to Parliament for approval the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility;

WHEREAS the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility shall provide a statement indicating the measureable objectives for the fiscal policy for a period of not less than the next three financial years, which shall be consistent with the fiscal policy, an explanation of the methodology to be used to measure the performance of Government against the fiscal policy objectives, a list of the sources of data to be used to report developments against the fiscal objectives,  a demonstration of how the fiscal objectives are consistent with the principles set out in Section 4 of the Public Finance Management Act using the macroeconomic and fiscal data assumptions and projections provided in economic and fiscal update;

AND WHEREAS under Section 5(2) of the Public Finance Management Act  the minister is mandated to publish the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility not later than one month after approval by Parliament or such a time as may be determined by Parliament;

AND AWARE that under Section 5(5) of the Public Finance Management Act Parliament is mandated to examine the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility with a view to approve the same;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament, in accordance with Section 5(5) Public Finance Management Act examines the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility hereto attached and does approve it.” I beg to move, Madam Speaker. I also take this opportunity to lay before Parliament a copy of the charter.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. It will be sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to study and give us a report.  It was seconded - even by hon. Ogwal? I know she has been demanding for it. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE GOVERNMENT TO DEVELOP A POLICY ON COMPREHENSIVE SEXUALITY EDUCATION IN UGANDA

5.18
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Please allow me to make an amendment to this to read as follows: “Motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to withdraw a policy on comprehensive sexuality education in Uganda.” (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Let them not heckle you; when we are finalising the text at the end, we shall vote on all of those.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I present to you the motion under Rule 50(k) of the Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS Article 34(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995 provides that a child is entitled to basic education, which shall be the responsibility of the state and the parents of the child;

AND WHEREAS Section 4(1) of Education (Pre-Primary, Primary and Post-Primary) Act, 2008 provides that the provisions of education and training to the child shall be a joint responsibility of the state, parents or guardians and other stakeholders;

AND WHEREAS Section 5(1) of Education (Pre-Primary, Primary and Post-Primary) Act, 2008 provides that Government through its relevant agencies shall be responsible for the provision of learning and instructional materials, structural development, setting policy for all matters concerning education and training; provide and control national curriculum;

AND WHEREAS Section 5(2)(g) of Education (Pre-Primary, Primary and Post-Primary) Act, 2008 provides that the responsibilities of the parent and guardians shall include participating in the development and review of the curriculum;

NOTING THAT the Ministry of Education introduced in Ugandan schools and institutions of learning a comprehensive sexuality education programme;

AWARE THAT the Ministry of Education does not have any policy or guidelines and framework on sexuality education;

FURTHER AWARE THAT comprehensive sexuality education emphasises the right of a child to do abortion, contraception and homosexuality;

COGNIZANT THAT the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XXIV of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda directs the state to promote and preserve our cultural values and practices, which enhance the dignity and wellbeing of Ugandans;

FURTHER COGNIZANT THAT Uganda is a God-fearing nation with morals and virtues of African setting;

APPRECIATING THAT comprehensive sexuality education lacks defined approaches to guide our children at their tender age so as to uphold our values and religious teachings;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by the Parliament of Uganda duly convened and sitting today that: 

The Ministry of Education and Sports halts dissemination of comprehensive sexuality education training materials and conduct of such programme in any school in Uganda and withdraws the policy on comprehensive sexuality education currently being used.” Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Yes, it is seconded by many Members. Go ahead with the justification.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I speak to this motion, allow me to lay on the Table a document that reads: “Teaching Book: A Reading Strategy for Teachers and Students to Familiarise themselves with ‘The Children are Free. Re-examining the Biblical Evidence on Same-Sex Relationship’ by Rev. Jeff Miner and Rev. John Tyler. Written by Rev. Stephen Parelli; June 2015 in New York; For Biblical Study Use in Uganda.” I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, it is the duty of parents and the state to provide the basic education as the Constitution mandates. The State has the duty to analyse and provide learning and instructional materials that are not harmful to the children and to the future of our country as directed by the Constitution. It is my pride, as a mother, to protect, conserve and cherish our culture and customs.

In Africa, we have ways of educating our children in matters relating to sex without compromising our values. 

I want to the give an example of the Buganda Kingdom through the Queen Nabagereka initiative called “Ekisakaate” (Laughter) During holidays, young girls and boys assemble in a particular school where they are taught to be responsible and disciplined citizens. They are also taught their roles as future mothers and fathers of this country.

Likewise, in other societies of Uganda, we also have the same in the Luo communities. Unfortunately, it has come to my understanding that the donors developed this so-called comprehensive sexuality education programme together with the ministry; and even the teaching materials were developed without consulting Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, Parliament enacted the Education Act that required parents to participate in developing the curriculum for schools. I am well informed that parents in Uganda have never been consulted about this and the Ministry of Education and Sports does not have any policy in place to that effect. 

Honourable members, we are still fighting the vice of teachers defiling our children in schools and it is worrying that we have this come up again. 

Just before I went to talk to the Speaker about this motion, I saw what was being circulated on the WhatsApp messages concerning this problem. It is also a big concern to most of the citizens out there because in the name of “comprehensive sexuality education” children are being taught things they are not supposed to learn. They are told that it is okay for them to masturbate. 

Children are also told that it is okay for a girl of 10 years to start taking contraceptives, a child as young as five years to be enrolled and to start or to be engaged in sexual activities. This is what is going on. 

That is why I urge all the Members here to be mindful of our children. Let us think about our children, even as we debate this motion. Let us support this motion with one heart putting into mind that we have children, who are being indoctrinated using “comprehensive sexuality education”. I also thank you, Madam Speaker, because I know you are going to support this motion.  I beg to move. (Applause)  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, before hon. Hellen Asamo comes, I would like to welcome children from Hoima Town Model Nursery and Primary School of Hoima Municipality. Please, stand up. You are welcome. They are represented by hon. Bategeka Nkooto and hon. Tophace Kaahwa. (Applause)

5.30
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons With Disabilities): Madam Speaker, I support the motion to urge Government to withdraw the policy on comprehensive sexuality education. (Applause)

We are aware that 70 per cent of the population in Uganda includes young people. With the introduction of sexuality education, our nation is going to be flooded with cultures, which have never existed in our country. 

Madam Speaker, introducing a child of 10 years to sexual education is wrong. Those are pupils of primary five, who are very tender. To make matters worse, this claim is supported by giving them contraceptives - that is why we have laws on defilement. We are introducing our children into terrible systems. Thereafter, we shall legalise abortion and our children will be taken for abortion.

Madam Speaker, we need to support our culture and the customs that preserve us. We are going to lose a generation of young people, who are going to begin practicing homeseuality. 

This Parliament passed a law on homosexuality. A few of us walked to court and said that we wanted the law thrown out. Hon. Ssebaggala then, collected our signatures to avert this claim. Madam Speaker, I pray that we resurrect that motion and ensure that the Homosexuality Bill is handled. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, there are books that have been distributed to schools. I have just been talking to the chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports and she told me she has already withdrawn two boxes from one of the ministry officials -(Interruption) - It seems the chairperson of the committee wants to give me information. 

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not the chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports but I am a Member. 

I just wanted to give information, Madam Speaker. Over the weekend, certain information circulated on social media about Green Hill Academy.  After hearing about it, on Monday 15th this week, the committee went there and interfaced with the management of the school. 

At first, they were a bit sceptical but with time, they apologised and told us that they had actually bought readers. They had not bothered to scrutinise the information in those books but took the material to the library. 

Pupils ranging from primary four to primary seven got those books and read them. However, one parent got concerned when the book was brought home. The school was alerted by the concerned parent and then they had to go to the library and scrutinise all the books they had got. 

We got over 200 books; one of them, which the parent had intercepted was, “Girls in Love.” Much as they claimed to have taken them to the library this year, the book had become so old in that you could tell it had been read by over 30 children. We, therefore, had to convince them that we did not want these books to be circulated and we came with them as evidence. 

Madam Speaker, we have a problem and it is only this Parliament that can save the situation. That is the information I wanted to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Asamo, I just wanted also to give information that when we were in the Seventh Parliament, the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) faced a similar scenario. We had gone for a meeting in Denmark and we were given books for our country. As we were browsing through them, we discovered that they were books on homosexuality. So, we came back here, raised hell and the books were withdrawn. That means that our sieving system does not exist, because these are now official books from the ministry. 

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the honourable member because she has now given us detailed information. It shows that inspection of schools is very poor; the inspectors just go to schools, sit on a desk, talk with the headmaster and walk away. Whatever happens there is none of their business.

Madam Speaker, when you go to the village schools, you find children falling in love and getting pregnant at a very high rate. At break time, you find them in the bushes; I have evidence of some schools, where children were engaged in sexual behaviours and when the head teacher called them, they claimed to be in love at that tender age. 

While we were growing up, we had senior women teachers. They were able to train girls about the growth of their bodies. They prepared them to see how they can get into the future; how to cook and how to manage menstrual hygiene but nowadays, there is nobody in charge. I remember there was some small allowance we used to give to the senior women teachers but now in Uganda, that is not there and children are finding their level discovering by themselves -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The seconder, you have three minutes. 

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, the role of the parents; we parents have left the children to the TVs and the social media. Last week, one of my girls showed me that video you are talking about – you know I am not on Face book. However, when I looked at it, two children; girls were telling themselves how to fall in love and it was running on the system.

You can imagine, our children have gone to this system. In other countries, people control information that goes to the young people. In Uganda, ours is very open. You find them learning things, when you talk as a parent; the child is already ahead of you in what you are talking about. How come that we as parents, we do not want to curb this? 

The children have been left to the mercy of anybody. Madam Speaker, as I support this motion, I would like to call upon the Ministry of Education to please stop and ensure that the young generation of Uganda is not left to rot. Children are dying of pain and they die quietly yet there is no disease.  And I think, as there is more sexuality education that has been brought, if we withdraw the policy, we need to increase on the inspection. We may withdraw but the practice will continue. I pray, Madam Speaker, that we increase on inspection to establish whether these things are happening. We also need to come in with more measures that can support the children and the teachers.

The code of conduct for the teachers is no longer there. They walk out and they go to classes and they are the first people who spoil the children. They even call them and say to them that do not the two of you want to love each other? They promote things which are not good. This is because they aim at getting some little money from it. Everything has become extinct. 

It is, therefore, my prayer that we try to bring the institution of the senior women teachers who are firm and are able to know what they were teaching. I learnt how to cook, sweep and make a bed when I was in school. All this is learnt in Home Economics/Management as a subject in school.

However, our children these days have been left “to whom it may concern”. I, therefore, support this motion and I would like to beg the House that we support it and have this policy withdrawn, and I equally would like to encourage that the inspection role of the Ministry of Education and Sports and all concerned leaders, take a step. I thank you.

5.40
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to amicably support the motion moved by the honourable member. There is a big difference between sexuality education and indoctrination. It is even a very big mistake for anybody to call this sexuality education.

Somebody out there would like to indoctrinate our children and turn them into adults before they are. This is where we as Parliament, must actually earn our pay. This is not only to urge Government but to follow up to ensure that Government follows up this matter and withdraws whatever that is there, on the basis of this abuse.

Sexuality per se ordinarily relates to orienting people on their relation and responsibilities. As I know it, these people are not actually carrying out education on sexuality which would entail teaching young people gender relations and responsibilities, but they are teaching them sex education. The two are totally different. This is where this motion comes in handy and I would like to invite the House to even move a step further and stop this perversion.

Article 34 of our Constitution in particular, Article 34 (4) talks about the rights of children, whereas Article 30 talks about the right to education, it does not envisage the right to any education; but education that is not harmful and not dangerous to the mental, spiritual and moral growth of children. I believe this is the spirit of the Constitution in relation to the right to education.

The danger abound is that, we are going to experience child to child sex and of course, adventure sex among children and adults. When children are prompted – the brain of a child is like a black sheet of paper. Whatever you write on it becomes indelible. 

We are going to see children demanding for sex from adults in their community because somebody informed that it works and is pleased. This is the biggest danger – 

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute more hon. Mpuuga to wind up your submission.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a trade to this orientation. It has started from the elite schools and our children in the poverty stricken areas admire what the children in the elite schools are doing. They believe that it is the right thing and before we know it, they will copy it and perfect it. I am worried about our children in the poverty stricken environment. Even parents here who can afford pay TV, are you aware that even cartoon channels have sexual issues in them? Have you taken care? So, Madam Speaker, I would like to move the House to second and support this motion. Just maybe we could save whatever that remains of our children.  I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Aza comes to the Floor, recently, when I went for a meeting at the Pan African Parliament, I was informed that DSTV in South Africa had started airing cartoons on homosexuality. There was then a public outcry and they removed them. However, if nobody had seen that, they would have continued being aired. I hope our ICT Minister knows what is happening.

MR AZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I qualified as a teacher in 1989 and I taught up to 2010. As a teacher, what I know is that in a subject called Biology, we have a whole topic called Reproduction, where everything about sexuality is talked about.

Secondly, in Christian Religion Education (CRE), we also have a topic on sexuality, both at O’Level and A’level that is Sex and Family Life. So, the clarification I would like to seek from the movers of this motion is that, is there any difference between what they are trying to move and what is being taught in the classrooms? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.47
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion, which is to remove the comprehensive policy on sexuality. It is written somewhere in the Bible but I cannot remember the chapter and the verses, that if a person misleads a child to commit a crime, they should tie a big stone on that person and be rolled into the ocean to be drowned there forever, never to come back and mislead our children again. (Applause)

Children are very innocent; they do not know anything about sex, they even do not feel anything for sex at all until the age of may be 10 to 12 years of age, and for the girl, I think 14 when she is starting her menstrual periods, and it is then when the boy is reaching adolescence or puberty. That is when they begin feeling elements of sexuality.

That would be the time when we can inform them about what is happening to them, and the dangers of having sex with either opposite sex or similar sex.

In our culture, sexuality is guided by taboos. They say if you are a girl and commit fornication, your brother or father will die. As a result, the girls are protected and the boys too.

However, today, when they bring sexuality to the innocent children - I think this a plan by some people elsewhere to ruin our country. When you want to spoil a country, start with the children by changing their mentality so that they think whatever they are doing is the right thing and yet in the end it is wrong.

They brought AIDS, we fought it, and now we know how to treat our selves. Now they are bringing sex early to our children. I know these people want to bring homosexuality in Uganda. They want to start with our children so that they grow up knowing that homosexuality is good. That is the beginning and they use a lot of money.

I would like to ask our Ministry of Education and Sports; how can you agree to such a policy in schools? Is it you the Ministry of Education that participated in developing this policy? Even if you are the ones who developed this policy, I thought when you are developing the policy you do many consultations. You go everywhere right to the villages?

5.51
MR NACO TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to withdrawal a policy of comprehensive sexuality education in Uganda. 

We are discussing something new in our society. This is a culture. If we try to bring these issues into our society just because some people have brought it as way of making our children adopt their behaviours, we must be careful.

There is a hidden agenda about this. When I read about the definition of a comprehensive sexuality education, when you do not go deep to reason you may think it is right. However, reflecting on the hidden agenda, you will find that they will not only educate them, they say that it is good because it will teach the children to abstain from sex or teach them about all the good aspects but the reality is that there is a hidden agenda in that.

The hidden agenda is by the homosexuals who have a lot of money and want to confuse our society. The best thing for us is to do away with it –(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I think we have a problem in this country. I would like to give information that before this session of Parliament, some civil societies were calling some Members and lobbying that we reject this motion. They were blackmailing that whoever will speak for this motion, there are repercussions as they process their visas to foreign countries. That it is safer for us not to debate this motion.

MR NACO TERENCE ACHIA: That is why I exactly mentioned that there must be a hidden agenda in this motion. You know, as cultures develop, I have just recently learnt that in some countries, there is a culture where children are taught sex as a culture and the whole society appreciates. That is a different country.

However, trying to bring this culture to Ugandan classes, we should reject this practice. Thank you.

5.54
COL FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very critical that the Minister of Education clarifies to us whether indeed such a project exists before we begin supporting the motion or opposing it. However, personally, I would support the withdrawal of such a programme if it existed.

Secondly, what are we doing about parents who are neglecting their children? One Member has indeed rightly pointed out that we have left the children to the televisions. However, what is the child in primary or O’level doing with a telephone that has internet? What education is this child getting from this telephone?

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, we need to check some of the programmes on televisions that are teaching sex -(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this will guide the Members so that we give a focused debate. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. 

If you look at the motion itself, on page 2, you will see that, “Aware that the Minister of Education does not have any policy or guidance on framework.” I want this one to be used to clarify what is called a policy.

The Ministry of Education does not have a policy so that when we are debating, we debate on guidelines on programmes being brought in by foreigners not a policy. Somebody brought in an example of Green Hill Academy and the book by certain reverend -(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, let me finish.

When the ministry develops a policy, Cabinet passes it. As far as I am concerned with my experience, the Ministry of Education has no policy on sexuality. I want this one to be clear so that when we are debating, much as I agree with the mover of the motion and I do not support sexuality-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how did those books get into the schools? That is what you should explain to the country.

MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, when I come to conclude, I will even give the difference between private schools and government schools. 

COL KULAYIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Therefore, it is incumbent upon us as leaders and parents in this country that must take interest into the growing up of our children. It is evident, that you just visit schools during parents’ meeting and see how many have abandoned their responsibilities.

I would suggest that this House takes keen interest in the absence of fathers from the socialization of their children. We do not only talk about schools and ignore what is being done in the homes. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.58
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the mover of the motion, hon. Lucy Akello, for thinking hard and bringing this to the Floor of Parliament.

However, I would like us to start with the text that reads, “A motion for a Resolution of Parliament to urge Government to develop a policy on comprehensive sexuality –“

THE SPEAKER: No, it has been amended.

MS AMONGIN: Okay, if it has been amended then I am okay with it because the word “sexuality” was already not in my favour because I believe that sex education as a concept is okay.

In Uganda today, Madam Speaker, you are aware of an institution in charge of developing the curricular, the National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC). If schools access these books on sexuality, it is going to be very bad for us. 

There is a proverb which says thus: “You cannot teach an old dog new tricks.” It means that if one wants to teach anything to a dog for it to be perfect, they have to start when the dog is still young.

Madam Speaker, you also realise that we have the African Charter on Children. This charter takes into consideration the values of Africans and now that Uganda is a member of the African Union and a signatory to this charter, it would be very wrong if today the Parliament of Uganda accepted these things to go on in our schools because I think that they know that we are very conscious about our African values. So, as a country we cannot justify the interests of the other world. The point is that they are now trying to come to Uganda and to all the other African countries through other means.

Madam Speaker, I believe that today our children are exposed enough. I am actually bitter because I have very wonderful kids in Green Hill Academy and I am thinking what next, if they got a book with a title, “Girls in love.” I am imagining my girl tomorrow growing up in the future and she starts looking at the other girl as a girlfriend. That will be wrong. 

Madam Speaker, whereas the minister has given a clarification that there is no policy –(Member timed out.)

6.00
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and wish to make my submission. 

Madam Speaker, God indeed loves this country because what has happened today is going to help us put an end to something that was well planned and being well executed, amongst our societies.

Honourable members, what the honourable colleague has talked about is not just happening out of the blue. It is a well-planned global thing. We know of companies in this country that are promoting what you would call “family planning.” But the truth of the matter is that these companies are agencies of some pharmaceutical companies out there.

For these pharmaceutical companies to be in business, they have to create consumers for their services or/and products, and there is no any other way for them to keep in business than to initiate young people into these acts.

Madam Speaker, Government has to begin tightening on some of the liberties or avenues that have been given to people to do business. We have these so-called groups of “born again” all over this country. Some of them have established schools and they have established exchange programmes. We have seen embassies bringing here what they call Peace Corps and they are deployed in our schools. What do they teach to the children in our schools?

The minister has just said here that there is a difference between Government schools and private schools. Do private schools teach a different curriculum? Do they have a different syllabus? It is in most of these private schools that our children are being initiated into these extreme sexuality cases. So, this motion has opened our eyes and we need to comprehensively come out to look at the education sector; right from nursery up to our universities. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.03
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Lucy Akello for having brought this very important motion. If you look at the statement, it says that sexuality education emphasises the right to do abortion, contraception and homosexuality and such a statement is so dangerous.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. I remember in the Ninth Parliament you presented the views of Ugandans very well to the outside countries. You boldly told the world that in Uganda, we do not support homosexuality. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, as one of my colleagues said, this is a calculated move. They are coming to target our young generation. They would like to intoxicate them when they are still young so that they grow up with that mentality.

Right now when you see what is going on in the schools, you realise that some of our parents are also supposed to be blamed. They are buying smartphones for these children. Children now can download movies from the internet when in classrooms. I really feel that as we pass this motion, we need to move a step ahead to ban the school going children from using smart mobile phones because they are also spoiling such children. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, let us be very firm and pass this motion. We need to support it and we should not think of any repercussions as one of my colleagues said. We are ready to defend the rights and the values of Ugandans. Thank you, so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, St Mary’s College Kisubi has succeeded in enforcing the ban on students’ telephones; they just use a call box not phones. Okay, hon. Akena, but only two minutes.

6.06
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the motion although there is an area where I think we also need to look into the future.

We are currently in the information age. When we were growing up access to information, good and bad, was not as readily available like it is in this generation. I have children who are doing an international syllabus and for them to be able to do their homework, they require internet. One is doing ICT and a lot of the homework requires research and internet. So, this whole issue of trying to keep our children out of the information age is not right. 

Access to internet by children is to equip them so that they can make the right decisions. We only need to have mechanisms in place to restrict the negative sites, but we cannot run away from the information age. 
Where we are today, our children need to be very tech-savvy to play a positive role in the global economy. We are not going to remain in an economy, which is not going to bring Information and Communication Technology (ICT) at the centre. 

Therefore, in this difficult issue, I am more worried about the internet than even the pay TV. Because of internet, you have a vast array of information and a lot of it is negative. How are we going to equip our children to avoid the negative sites? Despite blocking off those sites, we really need to instil in them a moral value and objective or purpose in life which goes over and beyond the negative aspects which they are going to come across. So, it is really a challenge.

On the issue of Greenhill Academy, I have a child there and I checked with the school establishment. Some of what was circulated on social media is not what was in the Greenhill library. They were extra things put on social media. If you speak to the Director of the school, Mrs Maraka –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, whether it was as small as the head of a fly, as long as it is not acceptable in our society, we are not going to condone it. (Applause) The devil is not going to come like the devil we think withholds - they begin small. If you are going to allow certain things on the basis that they are innocent, that is an entry point. 

Therefore, is the honourable member in order to say that because some of the things circulating were wrong we are, therefore, not right to debate this motion yet we have evidence that it was retrieved from that same school?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the activities are going on not just on social media but everywhere else. Therefore, Members are well informed on this.

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I would like to put it on record that I am a parent of the school in question – Greenhill Academy in Buwaate. I can say that the school management actually wrote letters, apologising to us parents; I received a copy of the letter. 

Therefore, for the Member to even come here and say, “You know, what is on social media and what -” I am speaking as a parent who received a written apology from the school administration saying, “These materials were there and we apologise and it will never happen again.” 

Therefore, we don’t have to cover things under the carpet. There is a lot happening that as parents and Ugandans who want to bring up children with high moral calibre, should rise up to the occasion and defend this. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR AKENA: Madam Speaker, I was in no way condoning what happened in Greenhill. I received the same letter, which is referred to. That letter gives greater clarity on what was found in the library. That is the only point I was emphasising. 

I support the idea that our moral values must be protected and our children must be protected. I am not trying to deviate from that. The only caution I was raising is that we are in the information age and we cannot keep our children out of the information age. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.11
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, this subject is a very pertinent matter. All that has been raised on the Floor of Parliament regarding this matter is an issue for which we must stand very bold. 

In Uganda, to mention, we have a culture. Today, if we want to do something in another country, we must protect our interest in that country. The three key issues we must protect abroad are our culture, security and the economy. If we do not protect our culture here at home then we are finished. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I am not going to stand here and leave an opening. What we are going through, as a country is, arising because we have not been able to control the openings where all these are coming from. How do we control these openings? It is through legislation. We must legislate and deal with enforcement of the laws. That is an area where we have performed very poorly as a country; the enforcement of our laws.

In the past when churches used to be the controllers of schools, you could not see this nonsense in any school all over the country. There was no problem like this. However, when church foundations were put aside, we saw these problems coming up. In the Arab world they censor information. I think it is done through the Sharia law; you cannot access social media anyhow unless it is vetted.

Madam Speaker, I call upon this Parliament to legislate very strong laws and also devise very strong enforcement measures of these laws in this country. That way we will come out of these problems. 

Madam Speaker, the issues that have been raised - people are here saying that when we talk about this, there are some Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) out there - it is true that in this country there are individuals who are beneficiaries of what we are going through as problems; they are there except that they do not want to come out to –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, I recall that not too long ago in this country, there was a time the political temperatures were very high and Government was able to shut down social media. It, therefore, makes me believe that we are able to control what comes into this country through social media or through whatever electronic means. And so I do not see why we cannot regulate what is spoiling our children. The information I bring to you is that the Government has capacity because they shut down social media and blocked all mobile phones and everything when it suited them.

MR OCHEN: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, it is on those grounds that the Minister in charge of Ethics and Integrity has to stand on his feet on this matter. If things go wrong in the country, he is responsible. This is because by law he is the one mandated to ensure that we are protected, together with our children. Failure to do that, it would be simple for us on this side of the House to say that he relinquishes the office for the sake of this country.

Madam Speaker, as I wind up I would like to call upon all Members of Parliament - if this country goes astray, we will be the ones who will have failed as Parliament of Uganda; don’t blame anybody. (Applause) If the Executive fails to achieve in the area of implementation, it will be us who will have failed to check the Executive. Right now, for whatever is being talked about here, we are responsible. Non-governmental organisations and other institutions are getting all these and it is us to amend the legislation and/or Acts of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, for how long can we continue like this? You represented us when you went abroad; you spoke very powerfully. When you came back we all said, why don’t you occupy that chair for speakership? (Laughter) It was because you stood very firm on this matter. 

Madam Speaker, we mean it. Sometimes it is very difficult for people to stand with the truth. Even today in the churches, there has been a problem -(Member timed out.)

6.17
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Madam Speaker, Proverbs 22:6 says thus, “Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it.” That is a Biblical principle that many of the families of Uganda leave with. I believe that as a country, if we miss this opportunity in the next 20 years, we will be looking back and seeing our children reflecting a very different image which we do not have as their parents.

Madam Speaker, I happen to be one of those parents who were approached by another parent from Green Hill Academy to air this issue out. This particular parent experienced the actual act we have been talking about in the House. This parent happened to find that book inside the child’s bag accidentally. The parent was just being concerned about checking the child’s books after the child was home, only to find a book that talked about gays. 

The book was teaching children about the positivity of being a gay, which made the parent get concerned. They asked the child, why the child had such a book in their bag.  The child said such books were in their school library and that their teachers had taught them those things.  

According to this parent, the child told them that teachers at their schools always taught them that it is cool to be gay; it is okay to have a gay friend; it is okay for you to love your male friends; and that it is okay for you to love your female friends. 

Madam Speaker, these parents were certainly in shock. They went to the school crying. What did the school say?  Well, they had taken disciplinary action against the individual teacher; the headteacher just apologised. He informed the parents that this would not happen again in the school.

Madam Speaker, this is not just an isolated occurrence in these schools in Kampala. There have been many similar complaints from several schools. This is a very serious matter, which largely affects private schools. 

We, Members of Parliament, take our children in these schools in Kampala; we are too busy travelling in and out. Our children come home but we do not check to find out what they are learning.  This is very perturbing and I would like to thank the honourable member for tabling this motion. 

At the beginning when compressive sexuality education was brought, it looked very enticing, good, and urgent. However, underneath this policy, there are other things that are happening. 

Madam Speaker, I challenge the Minister of Education and Sports and the Minister of State for Ethics and Integrity to make an impromptu visit to these schools occasionally to look through what they are doing in their libraries and ask the parents. I am willing to bring the parents who complained to me about the incidents at Green Hill Academy to Parliament.

Madam Speaker, if we do not deal with this issue, our country will lose a whole generation. You know what it means to lose a whole generation. I concur with the other Members of Parliament that as a country, it is our right to shape our destiny –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not delude yourself that this only happens in private schools; it is in all the schools. The programme of this people was to start from the church-founded schools so that they could test the church foundation; it is everywhere. I recently showed this book to some young people in my office and everyone who saw it said, “By the way, I saw this long ago in our schools.” So, do not delude yourselves that it is only in private schools. 

6.22
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi West County, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me a chance. I also would like to thank you for the information you have just given. I have been a member of a district council, and we had raised this issue too though we eventually lost it.
 
Madam Speaker, there was a Minister of Education and Sports in our history in the names of hon. Namirembe Bitamazire. I think we need to recognise her efforts because she was very exemplary. She would go anywhere, and say “Pedagogy, Pedagogy” and people would call her “Pedagogy.”

The problem we have is that we have people who have responsibilities and who are there to defend what they do not know. It is true that terrorism has failed and that is why these people are using another method to terrorize Africans. I read a book titled “The Wretched of the Earth” by Fantz Fanon an Algerian. When these people fail to affect you physically, they invent something that will affect you slowly and you end up dying.  

Madam Speaker, we need to appreciate that the security, economy and culture of Africa is at weigh. When you look at the way these people are being taught in schools, they are targeting the future generation such that –(Member timed out.)

MR LUGOLOOBI:  Madam Speaker, we all seem to be talking the same language and we might be running out of time to pronounce ourselves on the actions to take. I thought that at this particular time, we focus on the actions we need the Government to take on this particular matter. (Applause) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Focus on your prayers. What do you want the Government to do?

6.25
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Aware of what has been discussed now, I would like to make some proposals.

There is nothing that can come into this country without the authors. We have the authors already there. I propose that this issue be investigated and the authors be brought to Parliament to answer to our concerns because what we are talking now is about the future of our children. 

Madam Speaker, there is already a devil at work and we are sitting on a time bomb. Even the school in question should have its directors brought to Parliament to tell us where they got these books from? Who brought them to their school? We want to know this. Thank you for giving me this opportunity, Madam Speaker.

6.26
MS SPELLANZA BAGUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Lucy Akello, and as I support the motion, I would like to propose the following as the way forward.  

First of all, other countries have got systems of receiving anything that comes outside their country. Can we have our systems here streamlined so that what is not acceptable in this country does not come to our country? This is important we have a culture that is distinct from the cultures of other places.

Secondly, we have the National Curriculum Development Centre that stipulates what should be taught in schools and at what level. I do not see how we get materials from other places that is not acceptable to our own National Curriculum Development Centre and  is not part of what has be given to be taught in our schools at different levels. Can we have National Curriculum Development Centre do more than what they have been doing right now and interest themselves in what is being taught in our schools at different levels in this country?

Thirdly, we have a generation defiled here because whatever the Members have been telling us shows that our children have been defiled, given the materials that they have been exposed to. 

I am also proposing a rehabilitation programme in our schools in form of counselling for these children because of what has been made accessible to them yet they are not mature enough to handle such. That is my submission, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

6.27
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I too would like to support the motion and comprehensively associate with it because I consider this very timely. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the House - because I am intrigued by the phrasing “comprehensive.” Quickly, let me read for the House how Wikipedia defines the phrase “comprehensive” and thereafter will relate it to Section B of the resolution, which is asking the National Curriculum Development Centre to work with other stakeholders in developing the comprehensive policy on sex education. 

Wikipedia defines “Comprehensive Sex Education” as the instructions on issues relating to human sexuality including emotional relations and responsibilities, human sexual anatomy, sexual activity, sexual reproduction, age of consent, reproductive health, reproductive rights, safe sex, birth control and sex abstinence. Once you use the word “comprehensive” then you are going to introduce all these elements in what you are going to teach.

I have a particular problem with that phrasing because when you say “comprehensive” it means we are not teaching something around this, but now, we would like to expand it to include other aspects. This is a ploy to introduce other elements that will deal with same sex, abortion and all these other elements. 

In our resolution, why wouldn’t we leave this at as policy on sex education? Why do you want to call it a comprehensive something? Calling it comprehensive something gives a window for you to bring in the other aspects because you do not want to leave anything out? This will enable us to give some information, but not all information. I do not think the children in primary and immediate post-primary levels require all information regarding sex. So, I was -(Member timed out.)

6.30
CAPT. DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last year, we buried a girl in our place two days after graduating. She had acquired HIV from a teacher who was teaching them sex education in P5. Therefore, these are the issues we are trying to address and prevent. I get perturbed for the minister to come and stand before this House to say those are things done in private schools. 

Madam Speaker, I have two proposals. One, we have this challenge where our young girls are left with phones and they access Whatsapp messages that carry sex videos and pictures. During elections, Government closed the social media for just two days and it worked out. Other countries have done it, as one of the Members has put it. Can’t we also ban the social media so that we monitor the situation?

Secondly, we need not only to pass this motion but also to follow up on this matter with officials from the Ministry of Education and Sports responsible for the distribution of materials, as the honourable member from the committee put it. Thank you.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The discussions we are making here are for the few minutes. I have a feeling this matter needs detailed investigation. May, I therefore, propose that you put up a select committee to investigate this matter so that this country benefits from that detailed investigation?

6.33
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I would like to thank the mover of the motion too. I support the Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to withdraw any material regarding Comprehensive Sex Education from our schools.

Madam Speaker, hon. Baguma gave a recommendation that our department is possibly given enough muscle and teeth to ensure that whatever passes to Ugandans is first censored kind of. When we were passing the law on the interception of information, at some point, we were told that we were giving more power to Uganda Communications Commission to ensure it scrutinises the information transmitted to our people. By that time, the issue was about pornography and information that we thought would cause insecurity in our country.

When I look at the issues of DSTV, TV channels, Whatsapp and possibly, Facebook, I still wonder whether they do not fall under the ambit of Uganda Communications Commission. That is important to know so that this department of Government can help us track the kind of information that should be transmitted to our people.

I find it a little bit hard for people to even go ahead and blame the inspection programme of Government. It is because once the inspectors are given guidelines, they will go according to them. If the ministry developed guidelines and regulations for comprehensive sex education, even if those inspectors find teachers teaching issues to do with lesbianism, they would have no problem with it because it is the guideline of Government. As we discuss this issue, let us give Government the power to withdraw all the materials that regard comprehensive sex education. 

Also, Madam Speaker, if it is within our interest to save the population of Uganda and the young generation, I propose we reconsider the following animated channels for children on TV, which come with gay and bisexual characters. There is a cartoon channel which shows the following programmes: Clearance, Adventure Time, Courage: the Cowardly Dog. Also, there is a programme on Disney Channel called Gravity Fall; our children love Disney.

There is also another programme loved by our children called Nickelodeon. When you do not pay for DSTV - and some of the parents may not eat food in their homes - children will go on defiance. (Laughter) On Nickelodeon, there is a programme called the Legend of Korra. Those are programmes which come with issues to do with lesbians and homosexuality. 

There is also Hey Arnold and the Loud House. We also have this cartoon comedy programme for children on comedy central. There is a programme called South Park. There is a programme called Attack on the Titan, the Awesomes, sweet blue flowers and evolutionary girl, Mission new and king of the Hill. These are programmes our children are watching on television and we the parents still think that possibly we have controlled our children by not allowing them to move around but televisions are doing a disservice to us.

I would, therefore, like to call upon the communications commission and possibly the Ministry of ICT to ensure that these programmes that are intended to tarnish the future of the children of Uganda; that are intended to aid a population that will be of low moral caliber should be censored and we see what should be given to our children.

Madam Speaker, this motion was brought in good faith. I pray that we all support it and urge Government to withdraw any message, regulation and guideline that was in line with the education on comprehensive sexuality in our schools, whether Government or private. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much too. Before I invite the minister, there is something that is not working well. I remember, sometime back, a programme called thematic education was introduced in schools where people were taught in their languages. Then I asked, but where did it pass? It did not come to Parliament. The ministry just - may be this is also the same way that this has happened because we have never discussed some of these things.

Secondly, about three months ago, the presidents of Kenya, Uganda and the one of Botswana went to Nairobi to burn Ivory. They set fire to tons of Ivory. I would want to see the books set on fire here by the head of state. (Applause) After withdrawal, those books should be set on fire in public by the President of this country. (Applause)

6.40
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. To show that we are serious, one, you have suggested that we get all these books in this country and have them burnt. Secondly, these schools that are practicing this thing, for example, if they are private schools, what we must do is to withdraw the license to show that we are serious. If we are serious, we must do it. (Applause) If we relax, they will say it is okay. Thank you so much.

6.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you Madam Speaker. I rise to thank hon. Lucy Akello for moving the House to stand up for the future of our children. We appreciate this motion and the spirit of the motion. I only hope that before we conclude we will have some little adjustment to reflect what is on the ground.

Education is premised on two principles, for those who advance it: One is of freedom and another is tolerance. They exploit the freedom. They want to teach our children to be free to do anything including evil. 

The other one is tolerance. They use tolerance because they know you cannot change what you tolerate. They are the two principles they continue using.

In the western world, like in America, they have worked on this for over 40 years until the Supreme Court recently allowed some of these practices to flourish. Therefore, we are very grateful that this motion is coming in to build on the work that previous parliaments have been doing. We continue to move around this wall. Maybe one day it will come down.

Madam Speaker, you remember that we passed in this House the UCC Act and in that law we moved that the UCC should monitor all the electronic content that we consume. 

Therefore, in addition to this motion, we hope that the minister of ICT will come on the Floor of this House and explain what is happening, in terms of monitoring because the law provides for that.

In addition to that I am happy that the Leader of the Opposition has raised these issues especially on the cartoon. I would like to encourage parents also to monitor what children are watching. Despite the fact that you have busy schedules, please do monitor what is happening. This has been going on for a long time in Uganda. I am happy that the Tenth Parliament is moving to make sure we stop this. 

I urge the Minister of Education and Sports to move a suggestion to amend the motion, so that it can have a language that demands actions from us. However, I also would like to say that I know the Minister of Education and Sports has started moving to ensure that we have a curriculum that is appropriate for our country; that supports our culture. I further know that the Tenth Parliament will be counted among those parliaments that stood up for the future of our children. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Before the ministers come up, I would like to propose that the channels, which honourable Leader of the Opposition has mentioned should be listed and issued to all the Members of this House so that they take note of those channels in their homes because they were many. Clerk, do that to pass the message through our system.

6.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to join the colleagues in thanking hon. Lucy Akello for moving this important motion. 

This motion has reminded me of something we handled in the Eighth Parliament. When we talked about lesbianism and gays at the time, some people thought these were practices for people living outside but not in Uganda. Today, if one sounded a bell at City Square calling them come without being covered, they can fill the place. I think the Tenth Parliament is saying we should not reach that level.

Madam Speaker, I do agree with prayers and I would like to agree with my colleague, the mover of the motion. To show that the Ministry of Education and Sports is in support of what you are saying and we are tirelessly going to work together on the same, I would suggest that we adjust the motion a bit so that it reads thus “A motion for the resolution of Parliament to urge Government to ban comprehensive sexuality education materials and unwanted materials of that nature.”

Madam Speaker, I would like to promise that within two weeks, the Ministry of Education and Sports will come here with a statement to show you the steps it has taken in as far as this ‘cancer’ is concerned. 

We were already in the process because I am aware that NCDC was trying to pilot the process, and that some schools have been highlighted on what they are doing - the way you are getting information of the existence of gays and what have you.

However, we still wanted to see how best we can handle this issue. Now that the motion has come, we would like to work as a team. Indeed this is not a matter of Parliament alone but also to call upon the society, parents and all stakeholders -you have heard the Leader of the Opposition giving us the channels and that is the responsibility of the parents. It is a tricky issue. You may stop a child from the sitting room watching television but the children can put the television programs on their laptops.

And that is why I am saying we need a comprehensive approach on this. You may say I do not want the television set in the sitting room to show this and that but in their bedroom, some of you have allowed them to have their private television sets. So it is something that we all need to handle together in order to save the future of our country. We are mindful about our norms and cultures and we cannot accept them to be compromised.

I liked the approach of one of our colleagues who contributed. Our colleagues are very tricky because they use various approaches. If they cannot penetrate you in an open space, they will use a system that you will discover 10 years later and that is one of them.

We have been talking about the gay and lesbian matters. These are not matters of yesterday. They started with street children who thought they were being helped with biscuits. In some cases, they were taking them out of the country yet it was difficult for some of us to acquire a US visa. But with a programme of that nature, it becomes easier.

 All of us need to work as a team. In this debate, there is nobody who is opposing. It is a matter of asking how best we can work as a team to achieve this. That is partly what I have said. I am going to explain to my colleagues at the education ministry. We shall have an urgent top management meeting with members from NCDC and come up with ways which we can explain to the House so as to achieve the purpose of this motion. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in your amendment, you removed the word “programme” and just concentrated on the word “materials.” Is that what you really intended? 

MR BAKABULINDI: I said that the teaching must stop; the material must be burnt immediately –(Interjection)– okay, withdrawn.

Madam Speaker, the reason we need to burn and/or withdraw – like you said we should show an example as was done in Kenya. The reason why I am using the word “relatively” and not the word “policy” is that much as it was being done as a programme –(Interjection)- okay, let me allow you to ask for clarification.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I would like to just clarify on a few things that we agreed to with the minister and hon. Bahati, also a minister.

We agreed that the motion will be amended to read thus: “A motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to ban comprehensive sexuality education in Uganda and all unwanted school materials.”

Two, we had other prayers focusing on:

    1. The Ministry of Education and Sports urgently bans the teaching, training, conduct of comprehensive sexuality education in Uganda.
    2. The Ministry of Education and Sports bans dissemination of comprehensive sexuality education materials to all schools in Uganda.
    3. That the Ministry of Education and Sports develops a policy to protect our children from exposure to all materials and knowledge that can be used to promote unwanted practices in our society.
    4. That a ceremony be organised and conducted by the President to burn all the collected materials that are unwanted in our schools. And
    5. The Uganda Communications Commission and the Ministry of Information and ICT come up with modalities to protect the exposure of our children to unwanted channels on our television stations.

THE SPEAKER: We do away with the word “modalities” because we made the law. They should implement the law - the Interception of Communications Act. 

MR MUWANGA KIVIMBI: No. 5 will read thus: “The Uganda Communications Commission and the Ministry of Information and ICT to implement and enforce the law of the Interception of Communications Act.” I beg to move. 

MR BAKABULUNDI: Madam Speaker, I do not have any problem with what he has adjusted since we discussed together. However, I have a problem with the part that brings in the President as if we are compelling him. Why don’t we say, “The representation of Government authorities” where the Speaker can even use her chair to request the President rather than putting it in the motion as if we are compelling?

THE SPEAKER: The President participated in the burning of ivory.

6.53
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER & MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): As you can see, I only bring you the wisdom of the youth. (Laughter)

During the struggle for the independence of India, Ghandi mobilised the masses, automatically, also the middle class had to come in. Now, one of them, whose father did not even allow him to be touched by an Indian ayah but hired an English ayah, was Nehru who studied at Eton and Harrow. 

However, when the urge for independence came up, he had to come into the fold and went to Ghandi to join the struggle. Ghandi told him that he would not be able to fight in the struggle against the British when he is supporting them. He told him that the suits and ties that he was wearing are support to the British industry. 

Ghandi said that anybody who joined the struggle had to take off their ties and suits and place them in one place, so that they could be burnt in a bonfire. From that time, all Indians began wearing handloom and hand woven khadi cloth. 

So, this is symbolic of collecting all materials. As the Speaker told us, in order to discourage poachers, they had to collect all the tusks – instead of saying that they get them dispose of cheaply, so that treasury is beefed up, they lit fire on them. So, that would be a very symbolic action that can easily reach each and everybody. So, it is very good idea.

THE SPEAKER: That is wisdom of the young. Honourable members, the question is that the motion as proposed be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we would like to thank you for the work today. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.55 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 August 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
