

Wednesday, 22 August 2018

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you noticed, today, the order paper is extremely short. It is because the issues in there are important. So, we did not want to spread it over a lot of pages so that we can handle these matters within the time of this afternoon.

Honourable members, the late hon. Abiriga was brutally murdered. His death caused all of us a lot of pain not because he died but how he died. We all know who hon. Abiriga was. He used to bring us joy in this Parliament but he got killed very brutally.

Arrangements were made to have the people of Arua Municipality whom he represented to have another representative in this House. The date was appointed and campaigns were organised for elections. It is really sad that chaos happened in Arua that has caused us even more pain - that the President’s convoy was hit when the President was actually in it. How bad could it have been if his security had responded with arms at the attackers? It is just by God’s grace that nothing worse happened that day. I think it could have been worse.

Other members of Parliament got involved in the aftermath of what happened that day. However, these things bring questions that we should have opportunity to discuss as members of Parliament and as people of this country. Is where we are going the direction we should take? Do we have to make elections this violent? Do we have to make it a do-or-die situation in an election? Do we really? As leaders, should these things be happening when we are seeing? When we are there, should these things be happening? 

These are serious matters, we should reflect on honourable members. I even fear now - if there is another by-election coming, at this rate, I do not know what is going to happen. Can’t we do better than this? You see, we are all involved in this. In these elections, we are all involved. Can’t we address people better? Can’t we motivate people better? Can’t we inspire people better for bigger purposes? Can’t we communicate positively? Can’t we speak against violence? This is a moment of reflection.

This morning, I went to Makindye Military Barracks to see hon. Kyagulanyi. I had seen on social media pictures and things that even when I was going to see him this morning, my heart was pumping the wrong way. I did not know what to expect today when I was going to see him; I was scared. I went with Brig. Richard Karemire; he took me there. I went and sat in what should actually be a sitting room except there were plastic chairs and tables. Then, they brought in Bobi Wine. I was actually shocked to see him the way he was. He smiled broadly and greeted me. He said, “Mr Speaker, I am delighted you have come to see me.” We hugged and sat down to talk.

These things I am talking about, I shared with him. I asked him, “As a crowd puller, how do we take control of our crowds, which we bring together? If we are unable to control them, should we call them?” 

Then we went to the lighter matters and laughed. He is in some pain but far from what I saw on social media. I even have a clip of the laughter we had; I will be sharing it. I even thought that the man was half dead. He is not. He is jolly and laughing out loud.

Then I left and went to Rubaga Hospital to visit hon. Zaake too. He is wearing a collar around the neck to stabilise his neck because he has some injuries. He is in pain. I talked to Dr Brenda Anena and Dr Andrew Ssekitoleko the ones managing hon. Zaake.

In Makindye, I talked to Dr Gideon Nuwagira who is responsible for the day to day care of hon. Kyagulanyi. Hon. Zaake is in pain but he talked to me. The last time I saw a picture I think he was on oxygen but today he was not. The whole time I was there he was not wearing it. 

His concern is that he wants treatment elsewhere and the doctors told me that hon. Zaake’s biggest problem is that he is suffering from post-traumatic stress.

He is suspicious of everybody and does not trust anything around himself. Because he does not trust them, they have problems managing his wellbeing. 

They have written to Parliament and I will be looking at the letter and see how to manage it. But all these things could have been avoided and we need to take care, honourable members, in ways that we organise crowds and the way we motivate them. The way we speak to them and the way we inspire them should be in a way that communicates the sense of being a citizen. 

Exercise of choice is a human right but that should never leave one person to want to take the life of another or cause injury to another. It is not necessary.

Last week, the Leader of Opposition, hon. Aol Betty Ocan, raised concern on the whereabouts of four members of Parliament who were said to have been arrested in Arua District and have since been missing.

She requested Government to provide information as to where the Members had been detained; she moved that the House be suspended until the Government provides this information.

The Speaker suspended the House for one hour to allow Government to come with a statement on the missing members of Parliament. 

On resumption of the House, the first Deputy Prime Minister, Rt hon. Moses Ali gave a statement on the whereabouts of the members of Parliament. On account of his statement, the Speaker nominated an ad hoc committee of six members led by the honourable member for Amolatar, hon. Doreen Amule, the chairperson of the committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to travel to Gulu District and verify the facts that were alluded to in the statement by the first Deputy Prime Minister. 

The other nominees to the team were hon. Baryayanga Andrew Aja, Kabale Municipality; hon. Kamateeka Jovah; hon. Ssewanyana Allan; hon. Lubega Medard Seggona and hon. Oboth Oboth Jacob.

The Speaker directed that the ad hoc committee travels to Gulu in the morning of the 16th August 2018 and report back to the House within the shortest time possible. The committee’s report will be presented as soon as it is ready.

On the 20th of August 2018 at about 4.33 p.m. in the afternoon at the emergency exit gate of the multi-level park, one PC Mudashir Kapchebungai, a counter-terrorism officer attached to the Parliamentary Police Division was allegedly hit by a stray bullet while on duty. 

The officer is now undergoing treatment in the Iran Uganda Hospital in Naguru. I have viewed the CCTV footage which confirmed the above. Investigations are still on-going and you will be informed on the progress. 

Honourable members, we want to have a discussion on what I have just said but to facilitate that discussion, we will allow a statement from the minister and then we see how to proceed.

Otherwise, let us get back to why we are in this place, whether we are in this Parliament or outside it, let us try to do our best to promote mutual respect and facilitate co-existence amongst people rather than disrupting their normal way of working and business. Thank you. 

Honourable minister, we have to follow the protocol.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SECURITY SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY

2.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Mr Speaker, we the Defence, Security and Internal Affairs ministries had a joint meeting where we agreed that the minister for Security would present it. Since he is not around, I will present it on his behalf – (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought that the proper procedure would have been for the committee that was mandated by this House to present its report first and thereafter we can receive the statement of the minister. 

Secondly, the statement of the minister is not with the Members. What we have on our iPads is just the last page of a letter emanating from the Inspector General of Police. 

Therefore, would it be procedurally right for the minister to proceed when we do not have a comprehensive statement from him yet the committee mandated by this House to give its report is ready with its report on our iPads? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, we will proceed with the Order Paper as it is for now. Let us receive the statement of the minister and then we shall see how to proceed.

2.31
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Gen. Elly Tumwine): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a statement on the situation. First of all, it is mainly linked to the elections.

The by-elections that have been held in a number of areas since the general elections in February 2016 and –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sorry. Please activate your microphone again.

GEN. TUMWINE: The statement has been uploaded on your iPads –(Interjections)– yes, you check.
 
The constituencies that have had these by-elections include Upper Madi, Aruu North County, Kamuli Municipality, Jinja East; Moroto Woman Member of Parliament, Toroma, Kagoma, Kyadondo East and Iganga Woman Member of Parliament, Rukungiri Municipality, Ruhaama County, Igara East, Iganga East; Kaabong Woman Member of Parliament, Kibanda North, Kibaale Woman Member of Parliament, Rukiga Woman Member of Parliament, Pakwach Woman Member of Parliament, Kyotera, Namisindwa, Bunyangabu, Rubanda and Omoro. Most of these have been very peaceful save for Bugiri Municipality, Jinja and Rukungiri that had incidents registered. 

The Arua Municipality by-elections were occasioned by the assassination of hon. Col. (Rtd) Ibrahim Abiriga on 8 June 2018 at Kawanda in Wakiso District. The reception of the body of Col. (Rtd) Ibrahim Abiriga was characterised by violence instigated by some political players as honourable members of Parliament may recall.

The violent manner of the late hon. Col (Rtd) Ibrahim Abiriga’s death and the outrage it caused was countrywide. Therefore, the situation in Arua was already delicate even before the by-election was conducted –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this statement now on the iPads?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk.

GEN. TUMWINE: It should be. It was put there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is suspended for 15 minutes to enable us deal with this.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you.

(The House was suspended at 2.34 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.49 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the statement uploaded now? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the last meeting, the Speaker constituted and directed a committee to go to Gulu. This committee was supposed to bring a report to Parliament. However, when I look at my phone, the report of the committee is ready and that was the directive of Parliament to have the report. Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the committee which we sent presents the report then from that report, the Executive can also present its own report or rebuttal the report. So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the committee presents their report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought I had just ruled on that matter, hon. Nandala-Mafabi? It is exactly that same issue I ruled on and that is how I allowed the minister to proceed. 

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, I rise under the provision of rule 81, on dress code. Is the hon. Tinkasiimire dressed in conformity with the provision of rule 81 on dress code? Is the honourable member in order to dress the way he is dressed, which does not conform to the provisions of the rules of procedure?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would the honourable member who has been referred to rise for inspection by the Speaker? Honourable member, please, withdraw from the Chamber. 

(Whereupon hon. Tinkasiimire takes leave of the Chamber.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, have we confirmed that the statement is on the iPad? Okay, proceed.

2.52
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Gen. Elly Tumwine): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start all over again. Mr Speaker, by-elections have been held in a number of areas since the general elections of February 2016. The constituencies that have had these by-elections include Upper Madi, Aruu North, Kamuli Municipality, Jinja East, Moroto Woman MP, Toroma, Kagoma, Kyadondo East, Iganga Woman MP, Rukungiri Municipality, Ruhaama County, Igara East, Iganga East, Kaboong Woman MP, Kibanda North, Kibale Woman MP, Rukiga Woman MP, Woman MP Pakwach, Kyotera, Namisindwa, Bunyangabu, Rubanda and Omoro. Most of these have been peaceful, save for Bugiri Municipality, Jinja and Rukungiri that had incidents registered.

The Arua Municipality by-elections were occasioned by the assassination of hon. Col. (Rtd) Ibrahim Abiriga on 8th June 2018, at Kawanda, Wakiso District. The reception of the body of Col Ibrahim Abiriga was characterised by violence, instigated by some political players, as honourable members may recall. The violent manner of the late hon. Col (Rtd) Ibrahim Abiriga's death and the outrage it caused was countrywide. Therefore, the situation in Arua was already delicate, even before the by-election was conducted.

Following the burial of the hon. Abiriga, three weeks were given for the conduct of campaigns by the candidates from 23rd July to 13th August 2018, for this particular by-election. A schedule indicating designated locations and dates for the various candidates to canvass for support was published by the Electoral Commission (EC). 

Some players in the Opposition opted to hold illegal processions, involving imported rowdy people, who engaged in acts of hooliganism that disrupted campaigns of other candidates. These same rowdy crowds threatened the electorate by words and actions, including physical assaults, destruction of property and rape because of their different political affiliations. To disenfranchise Ugandans by importing illegal voters from other areas is criminal because it overthrows the power of the people in the given areas to elect their leaders.

The final day of campaigns for Arua Municipality was 13 August 2018. Candidates had distinct rally venues on that day. However, one of the candidates’ supporters, MP-elect for Arua Municipality, hon. Kassiano Wadri Ezati, were disruptive of other candidates' rallies and also engaged in violence. When their procession encountered the presidential motorcade en-route to the airstrip to drop the President, they pelted his motorcade with offensive objects, damaging the rear screen of one of his
vehicles. The procession also had a caterpillar (Registration Number UAP 064R) – a grader caterpillar - wrapped in red ribbons - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it 604 or 054?

GEN. TUMWINE: It is UAP 064R. It was wrapped in red ribbons, similar to the attire of the attackers and Opposition political activists at Transport Junction Road. It is now impounded and parked at Arua Central Police station. At this point, security officers intervened to contain the situation and they indeed prevented it from further escalation by use of anti-riot gear.
The situation was restored to normality. 

Sadly, however, someone who has since been identified as Mr Yasin Kawuma, a resident of Lusanja, Nangabo Sub-County, Wakiso District was established to have died. He was in a Tundra Vehicle, Registration number UAJ416K, which has since been impounded and taken to Arua Central Police Station.

This unfortunate loss is regrettable. Had it not been for the unruly and illegal causative conduct of some elements, it would not have happened. Having delivered the President to his helicopter, the security detail went back to rescue the wanainchi, which they generally did with a lot of restraint.

Scores of suspects were arrested including the following: Member of Parliament-elect for Arua Municipality, Kassiano Wadri and other members of Parliament namely; hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Gerald Karuhanga, hon. Robert Sentamu Kyagulanyi and former Member of Parliament, hon. Michael Mabikke among others, in connection with the incidents mentioned above to help in the on-going investigations. They have all since been produced before the courts of law. Notably, on 16 August 2018, a number of them appeared before the Chief Magistrate's Court in Gulu and were charged and remanded.

In a similar manner, hon. Robert Kyagulanyi aka Bobi Wine was arraigned before the General Court Martial seating in Gulu, charged and remanded at Makindye Military Barracks in Kampala. He has since been accessed by members of his family, lawyers and personal doctor and several members of Parliament, including those from the Ad hoc Committee of Parliament and the Uganda Human Rights Commission. 

Hon. Robert Kyagulanyi has also received appropriate medical attention under the care of the UPDF. He was also able to speak to the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament on phone, who sought to have a conversation with him. The Deputy Speaker has also told you what a warm and jolly conversation he held with him this morning. 

On the other hand, hon. Francis Zaake is not in the police custody or any of our custodies. He is reportedly admitted in Rubaga Hospital, according to the media, where he was taken by people other than Government or the UPDF.

On Monday, 19 August 2018, some parts of Kampala experienced riots in regard to the arrested members of Parliament and security intervened. These riots were contained. Over 100 suspects were arrested and investigations are on-going. Regrettably, in the process of this, some security personnel misbehaved and action by the Chief of Defence Forces has since been taken. Equally, the police opened a General Enquiry File to fully investigate complaints of abuse that could have happened during the operation to contain these riots.

Mr Speaker, rules require us to account to this august House and it is in this regard that we offer this statement, jointly with all the other security ministers. However, in the same vein as political leaders and people’s representatives, we need to behave responsibly. The pursuit of elective political office is premised on the idea that people can be allowed a free and unfettered opportunity and atmosphere to elect leaders of their choice. The trend of exporting trouble-makers and goons to intimidate, beat up, threaten and abuse those with opposed views in order to influence the outcome of elections, as happened in Jinja, Bugiri and Rukungiri and now Arua, is unacceptable and could not be and shall not be tolerated. 

In Arua, it was even taken a notch higher by attacking the motorcade of the President. It is the duty of our security forces to defend the country, its sovereignty and territorial integrity. At the core of sovereignty, is the Presidency and by necessary implication, the person of the President and his security and safety. 

This reckless trend has no place in our democracy and cannot be tolerated. Whoever engages in this conduct and other electoral and public order malfeasance will be held to account according to the law. Nobody is above the law. Every right has an implied duty, obligation and responsibility; this is the duty to enjoy one's rights and freedoms to the extent that in doing so, you do not offend the rights and freedoms of the others.

I would like to assure the honourable members that the due process of the law will be followed to the letter. Honourable members, I would like to take this opportunity to assure you and the country that our security forces will continue to discharge their duties of defending this country and its sovereignty firmly and effectively. In this respect, we all have a collective duty to preserve our dignity, as a country, with its treasured way of life, of a peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous Uganda.

On the issues of Mityana riots, a statement is hereby attached and it is signed by the Inspector General of Police, Mr Martin Okoth Ochola. It has also been communicated to the media and you can access it. I can read it –(Interruption)  

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise with respect because Gen. Elly Tumwine is my senior by far. In this Parliament, it is ministers that account to us and a ministerial statement can only be the statement of the minister. 

Is the minister proceeding well, therefore, in referring us to some extraneous document allegedly signed by the Inspector General of Police, when he is actually giving us a ministerial statement?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is it an attachment to your statement? 

GEN. TUMWINE: Yes, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it is not a statement from the Inspector General of Police if you are using it as part of your report. 

GEN. TUMWINE: I am using it to support my statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I am fairly schooled in the language. I rise on a point of order. Is the minister in order to give us a portion in his statement of the security situation that was called to account without telling us what transpired in Mityana? 

A statement by the minister is debatable, as a matter of course. He has said that he has attached a statement by the Inspector General of Police and therefore appending it to his statement. Is he therefore in order to give us a portion and we debate it without reading that attachment, which is actually not attached?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to highlight the contents of this report?

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will state the contents to ensure that it is from a very reliable source. The minister –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister is saying that the inspector general’s report is attached. This is despite the fact that when ministers bring statements here, they must sign them. Is it procedurally right for the minister to assume that he is signatory – (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, can you protect me from this young man, Prof. Kamuntu, the economics professor? 

Mr Speaker, any statement by a minister must be signed. The attachment we have is the IGP’s press release. Is it procedurally right for the minister to now assume that the IGP’s press release is his own statement? Is this procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, even in our parliamentary committee reports, we have annexes and attachments, which form part of the report and they are read together with the report. Would it be irregular for a parliamentary committee to attach evidence from other sources that support their report? Is that in order or out of order? We have used these procedures before. 

All I am asking the minister, since he is saying this is part of his statement, is to highlight what it says so that we know on the record of this House what this attachment says. He has said it is part of his statement, so let him highlight it. 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, this is a fundamental question. The statement of the minister in respect of the Mityana riots contains nothing other than stating that he is attaching a statement from the IGP. It is a fundamental matter in the sense that it is substantive in nature and cannot be relied on by a mere press statement. 

Would it not be procedurally right to expunge that attachment, unless the minister makes a full statement with his signature incorporating the matters referred to in that attachment?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have guided on this matter. Even in our Constitution, sometimes they talk about substantive justice and procedural justice and they insist that substantive justice must not be sacrificed at the altar of procedural justice. This is in Article 126 of the Constitution. 

However, maybe that does not apply here. What applies here more is that the people of this country want to know what happened in Mityana. The documents have been uploaded and are with us on our iPads. They are not with the people of this country. I have a copy here and you have copies of this document signed by the IGP and attached to the minister’s statement.

Do we want the country to know what happened in Mityana now or not? If we want to get the information and then debate it comprehensively, we would allow the minister to highlight what is in this report from the IGP, which is part of his statement, and then we can debate. However, if we do not feel like we want to touch the issues of Mityana, we can proceed to discuss only part of the statement, which relates to the incidents in Arua. I will be comfortable with that as well, but the people would not be. 

Therefore, what do we do? My guidance is that since the minister is the one making the statement, let him verbally incorporate what he has stated so that we can have a general debate on both issues.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. This is about the Mityana riots, destruction of property and death of one Samuel Ssekiziyivu. 

On 19 August 2018, the police was confronted with a riotous situation in which a number of goods belonging to the people of Mityana were vandalised, destroyed and innocent traders in Mityana town were inconvenienced. The rioters interfered with traffic flow; they blocked the road, burnt tyres in the middle of the road, destroying it immensely, and occasioned harm on innocent citizens. These acts are criminal, unlawful and unnecessary, as we said before. 

Unfortunately, while the police was handling these riots, an innocent citizen, Mr Samuel Ssekiziyivu, a resident of Myaazi, Kassanda District, was shot dead. He was travelling in a commuter taxi, registration No. UBA 869C, in which five other people were also injured. The injured ones are Mr Lawrence Jjingo, Ms Jalia Nakiryowa, Mr Derrick Ssengooba, Mr Reagan Muwonge and Mr David Asiimwe. They received medical attention at Mityana Hospital and Mr Derrick Ssengooba was discharged the other evening. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: General, just pause there a bit. I think there are children who are leaving, let me first introduce them. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils from Moyok Bright Primary School, Kween District. They are represented by hon. Lydia Chekwel and hon. Lawrence Mangusho. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Proceed, sir.

GEN. TUMWINE: The others were referred to Mulago Referral Hospital for further medical attention. The killing of Mr Samuel Ssekiziyivu and the injuring of the other five is regrettable and unacceptable. In the same vein, members of the public are reminded to desist from such riots because these riots are unlawful and criminal. 

The Uganda Police Force commiserates with the family of the late Samuel Ssekiziyivu. This message was given to the family by representatives of the police and the police is investigating the matter. The two police officers - 36334 Corporal Kefa Moshi and 54214 Police Constable Maurice Cheptai - who at the scene discharged their guns, are being investigated for the offence of murder and attempted murder in relation to this incident. They will be produced in court to answer these charges once investigations are complete. 

From the other day’s riots in Mityana Town, the police arrested 23 suspects. They will be fully screened and investigated and those found culpable will be taken to court for prosecution on the offences of inciting violence, threatening violence, unlawful assembly and malicious damage to property. 

We condemn those riots in totality. We pledge, as security forces, to continue with the core mandate of protecting life and property, preserving law and order as well as detecting and preventing crime. We continue to caution members, especially the youth who should be engaging in productive work, against being deceived into riotous and violent behaviour. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, the statement is now well received, and a statement of this nature attracts debate. Let us start the debate. Each Member will be allowed three minutes.

3.22
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this report. 

Whereas I do not support the beating of demonstrators and I condemn such acts, I highly suspect that these people are actually subversive elements within the police. This is because there is a civilised way of handling people who demonstrate. As leaders in this country, including Members of Parliament, we should be concerned and find remedies for the level of impunity and provocation by some elements in our society. If this country breaks into anarchy, we will all suffer and nobody wants that situation to happen in this country. 

If we are sincere with ourselves, as sane citizens and leaders of this country, we should condemn, in the strongest terms, the stoning of the convoy of the President. I have not seen anybody condemn this, including the press, apart from one lawyer who I saw on the television called Kirunda. He condemned this act and guided society on how to treat the convoy of the President – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In your opening remarks, you informed this House that an ad hoc committee was constituted to look into this matter. In the event that the minister has presented his statement and the ad hoc committee will also present their statement at a future date, I do not know whether it wouldn’t be procedurally right to first listen to the two reports and then debate can ensue. I would like to seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have ruled on this matter twice. If we have to wait for the report of the committee – I know what I am saying. Please, let me go by what I know not by what you have seen. If you must have this debate together, then that cannot happen today; it will happen next week. I am prepared and very willing to adjourn this Parliament right now to Tuesday next week if you are not prepared to debate this motion.

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Speaker, as we speak, the country is waiting on what Parliament is going to say about the crisis that we see out there. Therefore, we cannot postpone this very important subject to next week when we are being asked questions about the state of affairs of the country. If the report of Parliament is ready, we should be in a position to debate it. However, if it is not ready, we can at this point in time discuss the minister’s statement and then next week, we can discuss the parliamentary report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes you need to read between the lines to understand what is being communicated to you. When I say that the report is not ready, even if it is on your iPads, it is not ready. I know what I am talking about. 

We either go with my guidance that we handle this one first and if we cannot handle it – (Interjection)- Honourable, I am saying that the report may be uploaded there but it is not ready. That is what I am saying. I know it is not ready because I had a delegation come to me. Is it signed by the person who was appointed chairperson of that committee? Is it signed by her? That is why I am saying, honourable members, these are important issues; let us not subject them to controversies. I know what I am saying. Please, let us leave it there. We do not want to open controversies on issues like these. 

If we are prepared to debate the minister’s statement, let us debate the minister’s statement. However, if we are not ready to debate the minister’s statement without the report of the committee, then we can do it next week. No more points of  procedure, please. This issue is clear. If you want to debate, let us debate. Are we debating?

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You are the custodian of rules in this House. Rule 51 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament reads as follows: 

“51. Statements by Ministers
(1) 	A minister may make a statement at the appropriate time on the sequence of business prescribed by rule 25 with the prior permission of the Speaker whether for the purpose of explaining Government policy or action upon any matter.

(2) 	Statements made by Ministers may be debated provided that such debate shall not exceed one hour.”

Mr Speaker, the report we are talking about is a select committee’s report and it is not the same as a statement of a minister. Are we proceeding well when we know that the statement of a minister is different from the report of a select committee? In addition, we know the practice of the House that once a report is presented by the minister, we follow the rules. Yes we have different sentiments but we cannot abrogate the rules of the House. Are we proceeding well not to debate that statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why I am saying that debate on the statement of the minister is open. However, there are objections, that it should not be debated until the select committee report is also presented.

3.32
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Mr Speaker, last week, this House adjourned after constituting a select committee to go and get more information from Gulu. We believe that is the report which should actually move us forward. We were not satisfied with the statement made by the minister and the First Deputy Prime Minister. Therefore, we were relying on the report of the select committee, which was sent to Gulu. (Applause) 

If the report is not ready, it is not possible for us to proceed because that was actually the reason for the adjournment of the House last week. Therefore, we cannot move without that select committee’s report. If the report is there, I would like to ask you, Mr Speaker, to let the chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights, who I can see seated there, present the report. This is what made us suspend business last week. For us to proceed, we would need the report presented. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it still a procedural matter?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, you cannot delay matters of security –(Interjection) – Yes, because by delaying issues of security, we could cause more problems. 

Mr Speaker, the minister has tabled the report; let us debate because it does not stop the other committee from bringing their report. If there are contradictions, we shall debate them but let us debate this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are clear; a ministerial statement, after it has been presented, attracts debate for an hour. If there is no need to debate the ministerial statement, state it so that we say there is no need to debate it. I have told you, as presiding officer and as Speaker, that the report that is uploaded on the iPads is not ready.  

Honourable members, if we are not prepared to proceed with this debate, I have no option. Honourable members, please can you resume your seats. Chairperson, would you like to say something?

3.38
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true that this report was uploaded on the iPads and the information is in Parliament. However, there are very many other things that needed to be handled first by committee members and the chairperson. As a matter of fact, there are things that the clerk that was assigned to the committee has to answer to me particularly, as chairperson. For that matter, the report is not ready and I am personally not ready. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! If we can behave like this here, then how can we avoid the events that happened in Arua from happening again? 

Honourable members, House adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 3.42 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 28 August 2018 at 2.00 p.m.)