
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 19 August 2021

Parliament met at 2.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. Sometime back, I informed you about the return of the Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, back into the country and ready to start work. Starting next week, he will be chairing the House.

I would also like to remind the sub regional leaders that are spearheading the Emyooga programme to take charge, have meetings from next week and get ready to report to this House on their findings to enable us take decisions on the subsequent Government projects that will be sent to the constituencies.

The reports will be discussed and debated openly so that Ugandans can know that much as they think that there is no support they get from the Government – Government sends money down to them but some people end up enriching themselves with the monies that are sent. Therefore, we will have an open debate in this House. 

Each sub regional group will present a report in regard to the findings in their constituencies or districts. The reason behind this is to enable us to understand what happened to Emyooga. Has it created any impact? Were guidelines given to be used? What enabling law was in place? In case there was any enabling law, what are the sanctions for the people who have misused these monies? We must work for our people out there because we are the representatives of those Ugandans and so, we must show them that we need a corruption-free country. 

The above notwithstanding, we also need to thank the President for that money, which was sent to the districts; the money was received. For instance, my county got Shs 1.9 billion. Imagine for such a small district to get such an amount of money, it should have created a lot of impact but there is nothing.

I would like to request Members of Parliament to be very strong and act on the persons who have misused that money. 

I want to thank you very much for turning up for today’s sitting and for your daily contribution since I started chairing. When my “boss” finishes, I will come back again. Can we have matters of national importance? We have hon. Veronica Nanyondo. Hon. Ssemujju, I am not used to seeing you sitting there. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, yesterday, you said, “free sitting”. I am only hesitant to sit on the other side. However, on this side, I am comfortably sitting -

Madam Speaker, regarding your communication, I would like to seek your guidance. You said that we need to thank the President yet at the same time, we are investigating. In the case of my constituency, the money came directly supervised by the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) who represents the President there.

I am seeking guidance whether we should thank the President now or we first finish the investigations and find out whether it is not him to blame, having entrusted money with his RDCs, many of whom are thieves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ssemujju. I would be surprised if you got up and did not make a comment. However, I am saying that we are thanking the President for thinking about our people; that they need to have this money.

We are saying that we must get those RDCs. Each of them should be liable for their own actions; whether it is an RDC, CAO or whoever, they must be held liable. No one is above the law.

2.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard you give us the news of the Rt Hon. Speaker coming to chair the House, with effect from next week until you come back. I saw how emotional you were but I would like to tell you that these people – the colleagues from the other side and all of us - gave you support. You did a wonderful job.

I would like this to go on record that as colleagues, we appreciate the work you have done. The challenges that might have been there - for a new person to steer us the way you did, it needs to go on record that indeed, you did a wonderful job. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. [Mr Elijah rose_] Yes, hon. Elijah. Is it part of my communication? Now, we are handling matters of national importance.

2.11
MS VERONICA NANYONDO (NUP, Woman Representative, Bukomansimbi): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance with regards to the high tension -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am giving you only five minutes for matters of national importance including the discussion.

MS NANYONDO: I rise on matters of national importance with regards to the heightened detentions occasioned by attacks by machete wielding thugs in Bukomansimbi and greater Masaka at large.

It starts with threats contained in anonymous letters, dropped by unknown people in the area. These warning letters, which are written in Luganda, have triggered panic in the entire community, as residents still recount fresh memories of those killed in similar attacks in the greater Masaka Region between 2017 and 2018.

On a particular note, Madam Speaker, there is an incident in Kyetume Village, where one person called Mugera Hassan was attacked by those thugs and he is nursing wounds right now. Residents in those areas especially in Kibinge Subcounty Bukomansimbi District are spending sleepless nights while some are contemplating relocating from their homes to other places for their safety. 

Those attacks are similar to those earlier coordinated by a gang, which was headed by Muhammad Kiddawalime and the late Musa Galiwango who was killed by a mob in Bukulula Trading Centre in Kalungu District during a foiled robbery.

Madam Speaker, we thought that a combined force of the Police and other security agencies had defeated the –(Interruption)

Dr bwanika: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information that the same situation is obtaining in my constituency, Kimaanya-Kabonera. In the last two months, four people have been killed by the machete-wielding gangs; one in Takajunge and three in a ward called Kitanga.

I went to the police and met the District Police Commander (DPC) because they had removed all the police posts from that area. When I attempted to dialogue with them, they informed me that they do not have manpower. Our people in that area, including Bukoto Central which hon. Sebamala represents, are also suffering from the same threats. I wanted to bring that information to the Floor.

The deputy speaker: Thank you. Can you give us your prayers?

Ms nanyondo: Thank you, hon. Bwanika. Madam Speaker, I, therefore, pray that this Parliament addresses itself to this matter with a view to finding a conclusive solution to it because it has happened before and it is happening again. We do not know what will happen next. Thank you.

2.16
The Government Chief Whip (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, I am going to relay this matter to the Ministry of Security to coordinate with other agencies so that they link up with the honourable Members and then we ensure that –

The deputy speaker: There is a procedural matter from hon. Macho.

Mr macho: Madam Speaker, hon. Silwany is a Commissioner in the Parliament of Uganda. I am shocked that even according to a modern dictionary, we do not have a word called “smuggler”. He is referring to me as a “smuggler”. Can he withdraw that statement and refer to me as a “cross-border trader” before I continue with my procedural matter? (Laughter)

The deputy speaker: Hon. Macho, I did not hear him say that you are a smuggler. Maybe that was a joke between you and the Commissioner.

Mr macho: Anyway, Madam Speaker, he too is a rice farmer. Let me leave it at that. 

I rose on a matter of procedure. I keep saying this and I will repeat it; this country is one of the countries in Sub-Saharan Africa with the biggest Cabinet and number of ministers in the dockets of finance and internal affairs. I do not know whether we are proceeding well when these people who have just been given dockets as Ministers of Defence and Internal Affairs leave the Government Chief Whip to stagger on the Floor of Parliament and keep asking for permission and refer to tomorrow, when we are talking about the security of our people, which is a very important matter to this country.

I am raising a procedural matter whether we are proceeding well. Thank you.

The deputy speaker: Honourable members, when we were vetting these ministers, the one caution we gave them was that they must always be in the House. If they are not going to do so, they should inform us early so that we do not raise a matter that concerns their portfolio.

In each ministry, there is more than one minister. I am surprised there is no Minister of Defence, Minister of Security or Minister of Internal Affairs. How are we going to run this country when we have a skeleton cabinet? Out of 82 ministers, we have only five here.

2.19
Mr joseph ssewungu (DP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, this is a very serious issue. Maybe I do not take the same road you do but I know a number of ministers here who have put sirens in their vehicles to clear the way for them as they go back home and come to Parliament. We abide by that although they have no right of way.

When ministers come to face the Committee on Appointments, they promise heaven on earth. We should be getting answers after a Member raising a matter of national importance – I know that the Clerk’s office is aware of this and the ministers are informed. We should not be waiting for another week because these are matters that need urgent attention.  

Madam Speaker, I think the best method for ministers is maybe to develop another attendance book for them alone where they can sign their attendance. They are given vehicles and policemen as an extra privilege for them to carry out Government work. This is very dangerous. 

We are going back to the same system where the Chief Whip has to come in and explain then he becomes the Prime Minister –(Interruption)

Mr silwany: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Ssewungu for giving way. Today when I was coming to Parliament, right on the compound of Parliament, I saw several ministers. However, when I walked into Parliament, the ministers are not here. 

I think this House should take a strong deliberate decision that some ministers must attend Parliament because they are around. I have seen several ministers outside. Some are in the canteen. I saw them with my “naked eyes”. 

You know that I am a National Resistance Movement (NRM) backbench Parliamentary Commissioner and I am not against the ministers. Let the ministers attend plenary and respond to matters of this country. Thank you.

The deputy speaker: I want to tell you, Members, that the issues that are being raised are matters of life. If people are being killed and we do not have a minister to respond and you have a Government Chief Whip coming all the time to apologise - I am not sure whether that is what he is supposed to do. If we cannot have the ministers in the House to respond to the issues being raised –

2.22
The leader of the opposition (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your kind indulgence on this particular matter. I had a long discussion with the Members that raised this matter on the Floor. This particular issue of killings has been everywhere in the public and social media –

The deputy speaker: Honourable Member, I do not want us to go to the substantive discussion. My issue is one - 

MR MPUUGA: I am certainly moving to the issue, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My issue is one; I want the ministers in the House. Short of that, I am adjourning the House. 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, that is why I am moving – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I adjourn the House to Tuesday next week. 

(The House rose at 2.23 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24 August 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
