

Thursday, 25 August 2016

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I need to inform the House that four of our Members of Parliament have had an incident in South Africa, where they had gone to look at fertilizer firms and how it is being utilised in the farms there. When they reached their hotel, they were attacked by people who are now understood to be robbers. They took from them property and money and some of them lost their passports. 

The police there are now involved in the search; our Ambassador just called me about 30 minutes ago to brief me and the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, who is in Nairobi, has also been briefed. I do not know whether I should tell you the Members who have been affected – maybe it is not necessary. They are: hon. Robert Migadde, hon. Alum Santa Ogwang, hon. Francis Gonahasa, hon. Kenneth Esiangu, and two staff members: Ms Jacqueline Mutekanga and Ms Florence Aceng.

These are the people who are in South Africa and who have had this incidence.

The occurrence of this incident should make us take some advice, as Members of Parliament, when we travel. We should take time to notify our embassies wherever we are going so that they are aware that we are in that particular country. It is easier to coordinate because they will be on standby. Even if the country is big and they have no systems of being there, at least they are aware and can respond if such response is required.

Therefore, it is necessary for us to communicate with the embassies and just let them know that we, as Members of Parliament, are in a particular place. It is also important to be in areas where the security is guaranteed by the state there. In this case they were of course picked by the officials from this particular farm that had invited them and taken to the hotel and on arrival to the hotel, they were attacked.

However, that also goes to say that probably where they went was very faraway from the place where the security framework was strong such that people could rob them and go away quickly without any intervention being made. We always need to look into all these things so that when we are out of the country, our security is guaranteed and the safety of both our lives and property is also guaranteed. 

I thought I should communicate this to the honourable members. We thank God that nothing terribly wrong happened to the persons physically but certainly they have lost property. The property lost has been listed and quite a large amount of money has been lost and that is not good. 

2.14
MR ABDULATIF SSEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I am sorry about what happened to our colleagues. However, we would like to know their health condition; how are they? Were they admitted to hospital? In which condition are they?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think as of now they are just poor financially but physically, they are okay. They have not been harmed in any way. The only things that have been harmed are their pockets and property. They have not been beaten; they are okay, physically. The property lost has been listed but no incident of injuries has been recorded. But of course psychologically, they are not doing well.

2.15
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. As I support the Ministry of Health on the exercise of verifying and cleaning the status of health centres III, on the other hand, Adjumani fell victim. Four of our health centres have been listed among those to be barred from getting financial support and other assistance from Government. These are: Alore, Maji, Okusijonyi and Bila. 

From the information I got from the district, in 2010, these health centres were owned by the Government. Therefore, I pray to the ministry and Government that let verification be done because my biggest worry is that these four health centre IIIs may miss the money for this quarter. If that happens, four sub-counties are affected and the number of people getting services from these health centres is high.

Therefore, I need more clarification on their status and if they need anything, they can go and find the details from the district right from the establishments. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any response from the Government on this matter?

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a bit surprised that the four health facilities in Adjumani have been suspended from receiving funding because what we suspended were the private health facilities and those private-not-for-profit that are not accredited by the bureaus – whether Catholic, Protestant or Muslim faith.

Mr Speaker, although we put out that list, in our own records, they appear as private facilities. However, do not lose hope; this is the message I would like to give to Members of Parliament. We have sent out a team to do the actual verification and we hope that they will get back to us very soon and once this is done, we shall definitely reinstate these health facilities and give them all the money that is due to them.

The reason we did that is because we discovered that private health facilities not accredited by any institution and are not following the guidelines we have were actually receiving funding from Government. So, this is what I want to assure the Member that we are in the process of verifying and if they meet the criteria or if they were erroneously deleted or suspended from receiving funding, we shall definitely give them all the money – both for the first and second quarters. Thank you.

2.19
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to make my maiden speech. I rise on a matter of national importance. Sometime in July, I received a circular from the Executive Director of the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS). It was addressed to all chief administrative officers in the country.

The subject of this circular was seasonal allocation of agricultural input, both planting and stocking materials for season two, this year, 2016. In annex 2 to this circular, it was clearly stated that the NAADS secretariat was collaborating with Members of Parliament to implement the food security campaign for the constituencies. This was to be done through the distribution of a minimum of one tonne of maize seed per constituency, and that the Members of Parliament were also to deliver and distribute the seeds to the beneficiaries in their respective constituencies, working closely with various local, technical and political leaders.

Kibale County, in Kamwenge District that I represent, is predominantly a maize growing area and as such, I welcomed this intervention by the NAADS secretariat -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the urgent matter, honourable member?

MR ABIGABA: The urgent matter is that the entire Rwenzori region, particularly Kamwenge where I come from, was not included on the list of beneficiaries. I took interest to make a follow up with the NAADS secretariat but I have never got any satisfactory response.

My prayer, therefore, is that the minister responsible for agriculture should come out to explain under what circumstances the Rwenzori region – and like my brother said, the entire western region - came to miss on this important and valued Government programme. I would like him to also explain to us if a substitute exists at all, or if it is specifically designed for this region and when it would be executed.

Secondly, in case our region was erroneously left out, my prayer is that the seeds should be provided to the Members of Parliament as soon as possible, when we are still in the planting season, which is expected to expire in the next two weeks. Once again, I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any response from the Government on the issue of this region being left out on the distribution list?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I know the Minister of Agriculture will come and do further clarification. However, I would like to say that no region can erroneously be left out because when we sit to plan, we plan for the entire country and probably plan in a phased manner. If a region has not benefited, it could be that they planned according to the budget they have and that propelled them to move the way they did. However, the Minister of Agriculture will come and give further clarification.

2.23
MR LAWRENCE MANGUSHO (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance and it concerns our team from the just concluded Olympics in Rio. Our team did not perform well. I actually would like to task Government to explain to us, for example, as to why we are not doing enough to develop the abundant talent that we have in this country.

For instance, there is the much-awaited national high altitude training centre, which was proposed to be built in Kapchorwa. When a team of Members of Parliament visited this side, we could only see cows grazing on that ground yet, we have been expecting serious work to be done on this facility.

Our athletes, including our hero Kiprotich, train from Kenya and they train at the mercy of their arch rivals, in the long distance running. How safe is such an athlete, if he trains with his arch rivals? That project is multi-sectoral; we would like the Ministry of Finance to tell us how far they have gone to finance that project.

I hope you recall that we do not have good trainers for these athletes. I hope you remember that we had a trainer called Wemali Peter in Kapchorwa, who used to take advantage of our young sportsmen and sports women. He would tell them that unless you are impregnated and also abort, you cannot be a gold medalist. This happened and most of the Members know that it did happen. It was in the papers. Wemali was arrested but I do not know how far the case has progressed.

Mr Speaker, this is my maiden speech and this is the reason why I would like to ask for an extra minute. Some of the athletes affected – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, this is what I would like to do for you; and please, let me say this and then you will speak on this subject later. Honourable members, I have had a request from hon. Allan Sewanyana. He is the shadow Minister for Sports. I had this request on Monday that he needed to make his statement as a shadow minister, on the issue of the poor performance of Uganda in the Olympics.

I looked at the rules and I could not see how I could accomodate him under the rules, to allow him make a statement. His statement is not a personal statement but it is also not a ministerial statement. The rules do not make provision for this and I am going to ask the rules committee, that having embraced the multiparty dispensation, this should be looked at more carefully. Provisions need to be made for shadow ministers from this side to be able to make some statements, especially on matters of this nature.

I am, therefore, going to exercise my discretion under Rule 8; where no clear provision is made in relation to a particular matter - I become the law. (Laughter) Having become the law, I therefore exercise the discretion to allow hon. Allan Sewanyana to be put on the Order Paper under item four, in order to make a statement on Uganda’s poor performance in the Olympics.

When that comes, the first person to rise to debate this statement will be the Member from Kween. He will be speaking after the statement is made under item number four. However, this is only for now; it is not a rule of general application. It will only deal with the situation as of now. Each matter will be handled as it comes. Thank you.

MR KAMUSIIME: Mr Speaker, this is my first time to make a presentation. I am a new Member of Parliament and I am used to finding an Order Paper on the table in the Lobby, as I come for Plenary. Today, I did not find it and I do not know whether my colleagues have a copy. I am failing to follow the proceedings of the House. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us to go on without the Order Paper?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Up to now, we have not started on the Order Paper; so, you have not lost anything. Clerk, where are the copies of the Order Paper? We signed the Order Paper early today; do we have copies circulated? Can you please confirm this? Thank you. That ends the matters of national importance that were requested for; we will now go on to the Order Paper.

2.29
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have been having elections in the country and they have not been concluded. At the moment, the Electoral Commission is holding those due elections.

However, Mr Speaker, it should be recalled that we amended the law and allowed councillors for workers. No preparations were done nor guidelines given in that direction. I do not know if the Electoral Commission was properly briefed about the resolutions as taken by Parliament then. I would like to know from the Government the fate of councillors for workers. 

Secondly, we have raised this matter over and over again and we shall not give up. Our people are continuously asking when the LCI elections shall be held. What do we do with the expired leaders – some of them passed on, others have shifted to other areas, others have been imprisoned and some have given up? Who is in charge of the villages right now? People would like to know and I am raising this in my capacity as the Shadow Minister for Local Government.

2.31
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take cognisance of what hon. Nambooze has said. The Minister of Local Government and I are making consultations with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Developent to try to secure funds for holding these elections as soon as our national purse allows.

I agree with you that it is important. These elections have not been held for a long time and the LCs are very vital for the management of society in Uganda, and we are doing everything possible to ensure that we hold these elections promptly, fairly and squarely. I thank you.

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have seen requests for supplementary budget for several reasons. I wish to know why we cannot have a supplementary budget, if need be, specifically to cater for the LC elections?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of procedure, honourable member.

MR KAFUUZI: I need clarification from the minister.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank my “alternative” colleague for accepting to execute his duty. I know him as the alternative minister for justice, the alternative to this Government.

The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is; what happens to the duties that are being executed by these officers illegally?

Secondly, what is the Ministry of Justice doing at least in terms of the legal mechanisms? You see, the law can do everything including resurrecting the dead and you will be declared alive even when you died –(Interjection)– yes, the law can declare you alive.

The point I am raising is that these people are executing work including adjudging cases, which affects the rights of citizens. In light of the failure by Government to provide money at least for this very vital exercise, should we take it that the Government has even failed to make a law that can salvage the situation, including a validation legislation of the existing ones with the necessary modifications?

Have we descended to anarchy that everybody who is powerful enough can take a decision? You find that in these villages, an RDC comes and declares somebody LC1 chairperson and the Ministry of Justice is doing absolutely nothing apart from telling us that, “We are making consultations,” for the last 15 years.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As far as I understood the matter raised by hon. Nambooze, you have not answered anything. She asked about who is in charge of the villages, some of whose leaders have died. As you promise to consult, who is in charge now and under what legal framework? 

THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For every legislation that is brought before this Parliament, there is a Certificate of Financial Implications. When you brought an amendment to the existing law, you convinced Parliament by that Certificate of Financial Implications that the money that you need for revising the method of electing village councils was available.

Mr Speaker, the honourable Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, as hon. Kasibante said, has not given me something that I can tell people that I meet every day who keep asking when we shall have village elections.

He says that he is consulting but he has not told Parliament whether the consultations will end next week and he will bring the statement. Mr Speaker, can we request the minister to be categorical - because I have known him for being categorical - as to whether there will be elections this year or not or whether there will never be local council elections so that we tell people to improvise.

In my constituency, matters of selling land, including conflicts, are serious. We have people presiding over these conflicts and sales and even issue documents. Even when you go to court, they ask you to bring a letter from the LC1.

Can the minister guide on whether we should all become LC1 chairpersons and print our own stamps? What makes one a legitimate LC 1 chairperson?

2.37 
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable members for the clarification they have sought. However, as you know and as the Constitution provides, power belongs to the people.

Even in the absence of elections, the people can organise themselves and manage - (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, a portion of the minister’s statement is correct that power belongs to the people. The same Constitution goes ahead to say under Article 1(4) “The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed, through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda.”

In Article 1(1), “All power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution.” One, they have not exercised their will on who shall govern them.

Two, there have not been those free, fair and regular elections. By the minister clinging on one thread of the Constitution and telling this august Assembly that the people can organise themselves anyhow outside the constitutional framework, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your attention has been drawn to those very clear provisions of the Constitution. Would you like to speak now, properly? (Laughter) 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I envy you in the comfort of legal gymnastics but I do not envy you not sharing with me the burden of managing a third world country. 

Indeed, it would be very beautiful if we had sufficient resources to put our Constitution to the letter but unfortunately, we do not have the money. That is what the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Developent tells me. Since there is no money, we shall cut our coat according to the cloth we have. I am waiting for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Developent to provide resources and we shall hold elections. (Interjections)

Listen, dear colleagues. I am the architect of these LCs; they are very dear to me. I did it 35 years ago. Mr Speaker, I rest my case.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, now that we have the Deputy Leader of Government Business in this House, my colleague and learned friend, Gen. Moses Ali; and now that we have been reminded that a Certificate of Financial Implications was placed before this House prior to amending the law; is it not procedurally correct that since he coordinates the ministries, that we lift the burden off the shoulders of Gen. Kahinda Otafiire and we place it back to Government generally to tell us what happened to the certificate? Were they telling us lies? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Should we interrogate what the certificate said?

MR SSEGGONA: No, Mr Speaker. I am only asking whether it is not procedurally correct for the Government to tell us whether they told us lies by presenting a Certificate of Financial Implications and now they are telling us that there is no money. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did the certificate say there was money? I do not know what the certificate said. The certificate does not necessarily say there is money. 

2.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason a Certificate of Financial Implications is a necessity for every law that comes to this House is to prove to the lawmakers that once that law is passed, money is available to implement that law.

Mr Speaker, for laws that have no financial implications have been indicated clearly; that we have studied the law and it will not cause us any more burden as a country. The law can be implemented within the budget that is available to the particular ministry. 

If the law is to exert more funding to Government, the certificate indicates that money is available and it was upon that basis and background that the law was passed. Even right now, Government is spending money-every year in the budget, we allocate for those local council chairpersons Shs 120 – (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, Madam Leader of the Opposition. This morning, our committee has been interacting with the Electoral Commission and they said the amount of money required to hold this election is Shs 37 billion only and yet Government has been spending on these local council officials illegally much more than what is required to regularise them. It is only a question of commitment from Government as to when Shs 37 billion can be released and this matter ends. 

MS KIIZA: Thank you, hon. Niwagaba, for the information. Mr Speaker, you are aware that court declared those holding those positions illegal. Right now, we are dealing with illegal structures being held by illegal occupants and we are from time to time apportioning money to them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The structures are not illegal.
 
MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I am talking about the occupants of these structures. Aware that these officers are the first courts, they are holding Government money - the 25 per cent at village level; they are involved in appropriation but they are illegal.

When filling forms to apply for a passport, there is an area that requires a stamp of an LC1 chairman and that is why a Member asked whether we can all make our own stamps and masquerade as LC1 chairpersons because none now is known to be the rightful LC1 chairperson. 

Mr Speaker, Ugandans are anxiously waiting for a moment when Government will once and for all close this chapter. We do not want to keep meandering; I have heard the minister say there is no money yet we are spending money on issues that may not be as important and as necessary as the issue of the LC1 chairpersons. 

May I, therefore, ask that Government puts this matter as priority or else we stop funding certain sections of Government until the LC1s are in place?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I need a statement from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Did you give us a false Certificate of Financial Implications? Is there money? After which I will ask the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to tell us in clear terms how we are going to proceed with this matter. 

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we bring motions and Bills here accompanied by Certificates of Financial Implications, the certificate explains two things: 

What is the magnitude of the finances required to carry out that task? It also goes ahead to explain how that is going to be financed. Sometimes it is within the budget of the responsible department or ministry and sometimes we indicate that this will be catered for in the medium and long-term.

For this financial year, we passed a budget but we did not pass these resources to carry out the elections. We are in discussions with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to find ways on how this can be addressed. Do we have this money in the budget to carry out elections this year? No. Can we find it? That is what we are trying to work out. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the statement from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We sat as Parliament but we did not appropriate money for these elections. I do not know who should have proposed it because Parliament does not propose, as it were. What is the way forward?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, like I said before, we are in consultation with my colleague, the Minister for Local Government and with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We are devising ways and means to ensure that we conduct this election, probably this year when money is available –(Interjection)- can you allow me to finish what I am saying and then you can raise the clarification? If you ask for clarification before I say what I want to say, we may have a bit of a problem. 

Honourable members, it is not that Government is not interested in holding these elections – in Kiswahili, we say, “Kupanga Nikuchagua.” To organise these elections, there are priorities preceding them and there are also priorities among priorities because democracy is item number one on our agenda.

Certainly, like hon. Nambooze and hon. Sseggona said, the LCs are known for proper management of our society. You do not have to preach to me, I am already converted. However, the fact that we do not have money –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I remember here at a time when there was an issue to do with Members of Parliament who were elected in constituencies which were created by the Electoral Commission, without Parliament gazetting. You stood here and blamed your counterpart, the Shadow Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, for not bringing an alternative. May I, therefore, inquire that since your problem is money, should the Shadow Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development provide money for organising these elections so that we can proceed? What do you have to say about this because we can get money and organise the elections – (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Are you going to hold a fundraising? 

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Mr Speaker, I remember in the Ninth Parliament, we debated extensively about LC1 elections and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came here and pleaded that we should have another form of elections; that we were not in position to provide the secret ballot. We even agreed to vote by lining up and this was passed. 

What beats my understanding is that it is the same minister lamenting that we do not have money yet he told us that if we used this format of lining up to vote, then we were set and ready. What is the problem now?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude this matter by promising the country that we shall have these elections –(Interjections)– when the money is available. I do not want to be dishonest. 

Certainly even if I shed tears, the money will not be available. Let us look for the money within the current budget, which you did not provide for last year, and you are aware - when we get the money, we shall hold the elections. Find the money if you think you can –(Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, Maj. Gen.(Rtd) Otafiire and others seized power when I was 11 years and four months. They came to my village, organised and conducted village elections before they even captured power. They actually did not spend any money on those elections. The same Maj. Gen. Otafiire or the Government he serves came here and said, “We do not have Shs 300 billion to organise LC elections; change the law so that people can line up.” 

The procedural issue I am raising is, from his statement, Maj. Gen. Otafiire says that even under the new arrangement, where we require some supervisors who will spend Shs 37 billion, we cannot have these elections. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, for hon. Otafiire to bring a law here and other amendments and tell the villagers that you can go, choose a supervisor and hold these elections and then they will collect results, like they did when they were capturing power?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I have lots of sympathies for my colleague, Maj. Gen.(Rtd) Otafiire, whose green necktie I admire this afternoon –(Laughter). Wouldn’t be procedurally correct for us to know how long their consultations are going to last so that we can take one decisive step? 

Of course, I take with humility his suggestion that probably I could have provided an alternative. When you need an alternative from someone who you think has an alternative, humility calls upon you to approach that person. Probably, I would have been of legal assistance to the Government if I had been approached.

However, I have motivated myself this afternoon to say that there is even a possibility of making a law. You can even make a law abolishing them. Therefore, I am seeking to know if it is not procedurally correct for the House, and as representatives of these people, to demand that we have timelines to know and share with them their consultations and the results –(Interjection)– I am glad to know that there is Attorney-General’s Chambers which has not provided legal assistance to him.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the matter that hon. Nambooze raised is indeed pertinent and she has done it on the behalf of many people because it came up when all of us were canvassing for votes. There is a point on which she needs clarification as to what happened to the transactions that are going on within the system. 

Procedurally, I would like to propose, Mr Speaker, that you allow the Attorney-General, who by Article 119, is the principal legal adviser to come and advise us. Her point is very pertinent and we are continuing to use the LC1s. As we mobilise funds to carry out elections, we all agree that we carry out these elections – but what happens now legally to the status quo where business is going on within the LC1s?

I would like to request that I instruct my Attorney-General to help us and give us legal counsel because even hon. Sseggona challenged the minister that we did not come up with any law to legalise what is happening. I was listening and legal matters must be handled legally, I believe so. Therefore, I request that we halt this matter so that the Attorney-General comes to the House to give us guidance.

We are not going to carryout elections tomorrow, as we all know. It will take some time. Therefore, I would like the Attorney-General to come and guide us. I thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, there are two organs that hon. Nambooze raised concerns about. We have the LCI, but we also have councillors representing workers at district level. We amended the laws and even introduced councillors representing the elderly in the district councils and they were elected. 

Therefore, as we do not get the matter of the councillors representing the workers lost in the LCI election; wouldn’t it be procedurally right to ask either the Minister of Local Government - because it seems the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is exhausted and may not be in position to answer this question –(Laughter)- to give us a precise, concise and exact explanation on when and how the election of these district councillors representing workers will be conducted. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what is being proposed by the Government Chief Whip is the secondary part of the argument. This presentation has two parts; the transactions taking place in the absence of legally constituted office bearers and the second is the process that should put in place the legal ones. Therefore, the appearance of the Attorney-General will not solve the second one.

May I guide on how we are going to proceed with this matter:

    1. I am giving the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs two weeks to come here and tell us when those elections will be carried out –(Applause)- Nothing less, nothing more because by doing that, everything will have been solved.

    2. The second leg of the argument of asking what happens to the transactions being done right now; on that, the Attorney-General can come and advise us on what he has done to help the processes that are going on right now. The people are happy with whatever is happening - at least in some of those places - even if they move with stamps in their pockets and people are peaceful with it. What is the Attorney-General going to do?

Honourable minister, please come back here in two weeks and advise the House with a date so that we are clear that the election for LCI- there are flag bearers in every village in this country waiting for elections. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD.) OTAFIIRE: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, thank you for your concern for these elections. I am much obliged; I will come back with a good answer after consultation with my colleagues. I thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON MANAGEMENT OF HEPATITIS B IN THE COUNTRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is there a process that you have agreed with the-? Please let us know.

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had requested that he makes his statement then I can speak after him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I am informed that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has other urgent matters to handle. Can we call the next item?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE LOANS PASSED BY PARLIAMENT SINCE THE NINTH PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, we are dealing with section (e) as the first statement under item three.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing the ministry to make a statement on the loans passed by the Ninth Parliament. The statement is being circulated and the purpose of the statement is to update Parliament on the status of loans approved by the Ninth Parliament, but also to take advantage of this statement, to make a comment on the performance of Opuyo-Moroto 132 kV transmission lines which were asked by one of the honourable members last week.

During the Ninth Parliament, Government was authorised to borrow loans up to $5.7 billion for the following sectors: agriculture, education, health, water, environment, ICT, public sector management, energy and mineral development, works and transport, that are expected to promote growth, value addition and development. The table that you are going to look at shows the distribution of these loans.

It is important, Mr Speaker, to clarify that the loans you continue to see us bring here are part of the budget that was approved. Therefore, this US$5.7 billion is already approved as part of the budget for 2016/2017 by this Parliament.

Mr Speaker, the table below shows the status of allocation of loans considered and approved by the Ninth Parliament. We have 58 loans, which have been approved by this House and all are from page 2 to page 5. They show the debt, the project title, the sector, the creditor, the loan amount, the date on which Parliament approved it and the status of the loan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that on the annex?

MR BAHATI: It is a table inside the text. 

Mr Speaker, on Page 5, the borrowings were both on concessional and non-concessional terms consistent with the public debt management framework. As we have stated here below; we have a threshold of 50 per cent to our Gross Domestic Products (GDP) as our loan ceiling and so far, the US$10.6 billion, which we have as our debt portfolio is 38 per cent. We intend to remain cautious, well-knowing if we stretch this debt limit, how bad our economy can be. 

We have seen countries collapse like Iceland, the situation which happened in Ghana so we remain cautious within our public debt management framework. The table below again presents the creditors and their current lending terms applied on respective loans sourced during the Ninth Parliament. That table shows credit terms. We shall continue to borrow largely on favourable terms and restrict borrowing for sectors that are likely to enhance productivity.

Loans contracted for sectors such as roads, energy, water, agriculture, education and health, if effectively used, would increase productivity and subsequently enhance debt service both in the medium term and long term.

Mr Speaker, on the performance of the loans, a number of loans approved by the Ninth Parliament have been declared effective and implementation is on-going. Attached in the matrix after this statement as an annex is the performance and status on a loan by loan basis. Before I go to that, let me make a comment on the Opuyo-Moroto 132 KV transmission line, which was requested for by one of the Members of Parliament.

In regard to the loan for financing this project, I wish to report as follows:

This project was declared effective on 11 September 2014, a delay of over 12 months after getting approval. The activities undertaken between the dates of effectiveness to-date are the following:

    a) 30 March 2013; approval of funding by IDBA board
    b) October 2013; approval of loan by Parliament
    c) 10 December 2013; signing of the loan 
    d) January 2014; legal opinion from the Solicitor-General
    e) July 2014; call expression of interest to offer supervision consultancy services. 
    f) We then went through preparation, resettlement and compensation plan.
    g) July 2014, we signed the contract for implementation with the consultant.
    h) August 2015, we signed the contracts for preparation of tender documents and supervision with a consultant.

The current status of this project, the consultant for tender document preparation and supervision was procured on 4th August and the process of preparing tender documents is on-going. This is the status of this particular project. It is behind by 12 months. However, as we have said, in this new season of Kisanja hakuna mchezo we will make sure that this is really fast-tracked.

The next action timeline is 1st September; we will approve the tender documents and the procurement of a contractor will take eight months. We expect award and signing of the project in the first quarter of 2017. 

Mr Speaker, on the annex attached, we show the creditor, the project, the sector, the approval date by Parliament, the commitment date, loan amount committed, the amount disbursed to-date and the percentage of the amount of money that has been disbursed. And we offer explanations on the delays and the status of the loan. Some loans are performing well, others are performing poorly and we have stated the reasons in the column of the status. 

Mr Speaker, we thank you for giving us an opportunity to offer this information to Members of Parliament. We encourage you to read and also the relevant committees of this House to take interest in this one so that we offer an oversight role as Members of Parliament. I thank you, colleagues. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is one of those statements that are in response to information. We can ask supplementary questions or have a limited debate on the subject.

3.13
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have scanned through the report and in my analysis, it actually does not give the status; it is neither good for us as the people of Uganda nor is it good for the donors. 

On the first page, in 2015 we borrowed a loan for defence and I do not see it among the sectors which benefited from loan money. Why is that loan not reflected here?

From a monitoring and evaluation perspective, that should be the context in which this report should have been presented because we are trying to evaluate ourselves against what was planned. However, this report is not giving us what we want. Honourable minister, I thought that your report should have given us in percentage terms what amount of loan we have utilised for each of the loans. This annex is just giving us commitment dates and so forth. It actually stops on disbursement. What happens thereafter?

Our interest extends to how much of the monies that have been borrowed has been utilised. But for you to stop at what has been disbursed I think is not fair to us as Parliament.

In my view, in the annex, there are monies that we have actually borrowed but nothing has been disbursed and even then, we are caught up in a trap as a country because we have already committed ourselves to that money. What is it that as Government you are going to do to actually avert this because interest will be paid and yet we have not received any disbursement? What is it that you are going to do as Government to make sure that we don’t pay interest on monies on which we have committed ourselves and yet we have not utilised that money.

Finally, I see that these various sectors - what I would have loved to see in this report is for these loans, there is a period in which we are supposed to implement these loans and I have not seen that period because you are only showing the date of commitment. If we can be told that a loan in agriculture, for example, for regional pastoral livelihood should have been implemented in two, three or seven years, then we can ably evaluate ourselves as to whether we have moved fairly well or whether we are performing badly.

This statement does not give a picture of what a status report should be because it should indicate when we committed ourselves, how much we have received and how much we have utilised and how much we have utilised in contracts. It should all be presented in percentage terms so that Members can ably know -(Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: On page 7, Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme III, Parliament approved this loan in June 2012 but there is a column which has the disbursement date and the undisbursed amount. The performance of that loan is 37 per cent. The loan was approved as wholesome but there is money which has not been disbursed. What is the problem?

This is a key loan for rural communities where we all thought that CAIP III would improve on the infrastructure development. However in the details, they are telling us that from 2011-2016, the performance is at 37 per cent. Therefore, the report is not detailed enough to help Members understand that the money we approved here in Parliament is either utilised or unutilised.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Kakooza. Mr Speaker, in perspective, when you say about the status of the loan that “works are underway” or “works are on-going” is ambiguous. What does it mean? First of all, before you borrow any loan, there must be a work plan and that work plan must detail what level of activities will be undertaken in a particular period. Therefore, when you tell me “works are underway” or “are on-going”, I totally get lost. 

This is not what a status report should reflect, honourable minister. Put forward statements that are measurable, time-bound, and realistic because then we can understand that works are on-going but in what perspective - (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. What is missing here also, in my understanding, is that every loan has not only interest and other conditionalities which we are interested in – one element we need to see here is the aspect of counterpart funding. I hear quite often people discuss failures of projects because of lack of counterpart funding. What do you say about these loans and the aspect of counterpart funding from Uganda? Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, the way this report has been presented does not speak clearly to the Members and to the citizens of this country who are going to pay back this money. Therefore, it would be fair and in the interest of this House, for the minister to go back to the drawing board and bring us a clear report that the Members and citizens of this country can understand because this is a commitment, not only of the Government but also to the people of Uganda. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, once these loans are approved, the implementation is sector-based; agriculture, education, health, works and transport, energy - and we have sectoral committees in charge of these, looking at these things in those sectors. I do not know whether it is not going to be a tall order to ask the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us the details of what stages these loans are at and so on. I do not know whether it is not going to be a problem so that the House can make a good decision on this. 

Whether agriculture should be taken as agriculture and we pursue the loan with the ministry and the committee takes charge and we find out what has happened; what is the problem; where are we with this loan? I do not know whether a comprehensive, one-stop report can brief this Parliament properly. That is my concern.

3.23
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the statement although it does not guide the Members. However, every year when we get into the budget debate, the budget paper is presented here; it is accompanied with a document that talks about the financial debts and credits that we have as a country, including loans. 

Unfortunately, this document that talks about our indebtedness has never been discussed in this House. There is that specific document that was presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, in March 2016. That document talks about how many loans we have acquired and how much they have performed. It may not surprise you that some of the loans which we borrowed as far back as 2012 are still at zero per cent performance. (Interjection) Yes. It should not surprise you that even when we do not have electricity; even when we are talking about inaccessible health services, the loans that we acquired under the health sector – according to that document – have performed at only 17 per cent.

Mr Speaker, I therefore request that before we go into asking the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development about possibly coming back with a comprehensive statement that will speak to us, wouldn’t it be right for us to have a specific day to debate this report alone – on the performance of our loans and then we see whether we really need to borrow more. This is because I imagine that we still have enough of what we borrowed; it is attracting interest and we have not even utilised half of it. Majority of our loans are below 50 per cent performance and yet we are supposed to pay them back.

As a way forward, I propose that the report that was tabled in March 2016 by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Mr Speaker, you find it within your powers to direct that we discuss it so that we can see whether it is still necessary for us to borrow or not.

Mr Speaker, mine was just to propose that we should find a day to focus our minds and debate on this report so that Ugandans can know that we are borrowing heavily and we are committing them – much as the services are not evenly distributed – to stagnant loans. They are attracting interest which we are supposed to pay back. At the time we are lent, the dollar rate is low; at the time of implementation, it is higher than at the time it was acquired. It is unfortunate that by the time of implementation you will realise that the loan will no longer cover as much as it would have covered at a time when we approved it. I ask that instead of discussing this document in fragments, let us put a day aside to discuss that report of loans as presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the proposal. But wouldn’t it even be better – because most of the papers that come from the Executive are really raw material; they are not in a form that can be discussed by the House. Wouldn’t it have been better if they are sent to committees then they interrogate the whole situation and come back with clear recommendations and what the House should do then the debate will be better informed. Wouldn’t that be a better way to handle it instead of just bringing a report like this one and the one of March and then we debate? (Hon. Ssemujju rose_)Please, the Member for Buliisa is waiting -

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I am happy that the Member for Buliisa is waiting because he was chairing the Committee on National Economy and the time I was there, he made me believe that a report on loans would be presented to Parliament until when he and I left the committee without the report. (Laughter)

However, from what you have said, this report, as the Leader of the Opposition said, is tabled to Parliament every year. In fact, it has details because what the minister has presented now are loans passed by only the Ninth Parliament - He says that was what was requested. In fact, if you are not very careful, the minister in his statement says we have borrowed US$ 5.7 billion. 

However, the public debt is actually now nearly approaching half of our GDP. This includes the domestic debt. I am uncomfortable and beg for your indulgence that this matter now needs to go to the committee and it makes circles like it has done before.

For the five years I have been here as Member of Parliament, every year, a report is brought here. The assumption is that the committee will process it for debate but no single report has been processed for debate yet for each own consideration by this Parliament, there is a demand; can you update us on the status? 

I see the hon. Bahati coming back to give another report, either midway –(Interruption)

MS RWABWOGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from Kabarole where we have CAIIP roads. I think very grave technical mistakes were made because all the authority to procure the workers, the contractors for the roads and all the other controls for those roads, was left to the honouring bank. It is the one which procures the contractor, gives out the contracts and at the same time pays.

No one follows the payment because every time you try, the bank either cancels the contract and tenders it and does all these things. I think this is a very technical mistake and we need to follow them up. Ugandans are already paying for these loans. They have delayed to deliver; we are being weighed on quality, accessibility and time standard. All these, including technical standards have not been achieved.

As we go back, I think the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development needs to look at this because Ugandans are already paying interest and even if they stopped us today, the children of Uganda will still be paying interest on these loans. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you help us with these matters arising? Please wind up; I need the former chairperson of the Committee on National Economy to speak on this subject.

MR SSEMUJJU: My proposal, Mr Speaker, is that, you allow us to debate that report the same way we debate the budget speech. That report is nearly 100 pages; it is detailed. It will tell you how much loans we have consumed, the performance of each and every loan, the interest; for example, about two years ago, we were paying US$4 million every year on loans that were approved by this Parliament but Government was not utilising the money.

The lenders started collecting USD 4 million every year, for loans that we contracted and we were not using. My proposal, therefore, would be to allow us debate that report instead of sending it again to the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPERAKER: Let me just say this for the honourable member for Buliisa; you see, the challenge we would have would be the same as bringing the Auditor-General’s report here to debate. I do not know where you would start from. That is exactly what you are proposing. That would be extremely difficult. The easy way is to send it to the committee. They have more time to interface with all the sector players and then they come to us with recommendations of what the House should do. It is easier to debate it in that form.

Bringing a report of 1,000 pages and say that let us debate, I would be happy not to be the person chairing it. This is because you would not make any headway - even this small one, if you were to start a debate now, you would not comprehensively handle it and come out with any meaningful decisions on the subject. That is why it would have been proposed, if it were acceptable by the House, to refer this to the committee. They process it together with all the other documents, they interact with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and all the other people who are implementing this thing and they come out with a synthesised document, which can be discussed by the House.

3.34
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with you and also agree with the concerns which the members have raised. First of all, Parliament fixed ourselves in a box, by asking the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us loans approved by the Ninth Parliament. Among the loans running, they include those passed by the Eighth Parliament. Still running is Entebbe Express Highway, health sector support, technical schools, they are still running.

I would like to agree with you, Mr Speaker, that the right document to discuss is the performance of loans, grants and guarantees, which was laid on the Table by hon. Matia Kasaija, at the time of the Budget Speech.

However, that was then in the Ninth Parliament. Can I therefore propose that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails every member of the Tenth Parliament a copy of loans, grants and guarantees, before the matter goes to the Committee of National Economy?

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should find a day, working with Speaker’s Office, whether it is in the Conference Hall to take the whole Tenth Parliament through the issues of borrowing, in the question of the performance of loans. It is not only about the performance of loans, this country and these development partners have been having an argument on our debt sustainability vis-à-vis our debt strategy, which had expired in 2012. It is, therefore, important that all Members of Parliament do understand that the country is now borrowing in billions of dollars, not the US$2 million we used to borrow. 

We are now borrowing for Karuma US$ 1.6 billion, we are  borrowing for standard gauge in billions, we are having Public-Private Partnerships, which members would like to know if we should also call them loans or not because they have a lot of commitments. These are the areas I think the whole House has to be brought on board about.

Mr Speaker, you have also rightly guided that the sectoral committee would have been - every year this statement is brought here, accompanying the budget. We have been requesting the sessional committees to process the performing and the non-performing loans in their sectors. However, they have not been successful. The reason why the sectoral committee should be the one to look at these loans - a loan may run for five years and it is dispensed through an annual budget process for five years. The committee going to go through that is agriculture, health or education. That is why it is important that the sectoral committees should get engaged at that level.

We even had a debate in the last Parliament to the effect that another committee to follow up loans was put in place. I stood here to oppose it because that would be negating and taking away the mandate of the sectoral committee, which analyses that budget annually. Therefore, I would like to agree with the Speaker’s spirit that this matter – the old reports by the way do come but possibly, hon. Ssemujju has forgotten.

However, getting on to the Order Paper to discuss performance of loans, performance of the economy, if you do not put so much in the Speaker’s office, it is not easy. The Speaker’s office has already directed the Committee on National Economy – I was in their induction. I would like to request that it should be the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development if it is real kisanja hakuna mchezo, to come and open up and not to be defensive but open up. I wish it could bring a list in this budget, how many counter findings do you have?

Last week, we heard the Minister of Works and Transport telling us that they do not have money, for land acquisition of some of these projects which were passed six or seven years ago. So, it is important that we have a whole day of honest talk between Parliament and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Developent. We know where the problems are, because some of these projects have lasted four or five years, after loan approval. 

We do not have procurement, we do not have a contractor, we do not have designs. These are the issues which we need, if it is really Kisanja hakuna mchezo, to speak openly about and address the concerns therein. I agree that this report as it is, Parliament has – actually the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is enjoying it. We have boxed ourselves into a very narrow corner. They have a lot of bad information behind there, which will not come out.

However, the debt strategy is very important. We should go by the performance of loans, grants and guarantees. That was the bigger document, which is available and every Member should have it. Members would wish to know how much money in loans has been disbursed totally and how much has not because it is that undisbursed money where the country is paying heavily in terms of commitment fees.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request that the Ministry of Finance finds time to bring to us all those documents so that we discuss them honestly as the Committee on National Economy does its part. 

I would like to end by requesting that every sectoral committee looks at performance of loans under their mandate. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what the former chairperson of the Committee on National Economy has said, is certainly right. However, in terms of the Ninth Parliament, there were documents that were laid here in March whose  copies Members now do not have because that went with the other Parliament.

Would it be easier - the budget process cycle has already started again? By the time we reach next year, all those documents will start pouring in.  Would it not be better if we asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to re-lay the performance report on loans on Table so that they are sent to the Committee on National Economy to enable them look at what is there now as of this year before they come and brief the House, for us to have debate on the general status as we prepare for the next budget cycle. Would that be better?

You can re-lay the same document you laid in March so that we can send it to the committee but this time for a different purpose – for the committee to look at it more critically before we debate the status of loans and their performance.

MR BAHATI: Yes, Mr Speaker. In fact, even in this paper we told Parliament that we had already laid these documents but Parliament insisted that we bring other statements. But for that purpose -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you laid that in March. That was the Ninth Parliament.

MR BAHATI: If it is to re-lay, we shall re-lay it but we shall also go ahead to avail a copy for every Member of Parliament so that they can be acquainted with the facts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that might be a good point and area to start from and then we see how to move from there. Therefore, let us handle it that way so that we have proper debate on this subject.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON MANAGEMENT OF HEPATITIS B IN THE COUNTRY

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The copies of this statement are available but as they distribute them, I think I can proceed.

The issue of Hepatitis B was raised in the Ninth Parliament and even in this Parliament. I want to report that the magnitude of the burden of Hepatitis B in the adolescent and adult population came into limelight following HIV/AIDS Sero-Behavioural Survey(HSBS) that was conducted in 2005 by the Ministry of Health.

We tested samples for both HIV/AIDS and Hepatitis B. This was further reinforced by the data that was being generated from the health management information systems submitted by the districts and results of research conducted in various parts and population in the country.

By 2015, the Government of Uganda had already introduced the vaccine for infants against Hepatitis B with a pentavalent vaccine, which started in 2002.

To date, all children aged 14 years and below, are vaccinated against Hepatitis B virus. The World Health Assembly meeting that was held in 1992 on immunisation and vaccine quality urged member states to include Hepatitis B vaccines in the respective national immunisations programmes.

In 2009, the World Health Organisation issued guidelines on the global control of Hepatitis B virus to guide member states to develop their country action plans.

There was also a call on member states to intensify programmes to control Hepatitis B virus and advocate for UN agencies to include Hepatitis B virus control activities in their action plans.

Mr Speaker, the preceding paragraphs all indicate the various meetings that have been held at global level. I will, therefore, not read them.

In Uganda, it is estimated that approximately 3.5 million people (10 per cent) of the population are infected with Hepatitis B virus and 30 per cent of those infected are chronically ill and require treatment.

From the 2005 HIV/AIDS Sero-Behaviour Survey, which included testing for Hepatitis B virus the prevalence rates were mapped across the country and it is reported that the highest rates are recorded in the Karamoja region at 23.9 per cent; Northern 20.7, West Nile 18.5; western region with 10 per cent; and Teso sub region with 7.1 per cent with the lowest being central region with six per cent and south western region with 3.8 per cent.

Following this situation, the Ministry of Health, in 2014 set up a multisectoral committee on Hepatitis B which comprised of members from the ministries of Education, Agriculture, Gender, development partners, WHO, CDC as well as the Academia, UPDF, Uganda Police, Prisons, Civil Society Organisations and selected districts. The implementing partners where part of this meeting.

The committee began work immediately and to date we have a draft strategy, which is supposed to be approved. We have developed Statutory Instrument No. 104 of 2014 that declared Hepatitis B a public health threat and Statutory Instrument No. 105, which makes vaccination of health workers against Hepatitis B mandatory.  All these have been gazetted and I want to report that health workers have been vaccinated across the country.

The treatment for Hepatitis B is available and we have already discussed with Quality Chemicals for the manufacture of anti virals for the treatment of adults and children infected with Hepatitis B.

Reorganising the risk of Hepatitis B virus among health workers: We have already vaccinated them and I had already reported on that but let me inform Members that Hepatitis B is transmitted through blood and infected body fluids. Therefore, blood-to-blood contact, engaging in unprotected sex with multiple partners, sharing toothbrushes and razor blades with an infected person.

We have the high risk groups and these include the health care workers and this is why we had to prioritise their immunisation; the emergency personnel, infants, those with multiple sexual partners and of course illicit drug users, men who have sex with men, etcetera.

Mr Speaker, it is important to note that WHO care and treatment guidelines, which are followed by this country, require immediate treatment of the individuals who are co-infected by both HIV and Hepatitis B virus using the ARVs combination therapy.

The patients under this category are already provided for under the AIDS control programme. 

The patients diagnosed only with chronic Hepatitis B virus and not HIV positive but are eligible for treatment, are catered for through the monotherapy drugs of Hepatitis B that have been procured from Quality Chemical Industries. 

Out of the total population of 34.8 million people, about 16.7 million - that is 48 per cent - are below 14 years and as I reported, these have already been immunised at birth. The 18.1 million, representing 52 per cent and above, are those that are eligible for the Hepatitis B vaccine. 

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health has started the vaccination of adolescents and adults. This programme was launched in July 2015 in Ngora District by His Excellency, the President. Our initial plan was to move in a phased manner starting with the most affected regions and we had four phases that had been planned. The first phase should have had 39 districts but this was not possible. Therefore, the initial first phase was in 13 districts of Adjumani, Gulu, Dokolo, Moroto, Tororo, Ngora, Lira, Moyo, Napak, Koboko, Kumi, Arua and Katakwi. 

In this Financial Year, 2016/2017, due to limited resources, we hope to cover the remaining districts out of the initial 39 districts in northern Uganda, West Nile, Karamoja and Teso sub-region.

This is data that has been received in our system but we know that the numbers should be higher than this. So far, 427,648 people have been tested. The number testing positive is 34,315 representing eight per cent. You should know that this is an aggregated percentage.

So far, we have only received Shs 13 million from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that is how the money has been utilised. We have treatment clinics at Mulago, Arua, Adjumani, Gulu, Lira, Moroto, Soroti and Naguru. 

Mr Speaker, we intend to roll out these clinics to all regional referral hospitals and the general hospitals but as I indicated, all HIV co-infected patients are referred to the general HIV clinics and they all receive their drugs without any challenge. Regarding treatment with anti-retroviral drugs following infection, not all persons with a positive test are eligible. About 30 per cent of patients with chronic Hepatitis B infection are eligible for treatment.

Mr Speaker, I know that the demand is quite high and we would all wish to provide vaccines to all those who are eligible in this country. However, due to resources, we are not able to do this at a go. We require approximately Shs 180 billion for the vaccines, lab reagents and drugs for those with chronic Hepatitis B if we are to do this at ago in the country. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have had four debates on this matter. This is the third statement from the Ministry of Health and there have been four issues namely:

    1. The issue of funds disbursed by this Parliament and their utilisation. 

    2. How testing is being done; whether some people were supposed to pay money or not because there were cases raised in the previous debate that some people were being asked to pay money before they are tested. 

    3. The issue of vaccination; that those found to be negative are vaccinated. What is the process of doing that? Are people being asked to pay money for vaccines?  

    4. The issue of treatment; those who are found to be positive, whatever stages that the positivity is, the extent of the disease. There are issues of people being made to walk long distances. Some of them cannot even afford to go to the hospitals where these treatment centres are.

Those were the four issues that the debate in the House had generated and the minister’s responses have captured these although not in a synchronised way. I just wanted to recast these four aspects; that if we are going to have a debate, it should be in those areas. If we are going to ask supplementary questions - basically it is going to be supplementary questions because we have had a debate on this matter more than four times so we cannot have a debate now.

What we are going to do is to ask the minister to supply us with more information on those areas that we see gaps in and then we see how to conclude this matter. Since it is only supplementary questions, we will be having limited time. It is clarification so that the minister can plug in the gaps that we have not seen in the debate before and also in the report. 

3.55
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of Health for the statement in regard to Hepatitis B to this House. 

Mr Speaker, you may remember even in the Ninth Parliament when we moved a motion in this House that this has been a consistent issue. As a representative of a district that has benefitted from this programme, I would like to state some challenges.

When we presented this motion in the House, Ngora was among the first districts that were given priority. However, I expected the ministry to have realised certain challenges in regard to the implementation of this programme.

In Ngora, whereas we got the vaccines and whereas almost half of the population have got the first and second doses and are proceeding to the third doses, we do not have test kits. A person who is positive cannot be vaccinated. Someone must first be tested to see whether this person qualifies to get the vaccine. As such, the vaccines are there but there are no test kits. 

Actually, today I talked to our district health officer because I knew that this topic was coming to the House. He said that these vaccines are almost expiring because they have overstayed. They do not have test kits and they cannot ask people to pay for them because the law does not allow them to charge for them. Honourable minister, can you give a proper explanation to this House? 

Secondly, the honourable minister has raised areas of priority and even in the previous Parliament, figures were already rampant; eight per cent is too high. From tests in Ngora, a majority of the people are positive. However, counselling is not well done so people are wondering how to access treatment because the counselling is done massively –(Member timed out.)

3.57
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you very much, minister, for giving us information on Hepatitis B, which is already a crisis in our country.

I am worried about the number of doses that our people are supposed to receive. Aware that the people who are going to be vaccinated are supposed to get three doses, the first phase has already been covered in 13 districts and another phase is yet to come. 

However, the phases are taking quite a lot of time in-between. We know that after the first dose, the second dose is supposed to be given after one month and the third dose after six months -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please use the time properly. Just pose those clarification questions to the minister. 

3.59
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is about the testing. In Moroto Referral Hospital, when someone is tested for Hepatitis B, whether the results are positive or negative, this test is followed by a liver function test.

However, there is a test, which is always done either in Kampala or outside Uganda and that is checking on the viral load. Without that test, someone cannot be put on treatment and yet this test is not done in all these clinics that the minister is talking of. 

Therefore, I think the minister is not being honest enough to tell us where the problem is because without the viral load test to find out whether the virus is active or dormant, it becomes difficult for the doctors to put the patients on treatment.  Thank you.

4.00
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo County North, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification. We know very well that health is wealth but I am wondering why Government has to wait to prioritise the chronically ill, like the minister presented. I think that prevention is better than cure. Why do we have to wait for people to become very ill to the point of death yet this could be curtailed? 

Mr Speaker, recently in my constituency, people have been dying. We are burying 10 to 20 people in a week. This is a very high number. Actually, my district chairman was complaining that he can no longer sit in his office as he is always in the field burying people and most of these people are dying because of Hepatitis B. Government needs to help us –(Member timed out.)

4.01
MS SYLVIA RWABWOGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have very important information because this morning we had a meeting with the Executive Director of the National Medical Stores. The Ninth Parliament approved Shs 11 billion to cater for Hepatitis B. However, of this amount, only Shs 3 billion was released. If Government does not support the ministry, how do we expect the minister to deal with this situation and procure enough doses? Where did that supplementary budget that was passed by the Ninth Parliament go? Thank you.

4.02
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give the minister more information. Pallisa neighbours the greater Teso and we have had some people die in the sub-counties of Opwapeta, Kibale, Kaninima and Petete. 

In Kibale, a family of 10 all tested positive. Considering that Hepatitis B is more lethal than AIDS, have you exhausted all your efforts? Have you considered seeking foreign help from the World Health Organisation and taking this as a serious epidemic? Thank you.

4.03
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the minister. On page 1, the second paragraph, you have told us that to-date, all children aged 14 years and below are vaccinated against the Hepatitis B virus. You also indicated to us the districts where this is being done and that it is being done in phases. I would like to find out whether these children are from those particular districts or from the entire country. Thank you.

4.04
MR OJARA OKIN (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to understand from the minister how many phases are there. This is because you had planned for 39 districts in the first phase. How many phases are still remaining?

Secondly, you have covered 13 districts out of the first phase, which means that there are other districts that are left. Some of the districts are from the same region and yet others were left out. What criteria did you use to select the 13 districts? Thank you.

4.05
MS FLORENCE WAMALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I would like to thank you for this report but as a person who comes from Mt Elgon, I am not very satisfied because Sironko District is not included here. 

For your information, people from the mountains have a very long distance to travel and our roads are impassable. The people of Sironko must travel to Mbale Regional Referral Hospital to access treatment. The people of Sironko are dying without knowing whether they are suffering from malaria or Hepatitis B. 

Sironko has been promised a hospital ever since I was born and now I am in Parliament. Please, listen to the people of Sironko and give them a hospital -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Bunga Primary School, Kawuku campus. They are represented by hon. Allan Ssewanyana and hon. Sempala. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome.

4.06
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Mr Speaker, it is my first time to speak before you. As Government is struggling to manage Hepatitis B, I think Government should also take the lead in mass sensitisation. Actually, the locals do not understand what Hepatitis B is. 

I was in the village recently and people are infected and dying. However, they were asking me, “What is this ‘appetite’ that is killing people?” Apparently, if you have an appetite for sex or meat, you can fall sick and die. As such, sensitisation should be taken into consideration. Thank you.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our rules talk about the dressing code in this House. Some time back, I went to see Dr Besigye in Luzira prison and I was told by the prisons staff that a yellow Kaunda suit is a gazetted prisoners’ uniform. Therefore, is it in order for hon. Abiriga to come here dressed as if he is a prisoner? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member for Arua Municipality wanted to respond directly to the issue but the rules only allow me to respond to such things. Therefore, I will do it on your behalf.

Honourable members, our rules regulate the form of dressing. I have not seen, in the provision, where the colour is regulated. Therefore, hon. Abiriga is in no violation of any rules of this House; he is properly dressed in a safari suit. 

4.10
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister has given us a breakdown of Karamoja, northern Uganda and West Nile but this brings us to northern Uganda. The population of those already affected is 63.1 per cent, meaning that northern Uganda needs to be declared to the World Health Organisation for immediate action. What is your ministry going to do? When you add Teso, because all these regions interact with one another –(Member timed out.)

4.12
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the honourable minister for this report. 

Katakwi is one of the districts that is a beneficiary of Hepatitis B vaccines and we got the vaccinations about two months ago. However, I would like to present the challenge that we are facing as a district regarding the administration of Hepatitis B vaccines in the communities. 

As a district, we agreed that we would use the health centres III to administer the vaccines but this has come with additional costs. I am wondering if the ministry has the funds to administer Hepatitis B vaccines because for quite a period of time, we had to suspend this activity as we mobilised resources to be able to reach the communities –(Member timed out.) 

4.12
MR LEE OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Given the ravages of Hepatitis B in our communities, a lot of people have been asking if this is a secret death sentence or an ignored warfare. 

We hear of Government finding money to bankroll campaigns for Ugandans who want to bid for positions elsewhere but money cannot be found to save lives! 

Therefore, I would like to know from the minister: one, where are these 200 machines that you talked about on page 3 located? This is because in our community health centres, I do not see these machines.

You also mentioned that some health education messages have been developed and I believe that they are supposed to be running. On which radio stations are these messages running? I see a lot of lack of awareness about Hepatitis B; you find people playing with bodies of people who have died of Hepatitis B. 

In addition, it is very important that you show us, from this year’s allocated budget, what you have been able to do -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, can we allow the minister to respond because the issues are many? However, before that is done, let me make an announcement. The Inter Religious Council of Uganda has organised a prayer breakfast meeting for all Members of Parliament on Tuesday, 30 August 2016 at Hotel Africana Nile Conference Hall starting at 7.00 a.m. 

All Members are invited and your invitation cards will follow but this notice is important because Tuesday is a day of sitting of Parliament but you might not know so you might come late. However, the breakfast meeting is at 7.00 a.m. Please arrange to attend as the invitation cards are on the way.

4.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform colleagues that Hepatitis B testing and vaccination is free. However, we note that there are some health workers who have been getting money from the unsuspecting public illegally. Some arrests have been made where we have found this happening. 

In my own district, we found vaccines that had been stolen being given to people unsuspectingly at a fee. The same has happened in Gulu and in other parts of the country. Therefore, note that this vaccine is free and I would like to appeal to you that if you are in the constituency, please use the opportunity - (Interruption)

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Here at Parliament we paid for Hepatitis B vaccination. Is it in order for the minister to give us false information that the vaccine is free of charge when here we paid Shs 60,000 and we are Members of Parliament? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a concern from Erute, on the first day, that people were being asked to pay for vaccines. The minister is simply saying that Government has already procured these vaccines that it is using and the vaccination is free for the citizens. The vaccines are paid for by Government so they are supposed to be free and not paid for. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have private health facilities in this country but the vaccines that I am talking about that are given free are those procured by the Government of Uganda and given to the citizens by our own health workers in our own health facilities. If you choose to go to Norvik, Nakasero or elsewhere, you will definitely pay even as much as Shs 150,000. Therefore, the choice is yours. If you go to a Government facility, you are supposed to get this vaccine free of charge.

Mr Speaker, I note the challenge that has been raised by hon. Amongin. It is true that we had challenges with the test kits but I would like to assure all of you that the test kits are available. With the Shs 3 billion that we received as additional funding in the supplementary budget, we were able to procure test kits and these are available. If your districts do not have these test kits, I would like to advise you to inform the district health officers to request for these test kits because they are there at the National Medial Stores. 

Regarding the issue of counselling by health workers, I would like to inform Members that Hepatitis B is something that is new. Most people do not know about it. You heard the honourable member from Pallisa talking about appetite; that people are being told that if they have appetite for sex they may get this disease –(Interruption) 

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that people in Namutumba District are dying and they do not know about this strange disease, even when we try to tell them that it is Hepatitis B. They have reached an extent of doing mob justice against those that they suspect to have bewitched their dear ones.

Honourable minister, this is a very big problem. I do not see Busoga sub-region included in the report among the districts that are affected and yet in Busoga, Hepatitis B is prevalent, more so in Namutumba District. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR KABERUKA: Mr Speaker, although the minister has named only 13 districts, Uganda has over 112 districts. Kanungu is a neighbour to Congo, which is infested with that disease, and people in Kanungu do not even know about this disease. 

In addition, we have not seen that intervention among the 14-year-olds that you are talking about. Therefore, if you are talking about Hepatitis B interventions by your ministry, could you include border districts that are at risk? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please wind up.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That was not information but a question and I will respond to it, but let me move in an orderly manner because the Woman MP of Napak had raised similar concerns.

The issue of counselling by the health workers was raised by hon. Amongin and she indicated that it is not being done well. As I indicated earlier, you will note that even at the global level, initially there was no attention paid to Hepatitis B. The initial advice was that those with this infection would have it phased out with time. Unfortunately, with time we have noted that if those with this infection do not feed well and they drink alcohol, the disease develops into a chronic one. 

We have therefore followed the World Health Organisation (WHO) guidelines. I indicated that in 2014, we received technical advice from the WHO and we were able to form a multi-sectoral team that came up with a strategy on hepatitis B. Our first step was to ensure that health workers are protected because they atttend to patients. It, therefore, became mandatory for all health workers to be immunised.

For children, we introduced the vaccine against Hepatitis in the year 2002. Therefore, all children that are taken for vaccination at six months are given this vaccine. You may not know it, but this is part of the vaccines that are given to children before their first birthday at all health facilities. It is already in the routine immunisation and this is why we have been encouraging parents to take their children for immunisation.

Mr Speaker, the deliberate effort that we have taken is to give vaccines to adults but as I indicated, we are constrained because of resources. We cannot do this at once and this is why we are moving in a phased manner. I also indicated that if we receive all the money, we shall be able to do it at once, but in this budget we have only Shs 10 billion. A supplementary of Shs 11 billion was given but we only received Shs 3 billion from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The Woman Member of Parliament for Napak also raised issues of the liver function test - the viral load test - that is being done, and that they have to move long distances for these tests. Mr Speaker, we have just held discussions with WHO on the way forward because we have procured the drugs in this country and next week, we are supposed to conclude discussions on this matter. I do not want to pre-empt this discussion before we conclude but allow me to hint that we have been informed that it would do no harm if we provided - As long as somebody tests negative, they can be given the drug Tenofovir that is available.

This is what we are currently discussing. We hope that when we conclude this, next week people will not have to travel long distances; once you are tested positive, you are immediately given the drugs because they are available.

Hon. Nyakecho, I come from Tororo. She is not here but she was saying that 10 people are dying in a week because of Hepatitis B. This is not true because I am from Tororo. Colleagues, I do not want you to indicate that everybody who is dying is dying of Hepatitis B. Without doing post-mortem tests, you cannot just state that 10 people are dying weekly because of Hepatitis B. I bury most of these people, just like she does, but I want to indicate that without a post-mortem report, let us not assume that these people are dying of Hepatitis B.

Mr Speaker, the Member from Kibale was raising the issue of those who are tested positive –(Interruption)

MS NYAKECHO: Mr Speaker, I made a statement and I clearly said that at least 20 people are dying in my district and some are dying of Hepatitis B. Is it in order, therefore, for my sister to misquote me by saying that I said 10 people are dying of Hepatitis B? Is she in order to also say that I was lying to the august House when I was giving correct information from my own constituency?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you might have intended to say that but you said something else. What you said is that they are dying of Hepatitis B; I remember. If that is now the correct position, I think you are in agreement.

MS NYAKECHO: Mr Speaker, I know I said “some” and not all the 10.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You said all the 20 are dying of Hepatitis B. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Sarah Opendi, the Minister of State for Health. I would like to give information. 

Yes, Hepatitis B infection is a very big problem but the case fatality rate is much lower. It is not as deadly in terms of killing its victims as the situation is being imagined. Epidemiologically, less than 20 per cent of those who acquire Hepatitis B transit to the chronic stage, and that is why not all those who test positive are started on treatment. I wanted to give that information because it may not be true that all those who are dying in the constituency are dying because of Hepatitis B.

The other piece of information I want to give is that the statistics presented by the honourable minister is derived from a few samples that were tested during the HIV sero survey that was done in 2011. However, through the Ministry of Health, Government has directed, and indeed money was found for this, that we test all the samples which had been collected. 

In addition, the Ministry of Health has just launched another national sero survey and I am sure that Hepatitis B will be tested and then Government will get the correct prevalence rates for all the communities in the country. I just wanted to give that information because then we can plan better on how we can have treatment all over the country. Thank you.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable Dr Baryomunsi is not the Minister of Health but he is a professional doctor. I am actually very sad that the appointing authority has always moved people from ministries they could properly handle to those where they have little knowledge.

Having said that, the procedural matter I want to raise now is –(Interruption)

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for my colleague, hon. Nambooze, to insinuate that Dr Baryomunsi, a minister, has no knowledge of what he is doing or that the ministers do not know what they are doing? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not what was said.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. The minister has just given us a report but a doctor, who was holding that particular docket before and whose information I have no reason to doubt, has just told this House that these are results from just one section of patients - people with HIV. 

Therefore, would it be procedurally okay for us to continue basing on the information that the minister has given us, or should we request the minister to liaise with her colleagues so that they give this Parliament accurate information about Hepatitis B in the country? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the matter that was being presented here was statistics and anybody can present statistics. It has nothing to do with the medical profession as a doctor. Therefore, I think the variation is not because of the profession but just about statistics.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I said was that there was a national HIV sero survey which was done and during the testing, the scientists also tested for Hepatitis B prevalence. It does not mean that all those who had Hepatitis B were HIV positive; no. I think it is the level of understanding, which is troubling you. 

I have said that they tested fewer samples but now the Ministry of Health, through resources provided by this Parliament, is undertaking a wider examination of all the samples collected. Another new survey is also being started to get a much better picture of the prevalence rate in the country, including in Kanungu where hon. Kaberuka is asking how the magnitude is. That will enable us to plan better as a Parliament on how we can tackle Hepatitis B in the whole country. 

However regarding issues of housing, I am extremely knowledgeable and I will be here very soon to show you. Thank you. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, my honourable colleague, for that information. Mr Speaker, please allow me to inform hon. Nambooze that when we talk of the survey that was done in 2005, we do not only look at those who are HIV positive, but it was a survey of the population. Please, take note of that. 

Out of the blood samples collected, we tested for HIV and Hepatitis B. As such, we were able to get a rough estimate of what the situation is like in the country. However, in the districts where we are now doing the testing, - the 13 selected districts- we encourage as many people as possible to go and get tested so that they can receive the vaccines if they are negative. If they are positive, they will be advised on the next course of action.

Mr Speaker, there was a question on the criteria that was used, considering that the Karamoja sub region has the highest burden. You will note that there are also districts in West Nile and some in the north, Lango and Teso sub regions; for example, we had placed Ngora in phase III but when His Excellency the President went there, there was an outcry from the population that people were dying of Hepatitis B. As a result, we went and did some testing and we realised that the prevalence was much higher than what we had in our own statistics. This is why we had to include Ngora and Kumi and similarly, that is how Tororo also came on board and the other districts. However, I want to assure you that with the budget for this financial year, we hope to include all the districts in the high-burden areas of northern Uganda, West Nile region, Karamoja and the entire Teso region.

The Woman Member of Parliament for Sironko requested for a hospital as people are moving long distances. Yes, the desire for hospitals in these areas is noted. However, we cannot proceed without an increase in our budget because putting up a general hospital implies that we have to increase staffing and all the attendant costs that go with it. We are going to have these hospitals constructed and I would like to assure you that Sironko and all the mountainous areas and island districts will be our priority once we receive funding. However, we will do it in a phased manner.

On mass sensitisation, we started commemorating the World Hepatitis Day in 2014 and we started off in Adjumani. The next was Ngora and we are now moving to Dokolo this year on 3 September –(Interruption) 

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you very much. Madam Minister, you called Members of Parliament to notify us about this virus and we went to our communities to tell them about Hepatitis B and we are glad that you have already started action. However, still on the issue of sensitisation, we also need to go down and inform the populace. You know that there are some populations that have Hepatitis B positive people but when you go to the doctor – 

According to your statement, it does not spread through sneezing, coughing, hugging or eating food prepared by an infected person. However, some doctors say if there is an infected person in a household or community, even the utensils they use should be isolated. That means they should not share cups or plates with the rest of the household and washing should also be done separately, as though it were as contagious as tuberculosis. Can you tell us what the reality is? Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make it very clear that Hepatitis B is transmitted through blood and other body fluids. Therefore, as long as you come into contact with the blood of an infected person and you have a cut, you might contract Hepatitis B. You must have a cut; it is not simply by bodily contact because I may touch someone and wash my hands. 

This is why we are advised not to share sharp objects. It is also the reason we are advised to test in order to know your status before having unprotected sex with a person whose status you do not know. As much as possible, we advise that people in the north and the east stop taking ajono because they use the same straw and you can contract Hepatitis B through saliva. This is the message. 

However, I would like to assure you that we shall circulate –(Interjection)- Yes, you can get it through kissing as well; that is what hon. Oboth would like to know. Members, we shall provide information so that Members of Parliament can use it to go and help in sensitising the population. We commemorate World Hepatitis Day and we use it to drum up support and to sensitise the population. 

The Woman MP for Katakwi talked about the additional costs at the health facilities in carrying out this exercise. I would like to indicate that this is very unfortunate. If this vaccination is being done by way of outreach and at the health centre by the health workers there, there should be no additional costs and we have advised District Health Officers (DHOs) on this. 

We sent additional money to the districts for constituency health task forces but we realise that Members had not been informed in detail about this money. We have now informed them that they can use this money to conduct outreaches so that they can reach bigger populations, other than being static in one health facility. We have also advised that as they go out for outreaches like for HIV, they should integrate the other services like screening for Hepatitis B in their programmes so that they reduce on the costs. 

The Member of Parliament for Maracha talked about the 200 point-of-care Selexon machines. These machines were given to us through a grant by South Korea and they indicated to us that they would train personnel. We cannot just take the machines before we have trained our people. We shall distribute them to health facilities very soon after training.

The other challenge was that while this was a donation, we were supposed to buy the reagents - the cartridges supposed to be used in these machines - from South Korea. This is what has held us back but the equipment is there.

Regarding the budget and what we have done for 2016/2017, as I reported, Parliament appropriated some funds - about Shs 10 billon. This is what we shall use to roll out this exercise to the other additional districts that I talked about in northern Uganda, West Nile, Karamoja and Teso sub-region –(Interjections)- It is immediate; maybe even next week we shall be able to move because we have the vaccines now and all we need to do is to prepare the population. We shall inform those districts where we are supposed to be going so that you can go in advance and inform the population. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to get clarification from the minister because she is talking in terms of regions - Teso sub-region, Lango sub-region, Acholi sub-region. Are you going to cover the whole region or you are going to select some districts like you have done so far? When we talk about Teso, should we say that Soroti, Kumi, Ngora, Pallisa and everywhere is going to be covered?

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, in order for us to move in an organised manner, once we are ready, we shall come to the Floor of this House and inform the Members of Parliament accordingly, so that you can go in advance and mobilise. I think that is the best way for us to move. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I think we have received enough information on the issue of testing, vaccination and treatment. There is sufficient information arising from this discussion and the responses from the minister.

What we have not got sufficient information on is the issue of funding. What is the way forward on funding so that this matter can be handled properly? I think that is the pending matter, and I do not think that a discussion from the House can generate the funds. We need clarification from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the issue of funding. This is because Shs 11 billion was appropriated but only Shs 3 billion has been given for this intervention. What is going on? Who is in charge of Government here right now? Can we have a commitment on this?

4.45
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, we have noted the concern of the House regarding funding. I undertake to inform the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development about that matter so that he can come and clarify at the appropriate time. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, can you extract the minute to show that this House appropriated Shs 11 billion through a supplementary and only Shs 3 billion has been availed to the ministry. Extract that minute because we need a response as to why and what is going to be done so that this matter can be arrested. Thank you. 

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point of procedure I am rising on is for the long term protection of a developing country like Uganda. As the minister was making her submission, I was at pains because one time we went to South Africa with President Yoweri Museveni and he was telling African presidents how, geo-politically and demographically, Africa has survived amidst difficult times. 

It was then that I understood that there were some people called Aborigines who were wiped away and their land taken. There were others called Red Indians who were also wiped away. The President went ahead to say that we, Africans, are actually very happy because we survived and we were not wiped away. He fell short of saying that strategically, we have a lot of resources and these resources are actually sustaining the world. 

Mr Speaker, we have what we call poverty, disease and ignorance, which have always been associated with sub-Saharan Africa. That said, there are cases when we are very good at research but we do not ask the basic question: what is this thing called “outbreak”; how does it start and where is it from? 

Recently, Haiti found the UN liable for taking cholera to their country. The first time they said that the UN had taken cholera to their country, everyone said, “No.” It is just recently that I heard on CNN that the UN has taken responsibility. Most recently, in Kenya, highly educated Catholic medical doctors rose up and said that the tetanus injection they are giving to young people is nothing else but sterility and they put World Health Organisation to task.

In the face of biological warfare, would it not be procedurally right for Government to dedicate Shs 500 million to build the capacity of our own scientists who can have answers to questions like, “Where is this thing coming from?” In a country where we have a centre for disease control – The Centre for Disease Control is based in the US but we are so favoured that we have an office here. However, we have outbreaks from time to time - Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD), bird flu, nodding disease, Hepatitis B. 

The Bible says, “I have given you life and life to the fullest.” In this country, we can never live life to the fullest as we are talking about disease every day. The honourable member from Agule, whom I always tease as a son of Mukula because they have similar foreheads and he is called Mukula, stated it very clearly. What hurts me is that any virus, whether it is a computer virus, must be acquired by insertion. You insert a flash disc in an infected computer and you are infected. When it comes to us, it is the same thing. 

Mr Speaker, I am really crying for this country. We need to create capacity - a team that can do maximum research, well-funded by this country and not by any foreign funding. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, does your disease surveillance system include intercepting them before they attack people? Do you have that system, honourable minister?

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Disease surveillance in this country is our priority and this is why we are able to detect diseases very fast. Where we cannot, we work together with our development partners to ensure that we curb the disease before it spreads. Recently, we had the rift valley fever -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is what the honourable member proposing feasible?

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, at the continental level, we have now established an African Centre for Disease Control and here we have the Uganda Virus Research Institute; so yes, it is feasible. 

Mr Speaker, what he has indicated is that they are funded by partners but it is feasible, if Government had funds to support these institutes to do more research than what we are doing now. However, with the African Centre for Disease Control, we hope that we shall be able to build our capacities in-country. If I recall, in December a loan was approved here for improving our in-country capacity. We hope that with this loan, we shall be able to do more than what we are actually doing. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had a lot of discussions on Hepatitis B and we have had statements from the ministers on this subject. The balance that we have not been able to exhaust should go the Committee on Health so that they can have more comprehensive coverage and then come back to us. As for the House, I think we have had sufficient discussions on this. Can we leave it here?

4.52
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity and I thank the minister for the statement. 

It is unfortunate that as a country, as we try to get closer to our middle-income status, the health of our population is not priority yet I would imagine that the health of Ugandans should be given first priority. We should not look at development partners to be the ones in charge and in control of the health of Ugandans. As a country, we are saying that we have enough to facilitate our budget; I would say that most of this money should be tagged to the health of the population so that it can gear us towards the desired status that we are proudly talking about.

Mr Speaker, a statement was presented here in the Ninth Parliament about districts that had high prevalence of Hepatitis B. I still remember that Kasese was among the first 10 districts that had the highest prevalence. You are all aware that people from all districts try hard to come to Kampala. It is unfortunate that as we plan for the first 13 districts, some of those districts that appeared among the first 10 are not among the 13.

Secondly, a majority of Uganda’s population are within the centre; so I am surprised that none of the 13 districts talked about includes any district within either Buganda region or at least Kampala. Members of Parliament and a majority of the population come from those villages to stay here. This disease is in the whole country and Uganda is burying victims of Hepatitis B. It is not only in Ngora or Kumi. I do not know why, as a country, we can even start fighting disease in terms of districts.

If we are to talk about reducing Hepatitis B in our country, let us put aside enough money in the fight against it and we ensure that the whole country is covered. We have asked for loans in this Parliament and some of them are still redundant. Why don’t we look for money and ensure that the energy we put in the fight against HIV is the same energy we are putting in the fight against Hepatitis B?

We may look at it as a small thing but I want to tell you that in Kasese, for example, we have buried tens of thousands of people who were suffering from this disease. I know that it is even in other districts and they are burying many people. Therefore, it is sad that we are narrowing the treatment to only 13 of the 115 districts that we have as a country. Can we look for money and ensure that the whole country is covered with facilities that can enable testing, prevention and if possible, treatment of Hepatitis B, so that we know that we are talking about a healthy population that will steer our economy to a middle-income status? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Like I said, the issue now hinges on funding. We are going to refer the issue of funding to the Committee on Health so that they can look at it more closely and come and advise us on how to proceed. Let us leave it at that. Let the Committee on Health look at the issue of funding and then we will come back to this when we have options on how to raise funds to handle the disease with recommendations from the committee.

4.57
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, based on our Rules of Procedure, rule 50, I would like to move a motion without prior notice.

I have heard the minister talking about commemorating the day of Hepatitis B and yet if one looked at the budget that we are going to expend on that day, it would be enough to purchase vaccines for a number of Ugandans. We are crying about the lack of funding but I think where we are placing our money is not a priority.

I would like to move a motion that we postpone or cancel the day of commemorating Hepatitis B and allocate that money to buy vaccines for Ugandans. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, today is the 25th and the event is one week away; all the procurements related to this event are done by now. This Parliament cannot act in vain. It may be a very good idea but is it feasible? 

MS AMULE: Mr Speaker, I am grateful for the wise guidance that you are giving the House. However, as Parliament, we do not debate for today only. I think that hon. Osegge’s idea for this year might be too late but we need it on the record of this House that as of now, we do not need to commemorate when people are dying. If it cannot be effected now, it can be for the future. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it is in relation to this particular day, don’t you think it is appropriate for our committee, to which I have already referred this matter, to look at this and come back to us instead of -

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your guidance is good and we appreciate it. However, may I find out from the minister whether it is possible for her to tell this House those items that they are going to spend on as a ministry? We can then see whether some of the un-procured items can be done away with and the money diverted to the treatment or testing of the Hepatitis B victims. There are items that can be procured next week.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I indicated that we started commemorating the World Hepatitis Day in 2014 and we use this day to raise awareness. We started in Adjumani and everybody knows about Hepatitis B there. We moved to Ngora, and we are using this event to reach out to the people so that we sensitise them on prevention.

Mr Speaker, on this day, we move to all sub counties. Remember, we suspended this day; we should have had it in July but because of various programmes we could not have it and we fixed 3rd September as the convenient day to have this function. Teams are already in the field and people have been tested in all sub counties. 

The only expense is our film vans that move to the sub-counties to educate the people. The other expense is the people who will move from here on that day and the kits. However, we are not celebrating; it is really for the purpose of sensitising the population. Activities take place the whole week and all we do on the last day is to have an official function for speeches and of course, the radio adverts. Therefore Mr Speaker, although I do not have the expenditure here, it is quite minimal compared to when you have celebrations. Thank you. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister sounded as if she is now debating the motion. The motion was moved, with your permission, I stood up here and so many other honourable colleagues stood up and seconded the motion. The minister, in reaction, has been debating that motion. 

Some of us are at pains; I have been burying people in Mukono who have died of Hepatitis B but none of the districts of Buganda has been included on this list. I do not know if you intend, as a Government, to carry out genocide in some areas of this country. 

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay that you allow us to debate this motion, which has been moved? Thereafter, we can come to a conclusion as Parliament, more so knowing that this is not going to be the end of the celebrations that the Minister of Health will be having.

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda and it seems as if we are dividing Uganda by the way we are debating. The minister has just alluded to the fact that northern Uganda is in dire need and a smaller percentage is in south or central Uganda.

You know that we were put in camps and the issue of sex could not be controlled due to the insurgency. You may laugh but we have problems. That is the reason why we have a higher prevalence. They are creating this awareness for the population so that the magnitude could reduce. 

Is it in order for the honourable member - I do not want to mention the name - to discourage the whole House from performing awareness in Dokolo, which is part of northern Uganda? We know that they have plans and next time they will celebrate it in central or south-western Uganda. However, for this particular case, they have already moved ahead of time to conduct activities in Dokolo. We need this so much so that our population is sensitised. Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House does not act in vain. Let us protect the image of the House. If you would like to debate that motion you can, but I pointed out a practical situation that today is 25th of  August and the event is 3rd of September. If there is any money to be spent on that event, it is spent on procurement by now. There are processes for doing procurement. Would that debate still be a debate that will not end up in vain? That is the question I posed before we opened up the motion for debate and for the consideration of the Member who moved the motion.

The only issue that is pending, which has not been resolved properly, is the issue of funding to fight Hepatitis B. The issue of testing has been sufficiently covered and the same goes for vaccination and treatment. The only pending issue is the issue of funding and I asked, “Can our own Committee on Health explore more options and come back and advise the House?”

Certainly, if part of the exploration is saving maybe Shs 5 million from the day of commemoration - If that is part of the contribution, I will allow the debate. However, let us not debate in vain, honourable members.

MS JANAT MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Having sat here yesterday and today, I realise that we better request our Committee on Rules to revisit the section where the Speaker should be protected. We said that when the Speaker is speaking, everybody should keep quiet. We also provided for the procedure to be followed when the Speaker makes a decision and someone does not agree with that decision. However, when you guide and Members do not take your guidance, we need to make provision for that. Otherwise, at this pace, we may be construed to be wasting taxpayers’ money. 

I would not have stood up but yesterday I was at a loss. The Speaker guided and when you see the people who are disturbing the Speaker –(Interjection)– Sometimes the Speaker guides on legal issues and we, who are not lawyers, also stand up to try and guide a lawyer! (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member who moved the motion, do you really want this motion debated or should we leave this matter with the committee so that we can have a proper discussion on this matter?

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, I think in this case, it is not about winning or losing. We can amend that motion for future purposes. I still believe that there is no reason for us to commemorate or celebrate sad situations and spend money for that. We can amend that motion and say, where there is a situation like this in future, instead of spending money we cancel commemorating such days like those for Hepatitis B, World AIDS Day, among others altogether. 

5.11
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Mr Speaker, this is a very emotive matter because it touches on life. I do not want to ask how many people here have sinned. Somebody suffering from Hepatitis B and he is told that he is going to die!
 
When I rose up to support the motion, I agreed that the principle of that motion was good because it seems to me that commemorating or celebrating those days is not the only way of creating awareness. However, given the wise guidance from the Speaker that procurement could have taken place, I wish we had moved this motion a little earlier. We need to borrow a leaf. That money, which is going to be used there, could have been directed to do other things.

As Members of Parliament, if you want to create national awareness, commission us. On that particular day, it will be the same gospel preached just like they do in the Catholic Church. We shall preach that and create better awareness than you are doing. We also know that issues of accountability have ever risen from such things - how many were fed when actually, it was mineral water bought and sometimes nothing. 

Regarding the issue of taking vans to treat people in the villages, we do not have to wait for that day when we are celebrating or commemorating. We can make it anytime so that in the whole country, every Member of Parliament goes to their constituency and organises the same things at an effective cost or at no cost. We need to be proactive if we need 2020 to be the year for us to transform this country. 

Mr Speaker, I am humbled, being a person who knows the rules, that the Speaker kindly guides and the guidance is binding on me that this would be nugatory - our motion would be overtaken by events. I would advise Members that this is a matter that we need to consider, not only on Hepatitis B. As I support hon. Angelline Osegge, Member of Parliament for Soroti, we should reflect and review these celebrations and the commemorations of all these days. You may not know how much is spent on those days. We know why we do not achieve the goals. We need to get more serious and have value for money. 

I would, therefore, advise that we engage ourselves and interest more people here to move another substantive motion to debate all the national and international celebrations. We cannot do it because World Health Organisation is doing it - Do we know why they are celebrating? We can customise it accordingly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you want this debate on this issue of commemoration, can we have a separate motion properly brought and argued to handle it? Would that be okay?

MS OSEGGE:  Mr Speaker, under our Rules of Procedure, rule 48, may I, therefore, move a motion to give notice to the House that I will seek leave of this House to move a motion to debate celebrations on matters that include or that involve –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just say the subject of your motion. In the future, you will see how to - You are giving notice that you will move a motion, which will cover the subject of your motion, which you had proposed.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Notice received. When you are ready, let us know then we can have a debate. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DELIVERY OF SEEDS TO FARMERS IN ADJUMANI DISTRICT

5.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Christopher Kibanzanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With your indulgence, Mr Speaker, I pray, on behalf of the ministry, that you allow me to withdraw the statement so that I can go and sit with my technical staff from NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation so that by next week, I can bring a comprehensive statement that will give this House what it deserves. I pray, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the statement that you are withdrawing? You have not yet presented it so you cannot withdraw what you have not presented. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, there is a statement that was circulated and Members of Parliament have it. However, as I stepped in, I discovered that our technical team left out statistical data of what we have done in Adjumani and in other districts of northern and eastern Uganda. In my opinion, this House deserves better than the statement circulated. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Lwemiyaga, are you going to present the statement yourself? (Laughter) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Far from delivering a statement, mine is to express indignation at the way such matters of public importance are being treated.

You make a statement, it is circulated to Members, we come up with our notes on how to respond and all of a sudden you say, “I am withdrawing”. Of course, you are not only withdrawing your word but there are costs like stationery, time etc. (Laughter) I would propose that the minister justifies the point as to why he is withdrawing and making Parliament wait in strong anticipation and he lets us down.

Secondly, if this is the way the Executive is going to handle business in this House, this is very unfortunate. In some other democracies, you cannot do this. You cannot tell Members you have circulated a statement and all of a sudden you disagree with your technical team. We know the ministry is one unit-(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. It is important for the minister to know that in this Parliament, we do not receive documents from technical officers; we receive documents from ministers. 

What would have saved my brother, hon. Kibanzanga, is if he said, “I wish to withdraw with an apology”. You must take political responsibility for whatever you bring us here. We do not know who prepared the document for you. Of course, I am being very soft on the hon. Kibanzanga, being a new minister, but we expect you to read your document, understand and own it when you bring it to Parliament.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to encourage my colleagues to note that Parliament the world over is a very serious institution. We do not read documents and then you tell us you are withdrawing. When you withdraw the paper, how about the content? –(Interjection)- I would not have a problem; the information I wanted to give to my colleague is that this is political responsibility. Of course, I am very soft because the hon. Kibanzanga, prior to his defection, was a very good leading Member of this Parliament. (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, in the circumstances, the minister has to offer an apology to this House and the House accepts it and then he gets leave to withdraw the statement. Otherwise, Parliament is not a dumping site; it is a House of serious people who must be treated with care, and what the minister presents, we take it as Government.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members, for raising those collective issues. Giving an apology is humility and human. However, if you do not know how ministries work, I will tell you that we have political leaders and technical staff. Our technical staff are not angels; they can make some errors in a document. 

Having said that, I sincerely apologise; however, with your indulgence, Mr Speaker, I beg and pray that you allow us more time next week and we bring a comprehensive statement to this House. I beg to move.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, we cannot identify which statement the hon. Kibanzanga brought. According to the documents I possess, there is none that has his signature. Probably, next time, colleagues –(Interjections)- I know about organisations; you cannot receive a statement like this. 

In other words, I am requesting or informing the honourable minister that next time, we should know whether it is his statement or not. He should sign it because even if it was to be presented on the Floor, we could have thrown it out because nobody owns it. Honourable colleagues, you must learn how to be professional.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your apology is received by the House. We will wait for the time when you are ready to make this statement and you give it.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SECURITY SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY

5.24
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Henry Tumukunde): Mr Speaker, sometime back I circulated a document to this House covering the security situation of the country as it was then. It is important that I begin by saying that security is like flowers; it dies off with time. Therefore, in the circumstances, I am sticking to the rules of this Parliament that demanded that we give a statement on the current security situation in the country.

The general security situation in the country and along the borderlines is stable, save for the following notable threats and challenges that security agencies are working on with other stakeholders to address: 

The document raises issues on the terror threat. This threat is sometimes beyond our country. Because of the shared circumstances with our neighbouring countries, especially Somalia and Kenya, sometimes we step beyond the country to tell you what is happening. This is largely because our forces are participants in the Somalia situation. The points on this issue are listed below and the actions we are trying to take as a body of the house of the security agencies is hereby outlined. 

Mr Speaker, I am told you are hard pressed for time. We have also addressed issues on land wrangles and conflicts. We have outlined the different areas that are affected by these land wrangles and conflicts related to land. They are properly listed and the details are very brief, so it is very easy to pick the issues raised here.

Item No.3 covers harassment of Ugandans on lakes Edward and Albert. It is important to note that we have held meetings with the President of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and his delegation. I would like to inform this honourable House that every detail - loss, attacks, assault - was brought to the notice of this delegation. I happened to be a player and participant, and it is true that it got to the judicial notice of the Congolese Government that these circumstances may not be tolerated for long.

Mr Speaker, we got correct responses. Of course, we also have our issues with the Allied Democratic Front (ADF) operating in their area. Sometimes this compromises our capacity to stand that firm when they are also causing mayhem in that general area. We discussed ways and means of solving this problem and should it be appropriate, we shall come before you to tell you about the solutions that we have decided on and the action taken.

Uganda continues to be a safe haven in the general area. This has not necessarily gone positive on our own side. We have been receiving very serious refugee influxes; 207,000 from the Democratic Republic of Congo and now, 117,000 from South Sudan. The complications about these border refugee influxes is that we cannot force people into refugee camps because they have cross-border relatives. 

You know very well, Mr Speaker, that about 70 per cent of the Alur live in Congo. There are the Nande, who are called the Bakonzo in Uganda; almost 3.5 million Nande live in Congo. When there is a matter of refugees flowing into the country, we have found it very difficult to regulate them and put them into camps. They do not accept to come to camps because they are better habituated and served by their relatives across the border. We have a history of seeking refuge in other countries and so we treat this matter with the modesty and humility it requires. 

Crime falls under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. However, when crime affects the security of the country largely because of the magnitude and the cross interfacing, we are forced sometimes to discuss it as a subject under security. That is what is covered under item No.5.

We are raising other issues about animal thefts under item No. 6. This is also a security matter because of its cross-border effect. We find ourselves affecting the security of other countries and other countries affecting our security. When crime is sometimes to a higher magnitude, it becomes a gazetted security problem.

We have got incidents of religious cults. I know that many Members of this House are impressively religious. However, sometimes when some of these religious activities amount to discouraging immunisation, discouraging medical care and education, then we are forced to treat that as a matter of security concern.

There are other circumstances; for example, I received information yesterday about people attacking churches in Tororo. We are trying to establish whether it is a peculiar matter to do with churches or it is largely out of need that maybe causes people to try to seek some material gains from altars in churches.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank Members of Parliament. As I requested when I was first given opportunity to speak on this Floor, I asked all Members of Parliament to become vigilant participants in facilitating us to get to know the security situation in the country. I want to register, with pleasure, that every minute I am outside, I am being contacted by a Member of Parliament about a security matter. Fortunately, I am receiving responses from many of you that we have reacted promptly and that we are trying very hard to make sure that we are full page with the demands of the security of this country.

As I conclude, I wish to say that Uganda is largely at peace. This has nothing to do with whether people are necessarily peaceful; sometimes because of our activities, there are some things that disrupt the order of the public especially in the urban areas. It is sufficient to note that sometimes too much peace, as we have seen in Nigeria and the Republic of Kenya, is a recipe for likely insecurity in a country. So, I do not want to give any relaxing moods to this great House that all is well. Actually, in circumstances like now, that is when we should be even more vigilant.

Mr Speaker, I thank you very much and I thank the Members for giving me all this maximum attention.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this statement arose from a concern raised by the honourable Member for Butambala and I would like him to speak first. Can we limit the time because you know the number of Members who would like to speak?

5.34
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): I will be as brief as possible. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for bringing this statement. It is briefer than the one he gave us last time to take home. This is quite a brief version. 

By the time I was talking about the security situation in the country, there were specific issues I wanted the minister to address. For instance, in the name of national security, Government of Uganda operates - I do not know whether it is a prison or a detention centre or a police station - called Nalufenya in Jinja. At this prison, there is an acting commissioner in charge of crime called Francis Olugo, nicknamed mtoto wa Acholi. He is assisted by Steven Magoda and a one Steven Kanala. These operate a torture chamber at Nalufenya and I have information to that effect. I can give names because I have every detail with me about the people they have tortured and those that have been detained.

Fifty people were arrested from West Nile and Gulu around March and they were detained in Nalufenya for about four months. They were released at Kabalagala after detention for four months without any charge, having been tortured by Francis Olugu. I have had the opportunity to have some of them come to my office as Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs and they narrate horrible torture experiences. Can you imagine being tied by the hands and legs and they put you upside down for hours and then they bring you down -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR KIVUMBI: This is being done at Nalufenya. I would like to know from the Minister in charge of Security what Nalufenya is; is it a police station, a prison, a detention centre, a torture chamber or a safe house? That is one thing I would like to know.

Secondly, by the time we raised these issues, soldiers were being killed. There were murders going on in various barracks from Masaka to Gulu and all over under the pretext that these were either drunk soldiers or they had mental problems. However, to our shock, like in Masaka, the attack was on the armoury; can a drunkard make a charge on the armoury of a barracks in Masaka and in Makindye where an incident took place. We wanted to know some of these details. 

You know that you arrested a whole colonel in charge of the air forces under the pretext that he was going to stage a military coup. We wanted to have all these details as Parliament. Whether you want a closed session or not, these are the threats that our country faces. Were we on the verge of a military coup and what have you done?

On the security situation, we have friends across the border. A one Francis Mugumya, who you are saying is part of ADF, is scheduled to face a court martial in Congo. What have you done?

There is this other thing called ADF; can we know its strength? At one time, the President said they were only five left and now you are telling us that they are a credible threat. So, what is the status of ADF; what is its strength and where is it located? Is it an urban force or not?

Mr Speaker, the last point I want –(Member timed out).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is it going to be a debate or are we going to raise crazy issues? Let us have the former shadow minister from Obongi.

5.40
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, honourable minister, the statement here is about the current security situation; what is your definition of “current” – dating from when to when? This is very important in terms of security management. Your statement has a lot of gaps if your current situations extend up to maybe two months ago until today.

Yes, we have a situation, which has brought refugees to Uganda, but some of you might have read in the newspapers and even a statement was made here on this Floor about this. Members of Parliament from Yumbe wrote to the Ministry of Defence about abduction of people from Yumbe, who were taken across the border to South Sudan. These are Ugandans but up to now, we do not know where they are.

In Obongi Constituency, we had cases of people arrested by the army under the influence of some political leaders. This is related to the aftermath of the elections. The army literally took over the role of the police in Obongi. What is the relationship between law-enforcement agencies like the police and the army? You find army men on police trucks; doesn’t the army have its own vehicles? Even here in Kampala, you will see UPDF soldiers – They are trained differently, they have different ethics and norms, but you see –(Member timed out).

5.43
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister, first, for the composure with which he relayed his statement and the stability this time. (Laughter) Thank you. 

Mr Speaker, I ask the minister to tell us the status of these other groups that have sprung up lately. One attacked Parliament recently and another attacked a court of law and locked up a magistrate and lawyers in their chambers. Do they pose any security threat for the present and the future?

5.43
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. I would like to particularly draw his attention to land wrangles or conflicts. This is a very serious matter. 

I want to invite you, honourable minister, to Amolatar District to pick interest in a wetland that was single-handedly allocated by the district chairman LCV to a quack investor. He allocated over 27,000 hectares of land to a so-called investor. This became a very serious issue; the community members rose up in arms and it took the intervention of the Minister of Lands and Housing and the area Members of Parliament to calm down the situation. However, even as I speak now, this is a very serious security matter.  (Member timed out.)

5.45
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add to the minister’s statement on page 2, where he talks about land wrangles. I will be glad if the security scope captured this, honourable minister: you omitted the fact that even in the central region, especially in Buganda, land conflicts have the potential to cause a security threat. 

The other day, we witnessed a land conflict between tenants and landlords, and we also saw bishops in Mukono almost being burnt by errant tenants. Even in our villages, tenants and landlords are almost cutting themselves up using pangas. (Member timed out.)

5.46
MS JULIET SUUBI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I appreciate the minister’s statement and its holistic coverage. My biggest concern, however, is on land wrangles in Rakai District and the Greater Masaka. The biggest problem we have, and it is at its peak, is animal theft because of the Mutukula border and Nangoma across the lake. 

We have witnessed massive killings – They may not have been that massive but people are killing one another due to those conflicts. We have intervened as Members of Parliament; we went there and stopped those conflicts but we need heavy deployment at the border. Government should also talk to the Tanzanian Government to let Ugandan police follow up the cattle and other animals that are usually taken there. Thank you.

5.47
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you, honourable minister, for your insight in respect to the security situation in the country.

My comment is in respect to item No.6 - animal theft. It does appear that your focus has been on cross-border animal theft, but I would like to inform you that we have a very serious security situation caused by animal theft. I know that you mentioned the neighbouring districts but there is a big problem to the extent that people are now sleeping in their kraals, which is very disruptive. 

A number of people have lost their lives as a result of cattle theft in the areas of Agago. This prompted us to have a joint security meeting with the districts of Kotido, Abim, Kitgum –(Member timed out.)

5.48
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, there is a very serious problem among the communities in Butsumbamuro in Kihara Ward, where security agencies have been killing people. However, Government has never come up with any statement regarding the people who have been killed on that land that was owned by the former minister, the late Amon Bazira.

The second issue is about the police outposts, which were closed shortly after that serious incident of conflict within the Rwenzori sub-region, which has now caused a big problem - the crime rate in Kasese Municipality. All the police outposts were closed because the Inspector General of Police insinuated that his police officers were being attacked and therefore, he cannot continue putting them at risk.

The third issue is about the Rwenzori region- Kasese and Bundibugyo. These are areas that were seriously hit by conflict. I am really surprised that you can come up with a statement about the current security situation in the country and you forget the most recent and critical sub-region. We require that you give us a comprehensive statement about the security –(Member timed out.) 

5.50
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the status report on security in the country. The issue I would like to raise with the honourable Minister for Security is about the continued skirmishes particularly at our border with DR Congo and Kenya, and these are mainly linked to fishing. 

May I know when Government will expeditiously solve this issue, once and for all, so that our people can co-exist in peace with their neighbours across the borders? May I know when this will take place? As we talk now, honourable minister, you have taken time to research and you have listed some of the people whose properties have been confiscated but there are many other people – (Member timed out.)

5.51
MR MUBARAK MUNYAGWA (FDC, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Security. I am asking this because he knows Sam Mugumya very well. Mugumya is from Rukungiri and the minister is also from Rukungiri. Is it true that you sent an officer from Uganda, a UPDF officer, to go and interrogate him from where he is being detained?

Secondly, is it true that the Government of Uganda requested President Kabila to make sure that he court-martials Sam Mugumya from Congo? If not, what have you done to plead that this man is not subjected to the court martial, to the injustice that he is undergoing in Congo?

5.52
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by requesting that since the minister’s budget is classified, maybe in order to allow us debate a lot of issues, we should have one day for a frank closed session on security in the country. Otherwise, with what we are doing now, we are not going to do anything and we may pretend that things are okay and yet they are not okay.

I would like to ask you, honourable minister, about the rising cases of treason in the courts of law that do not relate to any of the seven issues you have read. Where do those cases of treason originate from?

You have elaborated about a lot of conflict, including social ones and other types of conflicts and you know conflicts have –(Member timed out.)  

5.54
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA BABUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is good the honourable minister indicated that the ADF continues to plan terror attacks. Yesterday, we got fresh information that the ADF came to a place called Butalinga near the Busunga border and they told the people to go away because they were going to re-settle. There is a possibility that anytime, they may attack the residents. 

For your information, we request for your thorough investigation as you know the history of that part of the region. We have been attacked by the ADF before and the effects of the recent Rwenzori conflict are still felt. (Member timed out.)

5.55
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the status of the crime preventers around the country. All of us know that these people were called to serve, and with a lot of anxiety they did, hoping that they would also benefit from the Government. However, up to now this is a disgruntled group. I wonder what plans the minster has to address that issue. Thank you.

5.56
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had raised some issue to do with the security situation in West Nile, particularly concerning the robbery of boda bodas. This was as a result of arms trafficking from South Sudan. Initially, this issue had appeared on the Order Paper but it was not handled. So, I would like to get a full briefing from the minister about it. 

I had also raised some issue of security concerning the people at the border point. These border points were inlets through which these people were coming in with arms. Recently, when they were taking in South Sudanese refugees at Kerwa, a woman was got with ammunition and when she was questioned, she said that those things belonged to her husband who was still at the frontline. There is, therefore, a high chance that more arms are entering Uganda. So, I will wish to get clarification from the –(Member timed out.)

MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the minister. However, on issue No. 2 on land wrangles, you left out the wrangles between Government and land owners, which is rampant in Uganda today. A case in point is in the area of Lakang in Amuru District, where Government would like to give people’s land to Madhvani without the authority of the land owners. Despite pleading from the leaders that you need to talk to the land owners, this issue is still persisting and people are living in fear that you are now planning to take soldiers there so that they take their land by force.

Two, still on land issues, you have left out the Apaa land wrangles, last year in September, you sent the police and soldiers and many people were assaulted, many people are still missing and two people lost their arms during that conflict. I even talked to the Minister of Lands and Housing about that issue, but up to now it has not been sorted out and it has not been brought out here.

The third issue is about the conflict resulting from charcoal burning, whereby soldiers – (Member timed out.)

MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Security. I rise on the issue of land wrangles particularly those that concern Nebbi and Nwoya districts. I acknowledge that the minister is new in this ministry. However, I would like to ask him to talk to the former minister because these land wrangles have been ongoing. If they are current, how long will they continue to be current? 

We are also new Members of Parliament and yet these issues have been ongoing-(Member timed out.)

6.00
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I would like to add a question to what hon. Centenary raised. After the Kasese attacks, the security detail of my king, the Omusinga Wesley Mumbere, was removed from him. To date he does not have security and anything can happen. We are not sure of the safety of his life. Why doesn’t he have security?

Secondly, in 2007 there was land that was given to the cattle keepers and the cultivators. Government took over people’s land unlawfully and the Prime Minister directed that the Attorney-General should handle that issue. However, up to now, this matter has never been handled and this has remained a source of conflict. People have died there and others have gone to prison. These things are not reflected here; what is the position of Government?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I ask the honourable minister to make some responses at this stage?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I did not intend to interrupt the minister, whom I appreciate very much for allowing us this opportunity to discuss issues of security for the first time. I am, so happy that he brought this report. 

The procedural matter I would wish to raise is about how seriously Government takes Parliament especially the Executive. By 2.30 p.m., we had the Vice-President and the Deputy Prime Minister here, but I have seen them going out one by one. I do not know as of now who is leading the Government side when we are discussing issues of security. (Dr Baryomunsi rose) Mr Speaker, as I wind up my procedural issue, I have seen a crime preventer standing. (Laughter) However, on a serious note-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that there is a crime preventer in the House? (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, we are all crime preventers. (Laughter) We have been trained to prevent crime.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The correct reference to a Member of the House is “honourable member” not “crime preventer”.

MS NAMBOOZE: I have been guided, Mr Speaker, but the crime preventer I was talking about is I. I want to know who is leading the Government side. The Vice-President is not here, the Deputy Prime Minister, who was with us, has gone away. I would like to be guided so that I am very sure that when we are debating this matter of security, the Executive is fully represented.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Security is here. If you want to address the matter to the Leader of Government Business, please go ahead and he will show up. I am sure one of them has been delegated. That is not an issue. Can I have the Leader of the Opposition and then the minister?

MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I expected Kanungu to be here. I do not know whether it was by omission. There is a great problem. We have lost about seven people at the border of Kanungu and Congo.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural point?

MS KARUNGI: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether it is procedurally right that we are debating this report without including Kanungu and yet it has been gravely affected. The honourable Minister of Security should love Kanungu also and think about it. We are also there suffering.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am going to let that pass only for now.

6.06
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for the statement. I personally find this statement wanting. One, I do believe that the absence of war does not tantamount to peace. We were discussing a statement here yesterday about the many people dying of famine in the countryside; this is insecurity that we should be worried of.

As a country, you are all aware, like my colleagues have mentioned, that one of our own, hon. Michael Kabaziguruka, is in prison on charges of treason and he is being paraded before the court martial. We would have expected the minister to tell us about some of these cases that are leading to our people who were arrested after elections being paraded before the court martial and whether that does not tantamount to insecurity.

Mr Speaker, I would like to know about the programme that the minister talked under terror threats. He said that the ADF has continued to recruit and radicalise people. However, he said that there is a programme by Government to de-radicalise the targeted individuals and communities. 

Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi alluded to the fact that there are some people who are being tortured in Nalufenya. I want to know whether this is the programme of Government of de-radicalizing.  I would like to know whether you have now resorted to beating, torturing and possibly imprisonment as a way of de-radicalising the targeted community.

Honourable members, you will also be aware that in Kasese, there was targeted shooting by soldiers and police; they were targeting specific individuals. We came here on the Floor of the House and mentioned these cases. Could this be part of the programme of de-radicalisation by Government?

Honourable minister, you mentioned very clearly that the Bayiira across are part of the Bakonzo in Uganda. Some of the Bayiira across have been accusing us of killing their people. They say that Ugandans are killing their people. I personally have a text massage from a Congolese relative which said, “We are sisters and brothers; why are your people killing us?” 

They accuse the Ugandan Government of sending people across to Congo to kill Congolese and they think we do it purposely. They say we have been accusing ADF so that we can go across and again repossess their areas that have gold and that we steal it. I just want to give you that information.  

The other information we have is that this Government - Even after the meeting you had with Kabila, you did not update the House. Maybe it was confidential information, but this is what we should know as leaders; Kabila was non-committal because he does not trust our Government in terms of security. It poses a serious security problem to us when our neighbours do not trust us-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, did you talk to President Kabila to confirm that he does not trust us, because you are on the record of Parliament?

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I might not have talked to President Kabila but we speak to Kabila’s people. We have told you they are our relatives. I am telling you what is happening. You people may brush it off but this is the truth that we should not run away from. As I speak right now, it is a matter I would like to bring to the attention of the Minister of Security –(Interruption)

MS AMULE: The Ugandan Government has been rated as one of the best not only in East Africa but the whole of Africa in providing security. Go to South Sudan and Somalia, the Ugandan Government is offering security. In negotiations, Uganda is always leading in the whole of Africa.

Is it in order for the whole Leader of the Opposition to come here and insinuate and also put words in the mouth of a President whom she has not spoken to and say he does not trust the President of Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to treat the issue of foreign relations carefully. Where you are imputing that a President does not trust another President and you are not quoting your source properly, there might be issues. I would like you to cage it properly so that it does not look like you have talked to President Kabila when you have not.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. I do believe that President Kabila on some other matters trusts President Museveni-(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I stay at that border. In December 2006, our people were chased from Congo and because of that, up to now Kasese has never been stable- (Interruption) 

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I am raising on a procedural matter. As you are aware, issues of security and relations between countries are very key. Uganda as a country does not exist alone; we co-exist with our neighbouring countries. 

At this particular time, my very wonderful sister has raised an issue in regards to the relationship between the Presidents of Congo and Uganda. I am wondering whether it is procedurally right for the Leader of the Opposition to continue debating before withdrawing the statement so that we proceed well.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already guided on that subject and I expected the person concerned to heed so that issues of foreign relations are spoken about carefully.

MS KIIZA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I, therefore, wish to call upon our Minister of Security and possibly the Minister of Foreign Affairs to ensure that the Ugandans who are right now in Congo, who are about to be subjected to a court martial in Congo where Sam Mugumya is - I am speaking about these matters because I know Ugandans who have been arrested in Congo and they are supposed to appear before a court martial- (Interruption)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have just received a statement by the Minister of Security on the current security situation in the country. I am a bit perturbed as to whether we are proceeding well when the statement that we received degenerates into a security matter in Congo. Are we proceeding right with my sister derailing the debate on the matter of security of Uganda and taking it completely to be a matter of security in Congo?

MR MAKUMBI KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a matter of procedure against the Leader of the Opposition. You have made a ruling and you have rightly guided that the Leader of the Opposition revises her packaging but she has continued arguing even without withdrawing the statement that has put this House at ransom. We are arguing on international relations but the Leader of the Opposition is defying your ruling. Is she procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already spoken on this matter and I expect the Leader of the Opposition to respond appropriately.

MS KIIZA: Thank you very much for that wise ruling and guidance, Mr Speaker. I respected your guidance and I was continuing from a different angle when the Members rose on points of procedure, order -(Interjections)- This could be valuable information from the Minister of Constitutional Affairs from my side. (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving way and for the benefit of the Government Chief Whip, we are talking about the Government on the left of the Speaker. 

Government owes a duty of protection to all citizens within and outside the borders and to protect those people against injustice, arbitrariness and harm of any form. The gentleman referred to as Sam Mugumya and others are citizens of Uganda that have been held in detention in Congo for two years without trial. They have been deprived of the protection of their Constitution. The Government of Uganda owes consular duties to its citizens wherever they are and in the past, we have done it. This is a security matter because the minister made reference to cross-border issues and that is why I was thankful to him. The question was only simple. What consular steps has Government undertaken? That is number one.

Number two, the connotations related to rebellion across the border –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this really information?

MR SSEGGONA: That is the information. (Laughter)

MS KIIZA: Thank you very much, hon. Sseggona for that information. I still wanted to let my colleague know that the minister talked a lot about the Congolese Marine arresting the Ugandan fishermen and the Congolese Marine robbing Ugandans of their boats. Even when you did not read that statement regarding Congolese not being in good books with Ugandans, I just wanted you to understand that and, therefore, ask our Minister of Security and the Minister of Internal Affairs, to go in high gear of negotiations with the Congolese Government to ensure  that our Ugandans who are in Congo get consular services. They should even be allowed to have legal representation as they are taken to those courts and that if they are - for example, he talked about the ADF, if it is proved that they are ADF rebels, they should be brought back to Uganda and charged under our laws not to be paraded in the Court Martial of Congo.

Mr Speaker, these are Ugandans and they should be tried according to our laws. That is what we would like to ask of our Government and that is what we are asking the Minister of Security and possibly, the Minister of Foreign Affairs to help our Ugandans who are arrested outside the country.

I remember we made a request to Government to ensure that our citizens who are arrested in China, Bangkok, among others, are brought back here and tried within Uganda. Can we, therefore, request that the same be done to our Ugandans who are arrested in Congo and are about to be tried in the courts of Congo? I would like to thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, do a summary.

6.22
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Henry Tumukunde): Mr Speaker, let me start by presuming that the practice I left in this House is still operating whereby the Leader of the Opposition must be given priority when you are responding to broad statements made by more people than one.
 
In this particular case, if that practice is accepted, shall I proceed to say that, first of all, this statement is not wanting. This statement is over and above what else I circulated to Parliament. I began by stating that should it be that intelligence is left to stay for too long, it becomes information and therefore, sometimes it is not appropriate to keep repeating it especially, if the essence has declined tremendously because there are security risks. Maybe we will conduct a seminar with Parliament to lay out systems and processes that we follow when we are evaluating intelligence and information. 

Mr Speaker, the difference between intelligence and information is that intelligence is processed material. We refine and process material. We come here to tell Parliament what we think is processed.

Secondly, still addressing the concerns of the Leader of the Opposition, we may not come up with every matter that we take cognisance of in the security circles. For example, on famine, what we do is that - you must have seen something in the newspapers – I do not know whether it leaked there. In Kyankwazi and other circumstances, we send information to ministries that they may react on this information or take advantage of it to shape their own policy and processes of managing public affairs. Therefore, once we disseminate this information, we do not want to absorb roles of these ministries to explain matters like famine.
However, I am also knowledgeable that yesterday and the other day, we were here tackling famine and it is because certainly we must have supplied information about this very concern. 

About the treason case and hon. Kabaziguruka, please, I apologise. First of all, the only statement I can make  is that if a matter is provided for by the law and you are arraigned in court properly by the procedures of law - I am sure Members of the Opposition, especially the one who is pointing a figure at me –(Laughter)- knows that I have been before this court. Sometimes, it is important to leave matters of the court to the courts and I wish I had as much defence when I was there –(Laughter)

Mr Speaker, going to the other important issue about torture of Ugandans as being a programme of de-radicalisation. In my own particular case, I combine many professions; some of them being a lawyer, security officer, I would seek that actually -  and I have given forum to the Leader of the Opposition to discuss with her any matters she thinks are very critical that I may give attention to because security is not partisan.

Rt hon. Leader of the Opposition, I still invite you in categorical terms that you may come and raise these matters of torture especially against Ugandans. We do not support torture and I certainly do not support torture. Torture sometimes can be your turn, next day. So, please, you are invited and I am willing to come wherever you call me, to come and we particularly discuss these matters. I support the issue raised by hon. Reagan Okumu that we may need to have more closed sessions to discuss these security matters. We could have representations from both sides. I would be very willing to be put on stake and attack to explain every issue, some of which may not be easy and some of which may fall under the departments that are not necessarily in my control.

I would like to also say that maybe in that very forum - Mr Speaker, I will care to put a difference between law and order institutions, Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, what they cover and what we cover. For me, I cover a particular institution called Intelligence, that is a docket and it is represented under External and Internal Security. We also care that we define security. If crime does not amount to security depending on the magnitude and the disturbance of the public or our own citizens, sometimes it is left to the police to manage. It is only when it is at a magnitude that amounts to public alarm and public displeasure including killings that we come in. We do not come in to arrest and I do not know any other of these. Of course, there are areas of concern – but they are left to certain departments and that is why this Government is compartmentalised properly. Most of the issues being raised head towards me yet they are better answered by the right senior general there, who is the Minister of Internal Affairs.

Mr Speaker, therefore, I would want that sometimes, we draw lines between these very –(Interjections)- maybe I will have to write a paper and circulate it to draw lines. Well, when time comes, I will do that. 

About targeted shooting in Kasese; honourable Leader of the Opposition, we have sent a group to Kasese. As of today, there was prejudicial minds about some other institutions of security, that they mishandle the situation. I do not know- we have now sent there a proper team and I will be going there personally to study what actually the circumstances are like. I will be willing to circulate this information to you; security is not partisan, you may then study and respond. However, we are doing a thorough investigation. You know when it comes to us; we may choose to be thorough. 

Therefore, about target shooting of the Bayiira, I would want to leave it to this very report and I promise we shall come back. About the Congolese and what happens across, I would like to seek the indulgence of this honourable House that sometimes some matters are not within our powers. If we tell a foreign Government and ask, “Can we be of help in resolving this matter” and they say, “These are our internal affairs”, what do we do?

It is limiting in very many ways. When people speak about the Congolese Government, it is as if we flew by air and landed there. We facilitated this Government. We have been facilitating it. It is on record. I do not think Members of Parliament here need to be told of the role of Uganda and the stabilisation of this region. –(Applause)- We have done what we can and I would seek that really- especially this goes to President Kabila if he trusts Uganda or not?

Mr Speaker, I know you have ruled over it but this man came to Mweya, we spent a whole day together, we had lunch. We were very cordial especially for some of us he personally knows. History is never eradicated in a very short while. I did not see any points of suspicion. This is a gazetted fact. Therefore, we exchanged and conversed as cordially even on side lines. I do not think this is correct.

About 2,000 people who were chased from the Congo; this is a matter of investigation. I think we will have to look into it and see how it causes insecurity to the Republic of Uganda especially in the area of Kasese. This is a productive area; we get a lot of food from there and we have had grand support until the recent days. I suppose it is of interest to any of our members of Government especially the leader of this country that we reorganise and we reinstitute Kasese in its old form. We shall be working on it.

Another point is about the processes of Mugumya and his being court martialed. I do not know if you, Mr Speaker, followed this matter. Where it was being raised in courts of Congo that in order to prosecute anybody in the court martial, it must be instituted in the law and I think it is still a matter of debate. Therefore, I am not too sure if we have sufficient facts about this matter. About whether Mugumya comes from my home district, I take judicial notice of that and I will do everything possible to provide every support to make sure that he is properly judged. Some of us know the importance of justice.

Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank my friend greatly. Actually, the fact that you do not have sufficient information may be an indictment on Government. We are seeking to clarify how far you have sought information because it is your duty?

LT GEN. (Rtd) TUMUKUNDE:  Mr Speaker, it is not true that all matters we give attention to are necessarily a public matter. We are a country and care for our people. Yes, Mugumya is a Ugandan by any standard. In any case, the allies of yesterday are sometimes the enemies of tomorrow and vice versa. Why do we have to continue to imagine that- Mugumya doesn’t concern us? Why it is even more complicated, when somebody is in another country’s hands, if you do not have procedures instituted by both countries, laws about repatriating these very people in front of law, we need to first make sure-(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you for giving way. I know as a fact that just a week ago, two of your own from intelligence were arrested in Congo. Within three days, your own Government intervened and they were back. I mean the Executive arm of Government intervened and they were brought-(Interruption)

MR SILWANYI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable member is bringing a very good point to this House. However, is it in order for him to deny ownership of the Ugandan Government yet he is a member of Parliament, representing Uganda, in Uganda in the Parliament of Uganda paid by Uganda and he denies saying it is “our Government”. The honourable member should apologise. Is it in order for the-(Laughter)- honourable member to say that? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member who made those statements is a lawyer. Therefore, he must have used it in a selective way to make a particular point –(Applause)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your wise ruling. Therefore, the point of clarification I would like to get from you, honourable minister, is why the Executive arm of Government has taken this long not to intervene as it has done in the last weeks for our intelligence officers who were arrested in Congo and somehow brought back? Why has it not intervened to help these seven Ugandans who have been in Congo and are yet to be court martialed by Congo?

Secondly, what - the same situation that happens in Congo is also happening on the border between Uganda and Rwanda. On occasional times, our people are kidnapped from Uganda, taken to Rwanda and sometimes lose their lives. Therefore, what exactly are you doing as the Executive arm of Government to ensure that our Ugandans who fortunately or unfortunately cross these borders keep their life and possibly return to Uganda alive and safe?

LT GEN. (Rtd) TUMUKUNDE:  Well, maybe I should start with hon. Niwagaba’s statement. First of all, no one can take the life of Mugumya and Uganda just looks on. I can give you an assurance on that one. However, you are a lawyer, the magnitude of crime, the way the whole thing was- the arrest, evidence got and maybe the volume of threat this person posed to that country could decide. That is if indeed, there are two Ugandans who were rescued recently. I do not know about that. I am going to inform myself about it.

However, either way, Uganda is concerned about Mugumya’s life. Let me put it on record and it is because we do the same for many others including those who smuggle drugs to China. We get concerned that they are treated properly and if it is- even we were protesting for one who was about to be executed. Although it was out of a process of law and you being a lawyer, you know very well what is involved.

Now, about legal representation, this is a matter I would have to consult the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General’s Chambers to check if Mugumya is not properly represented that we may facilitate him to be represented. That is if he is before courts of law legally. It may be that he is not. I am available to be informed.

The Rt hon. Leader of the Opposition, should you have facts about Mugumya and some legal processes in Congo, just get this information and we follow because how many of our own are not necessarily so supportive of Government and are still allowed proper legal process? The same should apply to Mugumya and I am one good example here.

I do not know whether I can answer all these questions at the same time.

Nalufenya I suppose it could be better answered by another Minister . I will first consult since the accusations are very serious especially about torture and about one Magoda. But you know these things are common on both sides of the thinking; there are many people who turn themselves in what Baganda call Bitaro and they become so lawless. It is on both sides of the thinking but since I do not know enough about mtoto I will consult with you, hon. Kivumbi. You know we have consulted before and I get better details so that I do not speculate in Parliament but in itself it sounds a very serious matter and we do not support torture.

We have handled more delicate situations in this country including terrorism but we are not on record for torturing Ugandans. Mr Speaker, every Parliament has got its reputation as we operate in this Parliament, it is incumbent upon us to make statements that we are very sure about. Because as we close these five years we shall be judged for even the way we debate. Where do we spend our time; that is why we are paid?  Let me leave it at. (Interruption)

MR AKOL: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. Mr Speaker, as I talk I even got information about one person called Frank Nick Abong who was arrested from Gulu on the 6  July 2016 and to date, he is in Nalufenya in Jinja and he has never been brought to court and he is being tortured there. That is the information that I want you to know which was sent to me now.

LT GEN. (Rtd) TUMUKUNDE: Thank you, honourable member, but let us put some procedure in place. Like I have done with many Members of Parliament here, should you really feel that there is something peculiar and outrageous going on somewhere, my office is open; let us process it. I can go with you to Nalufenya actually if there is need. We go and check if this person is there so that we talk from an informed position.

Rt hon. Speaker, maybe I should be allowed to conclude this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

LT GEN. (Rtd) TUMUKUNDE: These are important matters we need to address. Mr Speaker, if you say so-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is you.

LT GEN. (Rtd) TUMUKUNDE: I am saying give me time to finish these matters. They are very long.

About murders in barracks and people targeting armouries, it is great how informed Ugandans are, I do not know how they get all this information but come to me, bring this information so that we follow up properly. I think it will be more helpful; otherwise, we will be tending to a lot of speculation. I am saying no procedure-(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is that this Parliament and Members have this Floor of Parliament to transact business and once issues are raised, they are matters of public concern and this is the only place that is privileged and Members can raise their issues.

Whereas I listen to the minister, and indeed, there are those areas that require processed meetings but to dismiss each and every aspect; “come to me, come to me.” Those go but they are not on record but once the minister goes on record and gives us his position and the position of Government, then later on, we can hold him or Government to account for those very statements.

Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for the minister to refer such matters of public importance to him as a person yet they are being raised as matters of public importance, where our people who send us would like their voice heard and responded to. Is he procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think in terms of general responses to what is within the minister’s knowledge, he has responded.

What he is saying is that, for example, he has no facts about Nalufenya but they can go together and find out what is happening there. That is what he is saying; he has not dismissed everything; I have been listening. What he is saying is that those ones that have little gaps, he needs more information so that he can follow up.

LT GEN. (Rtd) TUMUKUNDE: Mr Speaker, thank you. Since I am on the Floor, I do not want to risk advising as hon. Mukwaya advised. Surely points of procedure should be points of procedure. I may be new in this Parliament but I am not very new in these matters. We really need to proceed seriously because when we use them to corner in information - anyway back to the bigger issues.

About a colonel of the air force who has been arrested and who is being charged; first of all, I am not aware he is being charged. He is not charged and I am not too sure whether people know if he is being detained. He is not being detained. I am talking about current.

Mr Speaker, I would want to leave the Speaker of Parliament to determine these matters and we have some discipline instead of being attacked and getting personal. This colonel is not being detained and he has not been charged but it is also appropriate for any Government to crosscheck information on any matter if for that period and time you are restrained for that purpose as long as it is within the law; I think it very okay.

About Sam Mugumya, I have said enough; I am responding to hon. Kivumbi. About the strength of ADF, just like any force recruits depending on the circumstances especially in zones where they have free ranging sometimes they grow in number and in the last report I said something about it. I tried to mention numbers and figures and we are trying to be as informing to Parliament as possible such that there are never too many issues in the shadows.

We shall be circulating more detailed reports but because I had done one before and it was still in this Parliament and everybody received a copy, I thought I did not have to repeat myself on those matters. Although it may not have been a substantive paper of Parliament, I tendered it to Parliament.

Now the Member for Obongi asked about the status of “current” refugees in Uganda. Honourable members, we sometimes find it difficult to deny people who are running away from trouble access to Uganda, whatever form they are; even when they are carrying ammunitions, our duty is to stop them from proceeding with these ammunitions; otherwise, we cannot stop them from coming with the ammunitions. All we usually do is to make sure that they are allowed in this country and they are treated properly. And in the circumstances where there are criminals among them, like we had a case in Nakivale, we always extract them but with difficulty because these people belong to the UNHCR. As soon as they are declared refugees, they become refugees of the United Nations and we get limited. You know that the United Nations, wherever they are, are actually an outright jurisdiction; you cannot enter their constituency. So we tread with all the complications that go with it.

I would like to inform this House, Mr Speaker, that these Ugandans and the neighbours – sometimes it is very difficult to tell the differences: Some are married across while others have in-laws this side as some have had a vice-president in one country and a parliamentary candidate on the other side. So we handle them with care, and we make sure we do not add insult to injury to the already suffering people. So in some of these areas, we treat them very carefully. 

However, we care that they do not cause insecurity to the Republic of Uganda, with all the limitations I have mentioned.So I will meet the Member from Obongi and try to get more facts about whether these people are actually a threat to this country or not. I suppose that on getting facts, we shall act immediately.

Turning to the Member for Busiro East, about groups that attacked Parliament – you know, the Banyankole have a saying - Mr Speaker, I am sorry to go sectarian – that one woman wished for a lion and when the lion came she ran into a tree. So you wished for democracy and you know what goes with it – demonstrators and so forth. And you very well know that whenever they are touched, you know who complains first.

So I do not know who commands these people, I do not know whose business they conduct, but they are Ugandans. They chose to come and address their issues to Parliament using whatever crude means they had. All we need to do is to protect Parliament from being overrun by these groups - (Interjections) – sorry? They also bring green pigs? (Laughter) So, if you have to give me more facts, Member for Busiro East, I will be very grateful.

On the land wrangles in Amolatar, I was seated just next to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and he said that they are following up the matter of the 27,000 hectares. But you see, until it causes some level of security risks, we always leave it to the other ministries to handle. That is because if we cared to handle all these, we would actually be rendered ineffective. 

There is the issue of land wrangles that was raised by the Member for Bukoto Mid-West. I cared to enlist land wrangles in the last briefing that I gave to Parliament and now. Then on the bishops being attacked in Mukono, I am informed that hon. Karooro was sent by the Prime Minister to go and address that matter.

But we have two problems in Uganda. There are those who need land and there are those who have land but because of the old laws, they do not use this land. That is how the Church becomes a victim. They have land which is sitting there and think angels are guarding it. (Laughter) If you do not occupy land, you know what will certainly happen; people in need of it will tend to want to occupy it.

I am glad to read in today’s newspapers that Church of Uganda had decided to lease out their land, which they are not using. That is a good precaution because in such a shortage of land, would you want to leave land just lying there because it belongs to church? I am sure those who have  a need may want to take it over. But now the leasing will solve the problem and I suppose that hon. Karooro will give a report to Parliament about what she achieved. (Interjection) Or maybe hon. Baryomunsi could give us some information.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I speak as a Minister from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I just rose to provide information to the Minister of Security and the entire House that indeed when the questions were raised with respect to land conflicts and eviction; as the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, we have taken policy, institutional and administrative reforms to address the challenges of evictions. Today, we have announced a committee which we constituted as a ministry. That committee will traverse the country, starting with central region to educate the masses on the laws related to land, but particularly to explain under what circumstances someone can be evicted. This is because most of the evictions in this country are illegal. That committee is chaired by hon. Persis Namuganza, the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

Secondly, there has also been a challenge of individuals in authority parcelling out Government land. On this, we have constituted another committee that is going to assist us to provide an inventory of Government and public land. So, we have suspended issuance of leases on Government land for the next three months until when we get a proper inventory, except with the approval of cabinet, can we issue that lease.

Lastly, I just want to say that Members who could be having challenges of land conflicts – if you are not being helped at the local level, feel free to engage with our ministry; we shall be able to respond very promptly and address those concerns. Thank you. (Laughter)

LT GEN. (RTD) TUMUKUNDE: Thank you, hon. Dr Baryomunsi. So about cross-border theft – and this is addressing hon. Kyinyamatama’s concerns - the issue about borders is that the authority of one country or the enforcement capacity of one country cannot be used across another country, especially in sensitive countries like Tanzania. The  problem we have lies in the fact that our own Ugandans, in search of pasture, are fond of crossing into other people’s countries. 

So as you tackle this, you go with fairly tied up hands because you know very well that you ask him from minute one when you are resolving issues – because I used to be in these matters – and when you ask: “Who are you?” They will answer “I am a Ugandan.” When you ask, “What are you doing here?” They will say, “I am here in search of pasture.” Then, finally, when you ask, “Do you know that this is Tanzania?” They will answer, “I do not know; for me I came here looking for pasture.” Such things sometimes become complicated. But I will ask you, Mr Speaker, that we could register some of these – especially if it leads to loss of lives - so that  we may quickly tackle these matters.

However, I will continue to emphasise that matters of simple crime are matters of the Minister of Internal Affairs. Unless it causes an actual security threat, I am not supposed to be put to task. Anyway, since I am on the Floor, I will try to defend my fellow minister, with whom we share much for a long time.

In response to the MP for Agago who talked about animal theft and Karamoja, I would like to say this: when I was a division commander in northern Uganda, I remember we did everything possible to stop the Karimojong from interrupting the lives of their neighbours. But you know this only stops at a point, especially when there are some flows of arms and so forth. The Government has done a lot, especially about disarming the Karimojong; it has made a fundamental difference.

What I ask of our Members – I know that I cannot give a specific answer on this matter – is that we get these facts, especially involving loss of life because the rules have since applied that should you cause loss of life, the lenience is reduced –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The army has declared suspension of hon. Col. Kulayigye yet he had entered this Parliament as a representative of the same. Is he in order therefore, to be here with us when he is on suspension from the army, that he should be representing here? Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these issues have procedures. If that had happened, we would have received an official communication to that effect. (Applause) However, by the time I left to come to chair this House, I had not received it.

But that said, honourable members, if we are relying on what the press has reported, which I have also read - I read that he has been suspended from some office but not from the army. So, he has not lost his membership as a member of the UPDF, but he might have been suspended from a particular office. That does not take away his right to represent the UPDF in this House, that is, if we are relying on the newspaper reports. (Applause)

LT. GEN. (RTD) TUMUKUNDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Maybe in your support, we don’t operate the French law here, where people are presumed guilty until they prove themselves innocent. So, maybe we leave it at that.

 The question asked by the honourable member for Kasese Municipality – honourable members you notice that there is a lot of pressure on the House today, I may have to be rushing through these matters. We are investigating a matter to do with cattle keepers, herdsmen and cultivators fighting over a piece of land in Kasese, and I think that it was also owned by Amon Bazira. I think we need to get the facts. I should not be forced into a state where I have to answer every matter as if am omnipotent. I would wish to rather tell this House what I am most informed about, and not risk telling lies or to be speculative.

About constituting a special committee to handle the Kasese-Bundibugyo matters - all that is not within my jurisdiction. I will pass it on to the Leader of Government Business, through the Government Chief Whip, who is quite awake - I don’t see her sleeping at all. She should be able to put together a group of Government officials to look into this matter.

About skirmishes at the border between Uganda and Congo, I have answered it sufficiently that we are limited and we stop at a point. We cannot cross these borders; it will cause international issues, and in any case, the law about sovereignty is very clear.

About the issue raised  by a member from Kawempe South, my friend hon. Munyagwa - you raised issues about Mugumya and I have extensively discussed that issue while responding to the Leader of the Opposition. 

Hon. Reagan Okumu, about cases of treason, the one I know very well, I have answered it, Mr Speaker. Otherwise, the others are in court - most of my colleagues across are lawyers - you know very well what that the law says about matters in court. I do not want to act pre-judicially, especially in the legislature, where laws are made; I would not want to prejudice it. However, like I said before, I wish as many other people got as much defence. (Laughter) 

The Woman Representative for Bundibugyo talked about Butarinda and Busunga and the ADF threat; I am informing Parliament that there is sufficient deployment in this area, commanded by Uganda People’s Defence Forces. We have got both internal and external intelligence represented. All I would like to ask from the Woman MP for Bundibugyo is to give me more concrete facts.

When I say this, I should be understood, so that we are able to know if what we are doing is not enough, so that then we can do more. I think it is correct and in order to say that. 

About the recent Rwenzori sub-region conflict, when I was responding to the Leader of the Opposition, I said that we have sent an investigative group; it is under my command. So there are no prejudices involved. I am the one conducting the operation. We are using internal and external security to ensure there are no prejudices involved.

About Kyegegwa on the role of crime preventers, this may be better answered by the Minister of Internal Affairs. And until it causes absolute insecurity, I do not have to come in.

About robbery – and this came from some Member from West Nile, whose name and with apologies, I did not pick. He raised an issue concerning the robbery of “boda-bodas” and arms trafficking to South Sudan. 

There are two particular problems, Mr Speaker. Ugandans would like to go and do business in South Sudan. They are also relatives to some people in South Sudan and the reverse is true and we encourage these things. 

So, until we get specific crimes registered and recorded, it becomes difficult to really flow in any direction, especially about prohibiting some of you. But we do all that we can, with the caution that I so much elaborated on, in the earlier explanations I have made to this House.

Member for Kilak, about a gentleman who is being held at Nalufenya - I would like to say no - land wrangles between Government and the people. I don’t know if hon. Dr Baryomunsi knows something about this, but it has not attracted the eyes, in short, it has not gained sufficient magnitude to attract security attention.

About the Lakang land and Madhvani, when I was there sometime earlier, it was an issue being raised by people then but I don’t think Madhvani has been allocated any land there. If he has, maybe it is something that can be better handled by another person; it is not quite a recorded security matter.

The other point he raised, which is very important, was about the soldiers engaged in charcoal burning. Honestly, I need to know who these soldiers are, how many they are and how much charcoal they burn. On this one, allow me to also put it under reference so that we may tackle it when we have – but I am going to send our internal security officials to go to these areas. I will contact you, sir, so that we may get further details about this matter.

The Nebbi Woman Representative said something about land wrangles between Nwoya and Nebbi. I think I addressed it in the last briefing I gave to this House –(Interjections)– yes, I did. So, let me be seen as to have tackled it already.

Then about Kasese, yes, the security of the king of Rwenzururu, I really do not know enough about this. Anyway, all kings are entitled to security. However, security provided by the Republic of Uganda as it is provided to all of you, is supposed to be used for purposes of safe guarding your own life; you, the official of Parliament that qualifies to be secured.

If it is beyond that, you use that security for other purposes, other than for securing yourselves - in this case, I am not so sure if it has to do with the king - you are usually either restrained or these security personnel will be removed from you. That is how I understand it. I do not know the circumstances but I will consult with the Leader of the Opposition since she is the principal element coming from that area. I will also discuss with people who provide this kind of security, the Ministry of Internal Affairs. But I also think this question should be put to the Minister of Internal Affairs on the sidelines so that he gives a concrete answer on this matter.

However, we are in the area to investigate all this. We have a big team and I am sure it will come out with what was wrong and what was right because we are commanded to do so.

On the issue raised by the Woman Member from Kanungu about the seven people who were killed at the border, I think I will consult with you. However, insinuating that some people do not like Kanungu enough is not fair. I will consult and at least get more information. 

However, we are also aware that across that border, there is some activity and we are following it to check if it has to do with Uganda or not. This is just information to you meaning therefore – and I neighbour Kanungu so, I would have no reason to ignore insecurity in Kanungu because if for personal reasons it might have to affect me. So, left at that, I will get more details from you and from hon. Kaberuka.

I had answered matters that were raised by the Leader of the Opposition. I have been given more information, Mr Speaker, about issues that were raised. I am going to give every attention to this matter. The only thing we shall seek from you, honorable members, is that when we come here to seek support for internal and external security, please find it important. Intelligence is too important to be ignored.  We should give it every support possible. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving credibility and importance to security.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have been in the habit of finishing all the items on our Order Paper but today it is going to be difficult.

We have a statement on Nakivubo, then item (f) about sand mining, item 4, which was a statement that I had permitted the shadow minister to present. However, honourable members, there is something that is burning that we discussed yesterday and I am going to seek your indulgence so that we find a proper way forward.

Therefore, I am going to defer item No.3 (d) and (f); I will ask the honourable shadow minister to make this statement next week. That means I am going to ask for item No.5, which is the motion for a Private Member’s Bill.

We had a discussion on it yesterday; we do not want to set a precedent that will disturb us in the future. That is why I think it is important that we find a way of handling it today and see how to move with it forward. Can you call for item No. 5?

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL UNDER ARTICLE 94(4) (b) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

7.14
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. This is a motion to introduce a Private Member’s Bill moved under Article 94 –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Having read and perused the motion and the attachment thereto, my point of procedure is grounded in Article 93(b) of the Constitution, together with Article 93(1)(ii) of the Constitution and read together with Rule -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was the second Article? 

MR NIWAGABA: The same Article 93, because Article 93(b) invokes the application of Article 93(a) and this time I was looking specifically at paragraph 2, read together with Rule 111(1) and Rule 107 of our Rules of Procedure for you to determine whether, in view of the matters mentioned in the attached Bill, particularly issues to do with remuneration that would have to be paid to the Judges and Justices of court whose term of office would have been increased, would not be a charge on the Consolidated Fund  and whether in the circumstances the mover of the motion does not need a Certificate of Financial Implication and whether that Certificate of Financial Implication has been laid on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion is moved under Article 94(4) of the Constitution and under Rule 111 of our Rules of Procedure. 

This motion is doing only one thing; seeking the authority of this House to allow the Member move a Private Member’s Bill. It is asking the House that, “Please, honourable members, grant me permission to move a Private Member’s Bill.” It is not about moving a Private Member’s Bill. What it is doing is to ask for permission to move a Private Member’s Bill. Therefore, this motion does not attract any issue of Certificate of Financial Implication. It is not a Bill, and it is not proposing an amendment; it is only seeking permission of the House so that the Member can bring a Private Member’s Bill. That is where we are. If that Bill was now to be brought, if the House granted the Member authority, then he would bring his Bill and that is when the issue of Certificate of Financial Implication would arise.

However, as of now, honourable members - and I spoke about this yesterday - that is why I thought it was important for us to look at it again today and see how to handle this. All the Member for Nakifuma is asking for is permission to allow him bring a Private Member’s Bill. He has not even presented that motion requesting the House. That is what is on the Order paper.

Therefore, the issue of Certificate of Financial Implication does not arise at this stage. Therefore, can the Member move his motion then we see whether to give him the permission to do it or not. That is the prerogative of the House. Otherwise, the prerogative that this House does not have is to stop the Member from even asking. The House does not have that prerogative, honourable members and let us not go into that. If it was done in the past, it was a mistake and two mistakes do not make a right. 

Let the member ask us, as the House and if we agree we will give him leave. If we do not agree, we deny him leave as simple as that. So can we proceed?

MR KAFEERO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. This motion is seeking leave of the House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill moved under –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, it is very important for any Member of Parliament to raise a Private Member’s Bill and such a Member should be encouraged because it is our primary duty, as Parliament, to make laws.

However, as we speak we should consider the matter before us. We are not talking about a village memorandum. We are talking about the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, if you read the preamble of our Constitution for which a Member is seeking leave to propose a Bill to amend, you will see –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, this is a procedural matter -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what is before us is not a constitutional amendment; it is a Member asking the House to give him the right to present a Private Member’s Bill. What is before us is a motion seeking leave of the House; that is what he is doing. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that we are not amending the Constitution right now but at least we are kick-starting the process of amending the Constitution. 

Mr Speaker, you have always guided us that there are some people who will read this Hansard in future. The procedural matter I am raising right now is a matter of time. It is already night -(Laughter)- and people who read the Hansard in future will see that we jumped three other items just to go for this item as if we are looking for something in particular. So, I would like to request, Mr Speaker, that you allow me -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I treat with indignation, any suggestion that other matters were jumped deliberately to deal with this. I explained why and said that those matters are important but that since yesterday we had a debate on this matter, I wanted us to find one way or the other over it.

Honourable members, this House has sat even up to 11:00 p.m. in my memory. So the issue of us descending the sitting into the night does not arise. The question is: are we as a House going to block one of our own from even asking the House? Are we?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DPEUTY SPEAKER: If you want to do that go ahead and do it. Let it go on record that we will not allow a Member of this House to seek leave of the House to present a Private Members’ Bill. We can take such a decision and move on.

As of now, we do not even have a motion. We are still anticipating what is in the motion yet our rules prohibit us from debating in anticipation. Can we receive the motion and treat it the way we want?

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I think Members are not trying to block one of their own. What Members are saying is trying to find out from the Member and ourselves whether we are following the right procedure according to the first Member and you have guided.

The second issue as raised by the hon. Betty Nambooze - you also said it here that two wrongs do not make a right. If this House has closed past 11:00 p.m. - it is not right because we also have issues of human rights. In this House, we have mothers and fathers. Members would like - others could even to give birth from the Chamber. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, Members are only requesting for your indulgence and as the presiding officer of this House, it is at your discretion - we can even adjourn debate and start with this matter on Tuesday as early as possible so that we give it the necessary time and support that it requires. It is just about asking for the time that will be healthy for all of us; a time that can be acceptable to all of us. That is all Members were asking for, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, all I would ask of the House is to follow our Rules of Procedure. All that you are attempting to say are in rules. Just move properly within the rules and we see how to move on. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, you gave guidance that this matter needed to be handled when our minds are fresh.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No that is not – honourable member, please respect me. I am here to say that I did not say what you are saying. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, when you look at Rule 111 (2) and (3) - I would like to read it verbatim and it reads: “If the motion is current, the printing and publication in the Gazette shall be the responsibility of the Clerk.” And (3) reads thus: “Following the publication of the Bill in the Gazette the progress of the Bill shall be the same as that followed in respect to a Government Bill.”

The interpretation is that allowing hon. Sekitoleko to move this motion without a Certificate of Financial Implication is in itself not fair for our country and for this Parliament. 

Mr Speaker. So, I would like to ask whether it is right to have him proceed and present his motion, which has this lacunar.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the record, let me state that Article 94(4)(b), (c) and (d) state thus: “The Rules of Procedure of Parliament shall include the following  provisions…” and in (b),( c) and (d) it is stated thus: “a Member of Parliament has a right to move a Private Member’s Bill; (c) the Member moving the Private Member’s Bill shall be afforded reasonable assistance by the department of Government whose area of operation is affected by the bill; and (d) the Office of the Attorney-General shall afford the Member moving the Private Member’s Bill, professional assistance in the drafting of the Bill.”

Rule 111(4), is what you just read. It provides the procedure for the Member to access that process and the rules impose the condition, that for the Member to exercise his/her right in the Constitution, he/she must first seek the authority of the House. If the House grants him/her the authority to do that, that Member will proceed to present the Bill. If the House denies him/her the right to do that, that matter will end there.

Honourable members, where we are, we are at that request. The Member is coming to ask the House to give him permission to present a Private Member’s Bill. He is not presenting a Private Member’s Bill. All he is asking for is permission to present the Bill.

Honourable members, someone said “We may disagree with what you are saying but I shall defend, to death, your right to say it.”   So, you are now even preventing a Member of the House from saying something - even if you disagree with it - is that really regular, honourable members? What precedent are we setting? 

My proposal, which would be the guidance I would give this House - and if it is rejected, I will make a statement because I am the one presiding now. People in future will read the Hansard and they will say it was hon. Jacob Oulanyah presiding. That is why I will need to make a statement to that effect so that when they read, they will know that I explained the situation properly but that the House disagreed with me. I have explained myself clearly and should the House say they do not want to hear one of their own or even ask them for permission to bring a matter before them, it will be it but I will make my own statement on that.

Member for West Budama South, do you have a matter to say on this?

7.33
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama South, Tororo): I did not have what to say until you made the last statement that if we so happen to deny the Member the opportunity to seek leave, you will make a statement.

However, I also would like to say that we would be attempting to amend Article 94, which I do not think we can amend. This matter - I have a neighbour here who wants to be on record without seeking permission of the Speaker. He is saying, “No.” He is a lawyer and I am also a lawyer. Mr Speaker, give hon. Gerald Karuhanga opportunity to speak why he is saying no before I continue. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, are we going to debate in anticipation or are we debating the motion before it is presented?

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, if I may conclude. I gave him opportunity but he was not granted -(Mr Karuhanga rose) – you may resume your seat, Sir, and I conclude –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please let us not turn this into -

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, it is not my habit to rise on points of order. The colleague asked me to really state why I was saying, “No,” and I thought it was not on record but since he has put it on record, I thought it is important to clear the record.

The reason I disagree with my senior colleague, if I may go into the profession;  Articles of our Constitution, from 88 to 96 fall under a title called Procedure of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I would kindly beg your indulgence to particularly look at Article 93 (b). I appreciate that this motion has been moved under Article 94 –(Interjection)– or it is intended to be moved under Article 94. But Article 93 (b) refers  to a motion.

Mr Speaker, it is not because we want to - and I think what you said is more than right; that no Member - and that would be the worst precedent for Parliament to deny any Member to present a Private Member’s Bill – but I do not think that Members want to deny a colleague the opportunity to present a Private Member’s Bill but they want to do it procedurally right. That is what we want to achieve.

In the Ninth Parliament, I attempted to bring a Private Member’s Bill on constitutional amendments to restore presidential term limits. But I was advised that the best way to do it – there was an intended comprehensive constitutional amendment and that I should rest my case and humbly wait for that moment. I never even appeared on the Order Paper and I took it in good spirit because I knew I was not being denied an opportunity. I knew that Parliament was doing the right thing because they did not want to amend the Constitution in piecemeal. I think that is the way we should move. Every Member, I am sure, may have a proposal to amend this Constitution.  Therefore, are we going to do it every day that -(Applause) - every Member can come here and bring an amendment? Shall we have an amendment to our Constitution every week? That is the spirit under which I am disagreeing with my colleague and the Constitution talks of a motion not just a Bill.

Mr Speaker, we appreciate the spirit of allowing every Member enjoy their constitutional right. As I conclude, my prayer is that as you accord every Member their constitutional right to bring a Private Member’s Bill, we should do it in the context of ensuring that our House takes care of all the views the Members would have to amend our Constitution not just piecemeal. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that very well-articulated position is a debate of the motion. You are debating the motion before it is presented. That is the problem. I am saying this because those same arguments are the ones you are going to use to shoot down the motion but not stopping it from being presented.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, very much Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Having listened to our colleagues - and certainly we appreciate the points they are making - I would like to say that we even appreciate your magnanimity on this matter. However, in order to ensure that the House does not debate contrary to Rule 71 of our Rules of Procedure on anticipating a Bill, which has not been moved, I beg to move the motion, under Rule 72 of our Rules of Procedure, that you now put the question that the honourable member of Parliament of Nakifuma be allowed to present his request. (Applause) I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you see, it did not even have to come to that. Do I have to put a question on whether a Member should be allowed to move a motion or not. What I would like to say is that do we have to vote on whether a Member should ask this House for permission? The question for the motion is not yet properly before the House because I have not yet presented it. Moving a motion has a process and that motion is not yet before the House. It has been proposed but not seconded yet. I have not asked for secondment. I know what I am doing here.

Honourable members, let us do this. A Member of the House has requested for leave of this House to allow him present a Private Member’s Bill. That is what the Member has asked. Allow him to present a Private Members’ Bill; of course the Bill is attached. Why don’t you allow the Member to move his motion then present those arguments against it before we throw it out, if it is necessary? 

Wait, there is a motion that was moved and which we have not processed. Are we going to take a vote as to whether - listen to me - are we going to take a vote as to whether a Member should be allowed to seek leave of this House? 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been in this House for quite a long time, almost 17 years. However, we should not forget the practice and record we make in this House and by both sides of the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you on procedure? Of course, there is nothing to debate if you are debating.

MR KAKOOZA: No, I am not debating. It is a preamble –(Laughter) - that the precedent we want to set - I do recall when hon. Ogalo was presenting a Private Member’s Bill here, the Executive never wanted it. However, because the House set a precedent that moving a Private Member’s Bill is a constitutional right of any Member that cannot be denied, hon. Ogalo carried the day. His success was in line with the Administrative Act, which we have on record. 

The second was the Budget Act. There is no way we can deny any Member of Parliament from seeking leave from Parliament; it is their right. It is just a bad precedent in the practice of legislation.

Therefore, I would like to say that as much as we have suspicions or anything –(Laughter)– and Mr Speaker, you are the custodian of these rules. If a Member moves in accordance to the rules of this House and is denied a right, it is a bad precedent and I cannot be part of it. And the problem is that we are denying it in anticipation and how can we leave that on record?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are submitting and not raising a procedural point. Let me take a procedural point - please you have lost your chance. Let me take the honourable member over here.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, you quoted a French lawyer on fundamental freedoms and said “Much as I hate to hear what you say, I will die to ensure that you say what I hate to hear.” I opposed, when Dr. Lulume Bayiga was denied a right. I felt insulted and a denial of a fundamental right of a person. 

The record of some of us to this Parliament is pegged on fighting for people’s freedoms and rights even when we disagree - and I fundamentally disagree with him by every stretch of imagination. But he must have his right and way. (Applause) The problem is that we are also moving in circles because yesterday, we laboured to ensure that this point be made. You rule that today, he will be given the right and thereafter, we are going to be accorded adequate time to debate that motion. 

My bone of contention is that if you stretch at 08.00 p.m., and this matter is contentious and the general public is concerned - remember we have a history of pigeon holes in this country. That is why I am simply asking that we give him his right on Tuesday, first issue, we debate it thoroughly and we give it justice.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members - first wait. This is exactly what happened yesterday. I thought today, when I would call the matter, the Member will present because that is what we agreed on yesterday. However, when the Member stood to present, the same objections that were raised yesterday, started coming up. That is why we are here. We would have finished receiving the presentation and preparing to either shoot it down or support it with the same arguments you are using – yes, hon. Sseggona.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me invite my colleagues to listen to me on this at least as the sector minister from this side. 

First, I have stood here and objected to the practice of even debating whether a Member should present a Bill because primarily that is our work. 

Secondly, that if we cannot protect and defend the rights of our own Members, who is safe in this country? Thirdly is that the Constitution must be protected and the first person to protect it must be this House. 

However, I have keen interest in the amendments sought to be moved by my colleague. How I wish they had co-opted me because I am deeply interested in this.

May I suggest, with humility, to you Mr Speaker and to my colleagues across - and I am very happy that this is not even a Government proposal; it is a private member’s proposal, which is our own now – that we do tripartite consultations between now and Tuesday –(Interjections)– no, not on the right - how I wish I could be listened to, especially by the honourable Agaba?

Mr Speaker, why I am moving this is because the hon. James Kakooza from Kabula, my senior colleague, has hinted on something called suspicion.

Although the rules of this House bar us from legislating in anticipation and suspicion, we ought to be honest to each other and we do not need to hold each other in suspicion.

Let us, I suggest, have a chat across the board - the three - Government, ourselves and the Members moving this motion could work out a mechanism that removes these suspicions across. It is this Parliament that has been demanding for constitutional amendments. We stood over certain amendments in the Ninth Parliament and we said that they would be handled by this Parliament; it is a leftover. So, why wouldn’t we sit down - because it is not a do or die that between now and Tuesday the country is going to be in flames because we have not discussed this today, no; it is not. Actually on Tuesday here I will not participate in a debate discussing whether or not, we should allow a Member to present because that is our work. But because of the debate it has generated - and we need to move in harmony - there is nothing that stops us from discussing between now and Tuesday. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I hear from the Attorney-General? There is a proposal that has been made; I will come to the UPDF later.

7.52
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Mr Speaker and Members, although this is not a Bill being presented by Government, we have been looking, as curiously as the Opposition. Speaking for myself, I agree with your interpretation of both the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and the Constitution, in the context of permitting a person to request to present the motion. And with the saying that you quoted by a great lawyer, which says that you may not like what the person is going to say but you must always defend, to death, his right to say it, that is the opinion that I would reside with. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.53
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I have been in this House for some time and I want to say that I always enjoy debates when lawyers are arguing because they rarely agree and how they help us is that they give us the different sides of the argument. I am seeing two aspects in this matter.

There is the word “motion” and the word “Bill.” The argument is not mainly about the right to move a Private Member’s Bill. To my understanding, people are saying that the way the Bill is going –(Interjections)– no, both the motion and the Bill – and I am going to refer to Rule 111(1), which ties the two. It says thus: “A Private Member’s Bill shall be introduced first by way of motion to which shall be attached the proposed draft of the Bill.”

The clarification I am seeking from the Attorney-General is: What is the motive of attaching the Bill to the motion? My mind moves to think that a Member, because of the enjoyment of their rights, cannot bring a motion, which asks us whether we should eat food or not, or another asking us whether we should sleep or not.

Therefore, the practice of attaching the Bill is very important as much as it is a right to move a motion. 

Therefore the clarification I am seeking from the Attorney-General is: is the Bill that is attached to this motion okay for this Parliament? (Laughter)

MR WILLIAM BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the Member. To answer his question, I would like to point out that Rule 111(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament says “a Private Members’ Bill shall be introduced first by way of motion to which shall be attached the proposed draft of the Bill.” It emanates from Rule 110(1), which of course allows every Member to move a Private Member’s Bill.

So, my answer to you is that the Private Member has the right to seek leave of Parliament to present the motion together with the draft of the Bill. 

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, to begin with -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on procedure?

MR TAYEBWA: At least I am not like the hon. Nambooze but anyway, to begin with, Mr Speaker, I do believe the Attorney-General has not yet received that Bill to know whether it’s okay or not because we have not allowed the Member to present a motion together with the draft of the said Bill; we have not allowed the Member a chance to present a motion which has the Bill.

Mr Speaker, I therefore, propose that we allow the Member to present the motion then we debate it on Tuesday. Thank you.

MR AGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. It is true that we have had a lot of time to discuss this matter. Mr Speaker, you have guided but we have kept moving back and forth. What is common in our arguments is that we keep hiding ourselves under the same Rule 111(1) that this Parliament does not have a right to deny its own Member the permission to present a Private Member’s Bill.

Rule 111(1) simply gives the procedure through which the Private Member can bring a Bill because first, it says: “The Private Member’s Bill shall be introduced first by way of motion…”

Now, the motion, to which shall be attached the proposed draft Bill is for information of what he wants to talk about. This is legal interpretation -(Interjections)- I think I need the same protection, as my senior colleague has requested from you, Mr Speaker.

Anyway, Mr Speaker, the attachment of the proposed Bill to the motion is for information of the kind of the Private Bill that a Member wishes to bring to the House.

In our Constitution, Article 93 that has repeatedly been quoted lists the Bills where there is restriction on who presents them and the requirements for them to be presented. It does not talk about the right of a Member to introduce a private Bill.

So, Mr Speaker, I agree with the deliberations made by my colleagues, especially to my right. Unfortunately, at their conclusions, when they would agree that our colleague be accorded the right to present his motion, they turned 180 degrees and said that we should defer the discussion.

Deferring the discussion is as good as denying the Member the right to present the private Bill, sorry the motion - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you rose on a point of procedure.

MR AGABA: Mr Speaker, the point of procedure on which I rose is: are we proceeding in a right way to continue to deny our own colleague, the right to present a motion to be allowed to bring a Private Member’s Bill, especially under Rule 111(1)? Thank you.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I spoke very loudly yesterday about this matter. So, today I chose to keep quiet about it because I thought that we had moved a step yesterday. And I will repeat my position that I will defend any Member of this House to have their views heard.

However, Mr Speaker, my colleague, the hon. Sseggona raised a procedural matter that would have aroused the curiosity of this House for consideration. It is very dangerous for a House of representatives to deliberate in suspicion. While every Member here has every right to suspect my intentions, I too carry the same weight of rights to suspect everybody else but myself.

Mr Speaker, we are discussing the amendment of a people’s pact - the Constitution. We are discussing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no, we are not.

MR MPUUGA: I take your guidance, Mr Speaker. The point I am trying to draw Parliament’s attention to is that I thought the proposal by hon. Sseggona would help us break the impasse because even the silence of the line minister from the Government’s side is very suspicious. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Pardon?

MR MPUUGA: The silence of the line minister is very suspicious. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Honourable Members, I think that is a matter which we need to interrogate further. By the mere fact of rising on a point of procedure, are you allowed to violate the order of the House - no, no, no, I am asking. And if you are raising a point of order, are you allowed to violate procedures? That is what we are saying. So, if you have risen to make a point of procedure but you start to violate the order of the House, do you have immunity against -  that is why I am saying – 

MR SSEGGONA: No, Mr Speaker, nobody has that right. It is the Speaker’s duty to restrain that Member but not to allow another Member to abuse our rules by raising a point of order on procedure. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That has been a practice but it is not in the rules. The precedent that is anticipated by the rules is that if a point of order and a point of procedure are raised at the same time, the point of procedure takes precedence. That is what it is; it does not mean that when somebody is articulating a point of procedure, you cannot raise a point of order. That is not true. Please, I happen to know a bit of these things. (Laughter)

The mere fact that you have risen on a point of procedure does not give you the immunity to violate the order of the House. For example, what you have just done by imputing bad motive on the Minister of Justice is out of order.

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, you know, the Minister of Justice is my very good friend and he took no offence. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that I was only inviting the House to consider this proposition and explore its possibility, perhaps it could be the way of breaking the impasse and we proceed. One, that the rights of the Member will be safe and two, that we shall not have broken any law of the land or even any procedure of this House, Mr Speaker. I so pray. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me take procedure from Agago.

MR EDWARD OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I have looked at Rule 101, with respect to leave of absence and noticed that leave of absence is granted by the Speaker. I do not see a provision where the whole House has to decide on a leave of absence. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the rule that has been quoted in this case, talks of the first introduction of the Bill, after the leave of absence is granted by the Speaker. So, is it procedurally right –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please if you are reluctant to receive this motion, let us express our reluctance in another way. Even the constitutional provision relating to the question of leave – for example, record of this House cannot be given anywhere, without the leave of the House.  For you to adduce evidence about the proceedings of this House, under Article (97), on immunities, you need the leave of this House, for that evidence to be made available for whatever purpose.

However, that does not mean that you even stop a person from seeking that leave. Even in courts, honourable members, you can have your papers badly drafted, having no grounds at all even to sustain any argument anywhere, but nobody will stop you from filing it in court.  After it is filed, even the judge will not throw it out before you show up. You will show up and then the other lawyer will say, this thing is so badly put, throw it out and it will be thrown out.  But to say - no, no, that is not what you are saying. What you are saying is, “do not even file your papers before us.” What I am saying is that let the papers be filed and then throw them out.  That is the difference. 

In courts of law, where I was an actor for a while, you can draft your papers, disclosing no course of action, but I am telling you, you will be allowed to file it there. Hon. Sseggona, I have not heard of a case, where the registry has refused people to file papers, unless they have failed to pay the filing fees.

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, I have been reading the Constitution and Article 91 says that the powers to legislate are vested in Parliament.  The duty we owe Uganda is to legislate on matters that are pertinent. How do we do that?  It is by bringing Bills – and our Rules of Procedure are very clear on the way we bring Bills to this House; it is either through Government or a Private Member’s Bill.

Mr Speaker, the motion before us – I would like to indulge  with the Members, who may not be in its support or who maybe having suspicion on whatever is coming that we may have our fears but the duty that we owe Uganda, the work that we must do, either way we have to confront this issue.

Therefore, my proposal, as Amoding Monica - I have many suspicions on what is coming and I am very anxious to debate that motion, when it comes. So, I would like to appeal to the Members that whatever suspicions you have, the time to rise up and debate and discuss, legislate or de-legislate, or throw it out, is the time when we put the motion to debate.  The way to do it is allow the motion to come because the Member is seeking from the House to bring this Bill and then we shall debate it, based on its merits or demerits.

Therefore, are we proceeding right to continue to debate in anticipation and in circles? We must bring an end to this discussion and choose whether we go forward or backward. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not proceeding properly. We are beginning to debate the motion even before it is presented. That is what we are doing.  Can we receive the motion and debate it to throw it out, if we want?  Yesterday, we deferred it for presentation to today. Can we allow it to be presented and then we debate it next week?

Honourable members, I am going to put this matter to vote, whether we should present the motion now or next week.  I am talking about just presenting the motion and leave it there. Can we present it? Just receive the motion and then we debate it, when we are ready to debate. Can we receive it in just three minutes?

MR KAFEERO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for ably guiding the House, and indeed for protecting my constitutional rights - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please just proceed.

MR KAFEERO: Mr Speaker, this is a motion to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, moved under Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and Rule 111(1) of our Rules of Procedure. The motion reads: 

“WHEREAS Article 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedures of Parliament recognise the right of a Member to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AND WHEREAS Parliament is authorised under Articles 259 and 262 to amend the provisions of the Constitution by way of addition, variation or repeal;

AWARE THAT Article 1(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is emphatic on the people of Uganda, expressing their will and consent on who shall govern them, and how they shall be governed, through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives;

NOTING THAT, Article 144(1) permits a judicial officer to vacate his/her office any time after attaining the age of 60 years, but in the case of the Chief Justice, and the Justices of the Supreme Court and the Justices of Appeal, on attaining the age of 70 years; and in the case of the Principle Judge and the Judge of the High Court, on attaining the age of 65 years;

NOTING FURTHER that, the independence of the Judiciary is a hallmark on the rule of law in any free and democratic society that affords the last line of defence, in terms of human rights promotion, protection and defence;

CONCERNED THAT, the requirements for justices and judges to retire at the age of 70 and 65 respectively, poses a challenge to the independence of the Judiciary whose security of tenure is fettered by the retirement age requirement yet acquiring and mastering such judicial qualities and skills is as a result of a long and continuing service at the bench, not necessarily picked from the lecture rooms;

WHEREAS the organisation of credible, regular, free and fair elections requires a high level of expertise whose acquisition, mastery is as a result of long and continuing experience and expertise, not necessarily picked from lecture rooms;

AWARE THAT Article 60(3) permits the members of the Electoral Commission to hold office for  seven years and for their appointment to be renewed for only one more term;

FURTHER, CONCERNED THAT, such a limit to their period of service or tenure only results in the country losing its well trained and experienced servants who benefit from the facilities provided by the Ugandan taxpayers like you yet when they leave the country in search for greener pastures at a time when they have garnered the best experience to serve their country, a kind of brain drain that could be cured by not restricting their tenure but only subjecting it to the conditions set in Article 60(8) of the Constitution respectively;

CONVINCED THAT a settled mind that is not fettered by term limits but brought by an environment secured and guaranteed by good performance and confidence built by results, will only serve to enfranchise and secure the wishes and aspirations of all the people of Uganda;

WHEREAS the Constitution in Article 104(1) limits the challenging of the validity of a presidential election to candidates leaving out political parties and the voters moreover the time provided for preparation, filing and adjudication of presidential election petition is insufficient as decried in judgment of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament or this august House to grant me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Constitutional (Amendment)Bill, 2016.” A draft is hereto attached to address the serious concerns raised in this motion AND do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation of its First Reading.” 

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we agreed that we would receive this motion and we have received it. Is the motion seconded? I would propose this motion for your debate but that debate will take place next week. Please internalise this motion and have your arguments for or against it; we will have a full debate next week. That time we will not debate this motion – is the motion seconded? Okay, it seconded by the honourable member for Dokolo North County.

The motion is accordingly received and the question for debate is hereby proposed but debate is deferred to next week at a time to be appointed by the Speaker. Honourable members, this House is adjourned to Tuesday 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 8.25 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 August 2016 at 2. 00 p.m.) 

