

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 25 August 2021

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members. I welcome you to this sitting. First, it is a series of sittings to lay the foundation rule upon which you will be asking in the interest of our people in their service. 

Yesterday, when I was referring a motion to the Committee on Budget, I did not give a timeline. Apparently, it is an urgent matter that requires urgent attention. The committee needs to handle this quickly so that they bring it back to the House and we hear the petition. 

Is the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, vice chairperson or any member here?  Hon. Paul Omara is a member of that committee. I am giving you two weeks from next week to come back and it will be a Thursday. The Clerk will extract the proper date and give it to you. Please examine this matter quickly and come back to the House on that date so that we proceed with that matter. Thank you. 

Honourable members, in the 10th Parliament, an investigation was conducted by a sub-committee of the standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. This was an assignment by the House to investigate the activities of the Departed Asians Property Custodian Board. The investigations were conducted in full observance of the rules of natural justice and the same culminated into a report, which was presented and adopted by the Parliament of Uganda on Wednesday, 3 May 2021. 

While the factual findings made were correct, the appendix 10 that was attached to corroborate the findings was not correct. It was supposed to be a list of persons who never returned in fulfilment of the requirements of the law, which made it mandatory for the departed Asians to return to Uganda but was attached as a list of persons who picked the certificate. 

The findings on mandatory requirement for repossessors to return to Uganda was grounded in Sections 3 (ii) and 9 (iv) of the Expatriated Properties’ Act and fortified in the findings of court in Miscellaneous Application Number 10 of 2010, Attorney-General vs Thakkar and Sons and the legal opinion of the Solicitor-General dated 25 October 2004, which is comprised in appendix 9 with the report. 

The above notwithstanding, picking of a certificate to repossess does not make one a repossessor in the eyes of the laws of Uganda. 

Having studied the report, I invoke the general authority of the Speaker, provided under Rule 7 (1) of our Rules of Procedure, to direct the Clerk to Parliament to expunge the said appendix 10 and any references to it from the report of the House on the operations of Departed Asians Custodian Board and indeed the public record of the Parliament of Uganda. It is so directed. 

The background to this is that some members of the public picked it and ran with it and yet if they had notified us, we would have corrected it in-house since it is very easy thing to do. It was an honest mistake; stapling one document instead of another, which was not really a fundamental error. It could have been corrected easily. Thank you.

I will request the Members from Alebtong and Kawempe to submit their urgent matters. We are not proceeding by procedure but proceeding properly. 

2.20        
MS DORCAS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter of national concern on the plight of the people of Alebtong District, which is about the heavy rains that have destroyed quite a number of acres. In total, about 632 acres of different crops like maize, beans, cassava, sunflower and other crops have been destroyed within Alebtong District and specifically the area affected is Amugo sub-county. There are about three parishes also affected including Otuke, Alela and Orit in Amugo sub-county. 

There has been prolonged drought within the area and it is only this time, when the rain came back, that the people had planted on a number of acres. Right now, their hopes have all crushed and there is expected looming famine within the coming months due to this destruction. 

We have 144 acres of maize, 116 acres of beans, 84 acres of cassava, 49 acres of sunflower, 128 acres of sweet potatoes and 41 acres of pigeon peas destroyed in the gardens. 

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the Government comes to the rescue of the affected farming communities by providing some relief food and seeds to be able to curb the expected looming famine within the sub-regions particularly the affected areas of Amugo sub-county. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The standard procedure is that the Chief Administrative Officer should compile a report of all those things you are saying and submit them directly. However, you, as a Member of Parliament, have the similar right to raise it here and you have raised it. I would like someone to respond to this. 

MS DORCAS ACEN: Much obliged. I already have the report from the Chief Administrative Officer. 

THE SPEAKER: That is not for Parliament but for the Office of the Prime Minister, Disaster Preparedness. 

MS DORCAS ACEN: Much obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Office of the Minister of Disaster Preparedness is going to get in touch with hon. Dorcus Acen and ensure that indeed action is taken. 

THE SPEAKER: We do not need a report in the House but action on the ground. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Sure. That is why I used the word “action.” 

THE SPEAKER: We do not need you to come here. Just go on the ground and save the people, as requested. Thank you. 

2.23
MR BASHIR KAZIBWE (NUP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On 11 August 2021, the people residing in the areas of Wandegeya, particularly the areas of Kimwanyi, Katanga, Busia and Soweto Zone, received a letter notifying them of an impending eviction from their land being claimed by Makerere University. We are talking about over 35,000 people residing in Katanga, which is the largest slum area in Uganda. We have young people staying there. In there we have people, who were born in that area yet Makerere University now says that this land is theirs. To give you a hit on what we are talking about, in 2014 – 

THE SPEAKER: No, you are going too far. What is the urgent matter?

MR KAZIBWE: The urgent matter is for the Government to address this concern because as we talk, Mr Speaker, the people of Katanga are sleeping outside for fear of being evicted by Makerere University. 
Therefore, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development together with the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, and Ministry of Security should talk to the authorities in that area. In addition, Government must have a plan of where to put these people in case they get evicted. The eviction is going to take place before the court process is concluded. So, I pray that the concerned authorities address this urgent matter as soon as this evening. Otherwise, the people in Katanga are up in arms and looking forward to rioting in defence of their 37 acres of land. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Disaster preparedness, security, and all those people who are mentioned – 

2.25
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have taken note of the matter concerning the people of Katanga and other areas. I am going to get in touch with colleagues and we take appropriate action.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Please get in touch for appropriate action and if there is no appropriate action, please come back.

2.26
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Mr Speaker, on 17 August, two Bills that had been returned by His Excellency, the President, for reconsideration, were forwarded to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs by the Speaker. Today, in our meeting, we discovered that we needed to get assistance from the General Counsel on one of the issues that came up. 

I realised that 31 August, which had been given to us as a deadline for reporting back, will not be met. I, therefore, would like to seek for a further period of two weeks, to 14 September to –

THE SPEAKER: Does the House agree to this?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: It is extended accordingly. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE AFRICAN CLIMATE WEEK

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister.

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to welcome you back to this House. Yesterday, I was not in to join the rest to welcome you. I just want to say that God is good; God loves you.

I am happy to present a statement concerning the upcoming Africa Climate Week, which we are hosting in Uganda. Uganda will virtually host the 2021 Africa Climate Week from 27 to 29 September, 2021 with the support of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and other partners.

The virtual event will be held under the theme: “Partnering with for transformation towards a low-carbon climate resilient and prosperous Africa: managing risks, seizing opportunities.”

Mr Speaker, you may also wish to know that this event was meant to have taken place in person at Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort from 9 to 13 March, 2020 with the Support of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and other partners. However, it was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic and will now take place in September 2021.

The total cost that was envisaged for that week-long conference, as of March, 2020, was estimated at Shs 6.5 billion for which the Government of Uganda was expected to mobilise. Approximately Shs 2.7 billion was supposed to be from our development partners. This was supposed to cater for logistical arrangements in the frame of the suitable complementary venue, communication and media services, visas and entry permits support, security and protocol arrangements for the high level segment.

The rest of the budget was supposed to be met by the UNFCCC Secretariat and other development partners to cater for the overall support of the conference, including but not limited to return air tickets for approximately 1,000 participants, accommodation, and international broadcasting.

Mr Speaker, before its postponement, the event was expected to host between 1,000 to 1,500 guests, including foreign ministers of environment and other high level dignitaries. 

The Executive Secretary of the United Nations, Ms Patricia Espinosa, was expected to attend alongside other UN members. Hosting this event would have offered a unique opportunity to bring governments, private sector and other non-party stakeholders to Uganda to discuss regional climate change responses.

Specifically to Uganda, the event was an excellent opportunity to:

a) 	Raise our country profile, which could have led to long term economic benefits, while ultimately bringing innovative pathways for climate action in this region;

b) 	Providing an avenue for regional discussions on climate change through the ministerial segment;

c) 	Promoting our regional recognition by showing our country’s demonstration projects;

d) 	It would have facilitated the understanding of climate change policies and negotiation;

e) 	It would have promoted collaboration between several organisations (UN organisations, NGOs, civil society, and private sectors;

f) 	It would have engaged women and youth leaders in the climate action;

g) 	It would secured worldwide media coverage through websites, social media, press releases and live streaming to showcase of the efforts taken by our country and in the region to address effects of climate change. 

h) 	It would boost our tourism potential and the economic benefits thereof.

Mr Speaker, allow me also to inform you that in preparation for the in person event and taking advantage of the accruing opportunities as enumerated above, my ministry had moved fast to undertake the following:

    1. We were able to compose a national organising committee to address issues of technical programming, logistics, protocol, communication and media services, among others. 

    2. We had also, jointly with the UN, launched the Africa Climate Week internationally. 

    3. We had worked with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to send out joint invitations to African ministers of environment to participate in this event. 

    4. We had also embarked on the resource mobilisation.

In the run-up to the official physical event in September 2021, my ministry, alongside the methodological support of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Secretariat, started up activities to build momentum towards the physical events as enumerated below:

    1. We had an event to ensure the planning and budgeting for hosting of the Africa Climate Week in Financial Year 2021/2022. We had budgeted for Shs 2.7 billion, as was required to host the event.

    2. We initiated the virtual roundtable that took place from the 3rd to 4th of March and the Ministry of Water and Environment participated in this event. 

    3. Thematic sessions and roundtables that included workshops, dialogues, virtual exhibitions and site events and other engagements were supposed to take place from 12 to 16 July 2021 and the event was cancelled. It was supposed to be done by UNFCCC. 

    4. In person physical event was supposed to take place from 20 to 24 September 2021. Preparations for the event was supposed to be in Munyonyo. 

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and failure to realise the much-needed resources to host the physical event, the virtual events have been reorganised to focus on three themes as follows: 

National actions and economy-wide approaches, led by the World Bank

These will centre around discussion on ambitious actions in key sectors, and how these actions can integrate in national planning and economic packages to enable COVID-19 recovery and support the Paris Agreement. 

Integrated approaches for climate-resilient development

This is supposed to be led by UNDP and will focus on the climate risks facing Africa, develop low-carbon solutions and seek partnerships for risk-based approaches to adaptation and resilience building.

Seizing transformation opportunities

This will be led by UN Environment and will provide a platform to explore breakthrough solutions to deliver climate action at a scale that puts Latin America on a low-emission and highly resilient development pathway, with focus on key sectors of the economy that need deep transformation.

Who would be the people to participate in this event? 

Uganda's active online participation is going to be at a technical level, based on the above three themes. Members should take note that national TV and regional radio talk shows will be the medium of engagement to the rest of Ugandans. 

It is unfortunate that not all stakeholders will be able to get engaged in this event. For example, we would have loved to see MPs planting trees and the civil society as well as other groups engaging in the restoration of our environment. 

However, a few experts will be identified to speak to the various government policy issues in the areas of: 

    1. Environment, natural resource management and climate change;
    2. Health;
    3. Energy;
    4. Transport;
    5. Physical infrastructure, among others.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, with the many changes that have happened in the planning and organisation of the event, I wish to request that the following be taken note of:

    1. The United Nations Framework Convention Executive Secretary’s request to have the Africa Climate Week go ahead virtually from 27 to 29 September 2021 and Uganda is the host.

    2. The planned virtual activities as outlined above.

    3. The fact that the participation of the Minister of Water and Environment in the official opening of the virtual event will be on 27 September 2021.

    4. The fact that the Minister of Water and Environment will be on the online participation in the one Global Ministerial Meeting slated for 4-6 October 2021.

    5. The fact that the UN website will continue reporting that Uganda is the host of the events, even if they are fully virtual. 

Mr Speaker, my ministry appreciates your support in moving the climate change agenda forward. Honourable members, we equally appreciate your support and look forward to the support of the august House in moving the climate change agenda forward.

You can participate in any way you can but this is the status. As a country, we would have loved to showcase our rich bio-diversity but this is the situation. I pray that we take advantage where possible. We can engage online and follow up the events as they unfold. 

We pray that in future, we shall have similar opportunities. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, issues of the environment are critical. Last year, on the World Environment Day, the theme was, “Nature is Speaking, Let us Listen”.

When we do not respond or feed into what nature desires, it speaks out. It speaks out through landslides, floods, rising water levels and all kinds of things. That is the language of nature: it is disruptive. So, when it is speaking silently and when statements like this are being made, we must listen and take action. The easiest action to take is plant trees.

I urge all of you, honourable members, to encourage tree planting in your areas. Encourage children to embrace tree planting and grow with the attitude of tree planting. That is the statement from the minister. 

This statement attracts debate but a limited one because it is a notification of an event. The subject of that event is important and so, we will have a debate, though limited. Is it a debate or comments? It cannot be a debate because there is no motion. So, we will have comments on this matter. I will start with the Member for Manjiya County.

2.44
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me commence by particularly thanking the minister and ministry in general for lobbying and winning this event that is going to be hosted in Uganda. I salute you.

Mr Speaker, the question of climate change is a global change and Africa has now concentrated its focus and attention to it. As a continent, it is very important. However, the fundamental question that we should ask in this is: how much is Africa contributing to the climate change challenge on the globe?

We are reliably informed – I expected in your statement, Madam Minister to furnish the House with information pertaining to the multi-billion donor trust fund that is in the African Development Bank; courtesy of those industrialised countries that have contributed. This fund must be shared equitably, although there is a challenge that some countries are hit harder by the climate change effects than others. Yet, it is conspicuously missing in your statement.

Honourable minister, you know very well that Africa has become a dumping ground by the industrialist countries that are responsible for almost three quarters of the pollution; the emission of greenhouse gases. We are the recipients of second-hand gadgets like refrigerators, which you know in your ministry that have exacerbated cases of climate change on the continent. Yet, we have continued to receive these gadgets. Short of receiving them, we are slapped with sanctions by the same industrialised countries that are responsible for most of the climate change effects.

As we talk, the globe is in a fever because of global warming. Africa may end up being the leading contributor of greenhouse gas emissions; not that they are the ones manufacturing it here but because we are a dumping ground. So, I do not know what you are doing as a ministry to limit this.

I know there is an environmental levy fund in your ministry, which I is think three per cent. I do not know how far you are utilising it to minimise this scenario of being a dumping ground. In the 10th Parliament, we helped to reduce the number of conditioned cars that were being ferried to Uganda as a means of minimising emission of greenhouse gases.

The last issue is about the fund, which is supposed to improve the resilience of African countries from the negative impact of climate change. Honourable minister, you know very well that in Africa, we have a challenge of being less adaptive because of capacity. Also, almost 70 per cent of our people survive on the ecosystem goods for livelihood. What is your ministry planning to do about this? Thank you very much. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will have hon. Boniface Okot. 

2.49
MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This being my maiden speech since your return, I would like to say that we are glad to see you. As young people of this country, we look forward to your leadership.

Mr Speaker, I want to report to this House that during our recess, there was a celebration of the International Youth Week, which was on 12th August. The theme for the Youth Day was, “Transforming Food Systems, Youth Innovation for Human and Planetary Health”.

During that celebration, the youth leaders of this country led by Members of Parliament representing youths and the National Youth Council leaders, launched an initiative of planting 60 million trees by 2025. This is in effort to deal with the adverse challenges that climate change has brought. So, we need this House to put that on record.

I want to also implore the honourable minister that the young people should be supported in this initiative because we want to partake of agroforestry. We have noticed that in many of the programmes, agroforestry is not considered as an initiative worth supporting. I thank you very much.

2.51
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest to appreciate the submission from the minister. Thank you very much.

One of the key objectives of this activity is to raise our country’s profile. However, to me, this function is to make us aware and remind us of the key roles in managing risks in relation to climate change effects.

As a country, we are not doing very well in environmental protection and this is in correlation with the effects of climate change. Therefore, as a country, we need to look at how to protect our environment in order to avoid deforestation. We need to also encourage degazettement so that our environment is highly protected.

Mr Speaker, at the local Government level, we have got by-laws but they are not enriched; these by-laws are not implemented. As the Committee on Presidential Affairs – Mr Speaker, with your guidance and support in the previous term, we toured the country and realised that some of these floods and hailstorms occur because we are not doing our part as local Governments. Therefore, I request that we enforce the by-laws and do our best as we seek for support for other interventions. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.53
MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also take this opportunity to welcome you back.

I thank the minister for having lobbied for this conference to be hosted in Uganda. However, I want to make a prayer that as part of the events of the week, Government should commit to cancel all the land titles that were issued on wetlands. 

As part of the events of the week, I pray that the minister puts aside a budget for sensitising Ugandans on promoting climate change agenda in mostly cities and municipalities.

I also pray, through the minister, that during that same week, we should see a commitment by the industrial parks on controlling the damage they are causing to the environment, mostly the cement factories in Tororo. You know how much damage they are causing. In my constituency, we have a factory of milk that is emitting serious stench. I do not know whether it is the way they handle their waste.

My prayer is that, during that same week, we should see the minister signing a memorandum of understanding with these companies and industries, making a commitment to manage the environment they are operating in. 

I also pray that during the same week, the minister sensitises us, the Members of Parliament, on the climate change agenda and authorises us to be her ambassadors in promoting that agenda. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.55
MS SUSAN ABEJA (Independent, Woman Representative, Otuke): Mr Speaker, it is my first time to speak in this House and so it is my maiden speech. I come from Otuke and it is one of the districts that were entirely forgotten by the Committee on Appointments of the 11th Parliament. However, we do exist.

My prayer to my minister – We are talking of preserving our environment, but there are other communities that God has provided them with natural trees. If possible, you should liaise with other ministries that can support these districts. For instance, Otuke and the whole of northern region has shea trees, but they are being destroyed since there is no value addition being provided to the shea oil we are producing. Thank you.

2.56
MR TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the fact that Uganda won the opportunity to host this event. What a big opportunity it is for the country that we are hosting this event at a time when nearly all the parts of the country are receiving rain. Therefore, this should have been the best tree-planting season. There is no any other opportunity that we should have used because in the future, it could be that we are hosting a similar event when the whole country is dry.

Couldn’t we consider, therefore, not only sitting in air-conditioned rooms and having the best speakers when actually climate change is speaking like last year’s theme read? 

Madam Minister, you are aware that already Rwenzori and other mountains are having a share of the peaking of climate change. We have talked about intensifying tree planting. I suggest that we still have time to make adjustments. Even when we have the pandemic, I am sure that giving out trees to plant could be the best activity that we could do for this week because I know that we could continue with it.

Mr Speaker, I am aware that the 10th Parliament was informed of the fund to provide trees to Members of Parliament to ensure that their constituencies are served with trees for planting. This should have been the right time to even given the Members of Parliament trees to take to their different constituencies. I believe, however, that we are not too late. Madam Minister, I beg for your consideration. Thank you. 

2.59
MR JOHNY SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I represent Budadiri County East where the peak of Mount Elgon, Wagagai, is. I thank the minister for the lobbying skills that enabled Uganda to host the African Climate Week. 
I wish the event could be in Mount Elgon Region. As you are much aware, Bugisu Sub-Region or the Elgon Region has been over-hit by mudslides. You are aware that the areas of Bududa, Manafwa, Sironko and Bulambuli - where Mount Elgon sits - have been over hit -  

Much as there has been deforestation in those areas, the communities there do yearn for tree planting. Unfortunately, year in, year out, the seedlings that we receive from National Forestry Authority sometimes are not adequate for those areas. I am of the view that as we move towards appropriation, we need to reconsider allocating more funds to the Ministry of Water and Environment to support tree planting. For us in Elgon Region, we do not need only the ordinary trees. You could also look at the extension of the bamboo planting. Bamboo is a strong tree whose roots can hold water and soil. I beg to submit. 

3.01
MR MICHAEL KAKEMBO (NUP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I add my voice to the minister’s statement. My concern is about the flower companies. In Wakiso where I come from, I have witnessed battles between Wakiso District and Rosebud Limited and Wagagai Limited. Many of us who tried to visit these flower companies found that they are protected by soldiers. They do not allow access. 

As one of the activities this week as we celebrate the African Climate Week, I advise the minister that this is the ample time that she and her team visit Wagagai Limited in Kasenyi, Katabi, Busiro South, Wakiso District and Rosebud Limited which is situated towards Lutembe Beach and see what is going on in as far as environmental protection is concerned. 

Mr Speaker, if you visited these flower companies and you love environment, you would bear witness and come back crying.

The way they are managing their waste and chemicals is terrible.

My humble prayer to you, honourable minister, is, as we celebrate this week, please pay them a visit and report to this House the findings. I beg to submit.

3.04
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad that you are back and in good health. Thanks be to the Lord.

Mr Speaker, I have listened to the minister’s presentation and it is good. We have lost a big opportunity for the world to know about the beauty of this country. However, we know that it will come.

Mr Speaker, as a researcher, I am very much concerned by the lack of information and scientific data to do with the climate changes in our country. I also get perturbed by the fact that our institutions like the Uganda Meteorological Authority are treated with very minimal resources and not given priority. In developed countries, all businesses, transactions and livelihoods of individuals depend on the climate. 

Therefore, you cannot marginalise the meteorological centre in a very small office at the Civil Aviation Authority and with very minimal resources, yet the data that this centre would provide would enable everyone to plan for their businesses. 

Unfortunately, you wake up in the morning and you do not know whether it will either rain or shine and move aimlessly at God’s mercy. That is very disastrous especially for people who wear my colour. We are only at God’s mercy when it comes to investment in science and research thinking that God will do something.

How I wish the Uganda Meteorological Authority can be given enough resources such that all these communication networks (radios and televisions), we have in the country where people talk about unproductive issues, can provide proper information such that the farmers are able to plan knowingly about the climate.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I am also very worried. I have scrutinised the capacity of NEMA now that we are going into oil production and oil pipelines are now under construction but the capacity of that institution - 

During the Ninth Parliament, we made laws that would enable NEMA to monitor the effects of pollution by these petroleum companies. However, I was very disturbed that instead of NEMA being given more resources, they have even cut down their budget and they now do not have enough manpower to enable them to deal with such a complex matter.

Therefore, I would like that the ministry should take these issues as a priority such that we do to fall into disasters like other countries like Nigeria and so forth. Therefore, I wish that we use this week -

Lastly, I come from an environmental prone area; the Rwenzori Mountain. The forest cover on it has dwindled so much and that is why all these calamities like the River Nyamwamba flooding and so on, which wash away bridges and everything is as a result of the cutting of the trees on top of the mountain. Why can’t we plant trees and prevent these situations?

Honourable minister, these are the issues I have observed and I hope you will take them in good faith for action. I beg to move.

3.08
MS PHIONA NYAMUTORO (NRM, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice and congratulate the minister for lobbying the African Climate Week to Uganda.

Mr Speaker, in as much as we advocate for mitigating the adverse effects of climate change, it is important that we put emphasis on the issue of environmental conservation.

I am raising this because I know that Uganda is one of the countries with the best climate in the world. However, I worry when I see us losing grip of the sustainability of protecting it. That brings me mainly to address the issue of waste management. Waste management does not just affect our immediate surroundings but it is definitely one of the greatest contributors to climate change today. 

I would like to request the minister that during this week, we have a particular session where the ministry addresses and presents Uganda to the whole world with streamlined policies on how best we intend to have issues of garbage collection managed, how best we can sensitise our people on waste management to create a better and conducive environment for human beings; not just in Uganda but across the world.

I would also go on and request that in this particular session, young people that have had different innovations to this particular cause be involved across civil society and the Government as well. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I had already done my picking. Dr Elijah -

3.10
DR ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Independent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to congratulate the minister for winning this event conference in Uganda. As a member of the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry, I see this as a plus to our country; it will advertise us more.

The concept of climate change is a new one. My understanding is that it is even much broader than the usual talk of environmental protection.

Before I came to this House, I was engaged in research regarding many issues but including local governments. I can firmly tell you that many of our people do not understand the concept of climate change.

I do not know the strategy you have to sensitise and include our people to engage in this conference, so that it is not only for the elite here in Kampala. This is very important because we will end up talking to ourselves; maybe for us who have a little or some understanding of the concept of climate change.

My second observation is that there are a number of civil society organisations, which are engaged in quality research that can even come up with actionable recommendations. Would you like to consider involving such civil society organisations and academia that are engaged in research in climate change?

This will enrich and even when visitors come, they should find people of substance debating these issues so that they know that Uganda is well grounded in matters of climate change.

Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I congratulate you once again.

3.13
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is good to host such events but in my opinion what is more important is taking serious action against people that are destroying our environment. 

When I was at Makerere University, I used to follow the former Member of Parliament, now the honourable minister. By that time, she was even called “Mama Mabira” because she fought hard to save Mabira Forest - 

THE SPEAKER: When was that, Sir? 

MR WAKABI: That was around 2000 – I have forgotten the date (Laughter). It was during the Eighth Parliament, Mr Speaker, when she fought hard to save Mabira Forest, but I do not know what happened to her. It is surprising that we now have Indians destroying Bugoma Forest, and she is now in the steering wheel, but taking no action.

Mr Speaker, it is disturbing that foreigners are the ones destroying our environment. When you move on the road from Wandegeya to Zirobwe, you will notice that all the swamps are being destroyed. You will see Chinese building factories in swamps but without any action being taken on them. 

My prayer is that we should first take action against the people destroying our environment. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I am trying to allow our new colleagues to participate. Hon. Ssewungu and the Member for Bukonzo West, you are veterans. Let us first hear from the new colleagues. 

3.15 
MR JOEL SSENYONYI (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We get excited whenever we have a conference as big as this one and perhaps for good reasons. It will expose the country and so many other reasons. 

My worry, though, is that while we normally have these big conferences, the real tangible value from them is not recognised. We have, for a very long time, participated in depleting the environment. My interest from the minister, whether it be on this Floor or at a conference like this one, is to get commitment from the Government. What are we going to do to make sure we preserve the environment because we have done a shambolic job thus far? 

Let me paint for you a picture, Mr Speaker. In 1900, our forest cover was at 54 per cent but by 2017 it had reduced to 12.4 per cent. What that means is that we have lost over 2.4 million hectares of forest cover in this country. 

Yesterday, the National Forestry Authority warned that if this trend continues, by 2040, we shall have zero forest cover in this country and that worries me. I do not know if it worries the minister who used to be referred to as “Mama Mabira.” 

We would like total commitment from the Government on how we are going to deal with this situation, but also that the commitment gets to be followed by action. We have gotten commitment in this country time and again, be it on this Floor or elsewhere, and it is usually the same words; they will probably be put on paper but nothing is done. We want to see some serious action, Mr Speaker. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should be drawing to a close. This is a very important subject and that is why I have given it all this time, but I think it is important that we draw to a close because we have other business. We should be preparing to close this debate.   

3.18
MR HILLARY KIYAGA (NUP, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, honourable minister, for the submission. My concern is, when I was still in the village; I was shocked to see natural forests that belong to the Government being cut down after being leased out to the private individuals. 

We have a challenge. We do not know the terms and conditions that are given to these private individuals to cut down natural forests that belong to the country. At the end of the day, it does not only affect the environment but even the locals around such areas. You cannot imagine our people cannot even get firewood from these natural forests because when they now go to these forests, they are taken as strangers because they are now private property. 

My prayer, honourable minister, is that we need to revisit the terms and conditions given to these private individuals to whom these forests are leased. 

I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you see this is a debate without division and sometimes it is not a very good way of processing work. We talk but decisions cannot be taken because of the way the matter has been brought. 

I see many honourable members still want to speak to this subject but I have to close now. I know it is unfortunate – but okay, let me allow three members to speak. After, we shall have the shadow minister and the minister. 

What is important is that a proper motion on climate change should be brought to help us have a proper discussion and take a decision by resolution of this House to give our perspective of what needs to be done about this issue, mitigation and stuff like that. That might be better because the vehicle through which this one came might not lead us to that. Please proceed. 

3.21
MS JOSYLINE KAMATENETI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I thank the honourable minister for the good submission. I come from Ntungamo District, a place with very many hills and where mining is being done, especially in Ruhaama County. In Kajara, we have a very big hill called Nyabushenyi. We have foreigners and some Ugandans there that mine and leave mountains bare. 

Therefore, I request the Government, through you, honourable minister, to always have clear agreements with the people that come to invest so that after mining and doing everything they set out to do, they can always plant trees as a way of giving back to the community. They should not just get minerals and just go away after spoiling our environment and the vegetation. 

When I was at university in 2006/2007, we used to go to the village to sensitise people. We would get leaders and Members of Parliament to lead us in planting trees. Those trees are still there up to now. 
Therefore, I encourage leaders, through you, honourable minister, to always go to the villages and encourage people to plant trees, involve communities because it is the responsibility of everyone and not only the Government. I beg to submit.            

3.23
MR WILSON KAJWENGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I congratulate the Minister of State for Water and Environment for having been given opportunity to host this important international occasion. I would like to see the minister come up with a concrete category of a number of activities: pre-occasion, during-the-occasion, and post-conference. These activities should involve the whole country. 

I do not agree that having 1,100 people attending physically would have given us better coverage than even the digital one. We can even showcase our beautiful motherland now better than we would if these people had come here physically. 

Having said that, Mr Speaker, it is a policy that whoever wants to get a licence of investment or any activity must acquire a Certificate of Environmental Impact Assessment. I have a feeling that all these factories that we see have environmental impact assessment reports or certificates stacked in their shelves. However, wherever we pass, every factory is emitting fumes and has bad waste disposal. 

Therefore, does the ministry stop at giving only environmental impact assessment or it follows up? If it does, why do we see stench and poor waste disposal, among others?

My proposal is that accompanying the environmental impact assessment should be a condition that investor X or Y is going to plant an average of one million trees to restore our loss of forest cover. I submit.

3.25
MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, you are one of the luckiest people in this country, to be serving a ministry where your passion lies. You should also know that the country is judging whether what you reflected as passion was real passion not politics - and this will be through the results that you will deliver.

When we were children, we grew up looking at the forest guards holding sticks only. They were able to guard and protect our forests with only that stick. Today, we have people with guns and they are unable to protect our forests –(Interjection)- it makes us think that probably, the people guarding our forests with guns are actually the people giving out our forests. You are lucky to be sitting in Cabinet - the people that own, supervise and superintend over the people holding the guns. Would you do something?

Most importantly is that 60 land titles have been submitted to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for cancellation because they were issued on wetland areas. Nothing has been reported to us. We do not know why you are not putting a lot of pressure as you did as “Mama Mabira” on your colleague, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, to cancel these land titles that were illegally issued. 

Work permits have continuously been given on forest gazetted areas. We wonder what happens to the land, where work permits have been given and eucalyptus trees have been planted and after 15 years or so, the trees are harvested. What happens to that land thereafter and the effect of the land after they have harvested the trees? We look forward to seeing what comes out so that it ceases to be a cosmetic of simply talking about climate change.

Mr Speaker, allow me to take the information that I was being given in one minute –(Interruption)

MR LUMU: I would like to thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to welcome you. However, I want to give the honourable member information that when we were still in primary school, we used to have an environmental week. My primary school was called Mpiriggwa Primary School in Mityana District. When you talk of climate change right now in those schools, the children will look at you as if you are in some kind of comedy – 

THE SPEAKER: The information?

MR LUMU: The information I would like to give to the honourable member is that we used to have an environmental week. Therefore, the minister should as well encourage climate change to be taken to the primary schools, first, so that it can be understood and grasped by the young people. 

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you, honourable member. It is good information because even up to now, we have sanitation week in schools and I would like to tell the minister that most of the schools have lots of vacant land. They do not use it for agriculture or tree planting. We do not know what the sanitation week is used for in these schools. Can we replan to better our environment for a better future? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It is already 3.30 p.m. 

3.30
MS HELEN NAKIMULI (NUP, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I welcome you back, like my colleagues did. I would like to thank the minister for lobbying for our country. Allow me to draw examples from Kalangala District, where I come from. 

Honourable minister, I was born and raised in the Ssese Islands - Kalangala District. When we were growing up, we were told that when you go to a forest, you only pick firewood. As girls, we would only go there to do the cultural things we were told to do - I think all of you know those things. (Laughter)

Today, as we speak, when you tell your child to go to a forest, she cannot go there because everyone will see her. I would also like this august House to know that this week on Monday, a landing site called Kakyanga on Fumve Island lost property; seven houses were destroyed by strong winds because of the cutting down of trees. We do not have any natural forest in Kalangala because most of our leaders are the ones cutting down the trees. The National Forestry Authority is giving permission to people to cut down our trees. 

My humble prayer to the honourable minister - I kindly beg for your ministry to put up stringent measures to people who cut down trees, especially in our country –(Interruption) 

MR KABUUSU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I welcome you back. I also hail from Kalangala - Ssese Islands. The information I wanted to give to this House is that the NFA, who are the custodians of the forests - I do not know. When people are given custodial powers, unchecked and we do not do what is necessary to check these people, they give out the forests to whomever they wish and how they want it. 

Mr Speaker, could there be another way, possibly, if these forests were degazetted and people settled where settlement is needed and where they do not want, is where we would gazette the forest – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are debating. 

MR KABUUSU: I take the guidance, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up, Member for Kalangala. 

MS NAKIMULI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Therefore, it is my humble request that the honourable minister cautions those who are doing deforestation in our area and also gives us trees in Kalangala District. Otherwise, the natural forest is gone. Thank you. 

3.33
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to welcome you back to the House and above all, I thank you for keeping us here in the House; now we are out of the tents. 

I also want to thank the minister who was on our side, where she derived the name, “Maama Mabira”, when we were fighting for Mabira Forest. Indeed, we are proud that what she fought for is still struggling. Recently, I heard her talk about banning all buveeras in Uganda. We pray that, that will take place. 

Uganda is one of the most blessed countries in the world. The equator crosses Uganda and anything dealing with climate is hinged on the equator. This is why even Churchill named Uganda the Pearl of Africa. However, there are remedies we need first. Before you think about anything, we must deal seriously with the reduction and cutting of the tariff on electricity so that people can use power. 

The population is growing but the cost of power is going high, yet the Government has invested a lot of money and built new dams. As we speak, I think a unit is above Shs 600. Therefore, the honourable minister and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development must sit and reduce the cost of power so that people stop encroaching on the environment. 

Many Ugandans have developed different charcoal stoves, which reduce on the consumption of firewood. But what is the Government doing in form of giving assistance to these people to fight and help them produce more charcoal saving stoves? 

When you read about the NRM Government - they call themselves the bush fighters because they used the bush to fight. Indeed Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni will tell you he spent five years in the bush, which is undisputed. Without the bush, maybe he would not have taken power; the bush gave him a lot of energy to fight and get there. 

It is very painful to find that as we speak now, natural forests are being demolished and they are planting artificial forests. (Interjections) I do not want us to go back to the bush.

Mr Speaker, I know you know Kisubi Seminary. One time, there was a gentleman who went to meet the rector. He told the priest that the trees at Kisubi Nabinoonya had overgrown, and asked the priest to allow him to cut them down. The priest told this person that the seminary started in 1937. And ever since then, it had had more than 10 rectors and none of them had ever tampered with the trees at Nabinoonya Kisubi. He asked, “Why do you think that I, the priest sitting now can grant the cutting of these trees?” Indeed, this priest refused and sent away this person. As we speak now, these are the areas where people go to enjoy themselves. 

As I conclude, the issue of children in schools is very key. Most of the message is delivered by children but there must be willingness and teachers should sensitise them on the same. Let us use schools to come out and fight all this. 

What is happening in Kampala is that all the trenches have a lot of water bottles filling them. Can we do something to control the degradation of our environment? People are littering everywhere and there is no sensitisation. Countries have fought that and achieved good results. 

Once again, Mr Speaker, I thank you but I pray that Members of Parliament come out vigilantly to fight the cutting down of artificial forests and we maintain them. Otherwise, it is not about going to the bush and surviving in Government that you cut down bushes to stop people from waging war using the same route you took. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am hearing a very interesting suggestion that “forest cover” means “forests providing cover for guerrilla activities”. (Laughter) I do not know if that can pass any standard. But the honourable member has stated it and the record have captured it. Maybe we should get time and find whether it makes sense at all that forest cover should be used only for those purposes.

We are talking about climate change and mitigation factors. The ingenuity of the honourable member is extending it a bit far. Honourable minister, you have a short time. 

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the passion you have to save the mother country. 

I have always thought that what unites us in this country most, after sports, is the environment. During the debate, you energized me and I do appreciate it. You have raised pertinent issues that needed tangible response. I have written almost all of them. In fact, if I am to go through them one by one, the Speaker might have to allow us to spend half the night here. I do appreciate honourable colleagues. 

What I came with today was to inform this Parliament and the country about the upcoming event. We should have made a big capital out of it, but unfortunately, because of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are going the way we are going. It is not our own making but it has happened. 

I appreciate your compliments, colleagues, for the paper presented. I will attempt to go through what Members have raised and make a prayer at the end of it. Maybe I will not be able to satisfy all the issues raised now because most of them are overlapping and Members need to know what the Government is doing to change the status quo. I think that is what is pertinent. The reality of the situation is that our environment is being destroyed. Destroyed by who? It is you and me. 

If we change the mind-set and become change agents and ambassadors, with the Government as the driver, we shall be there. This is very encouraging and I salute you colleagues for that. 

Allow me to just pick out a few and not be repetitive. I will pray that next week or any time convenient to this Parliament, I should be allowed to bring to this Parliament the status quo of the environment and natural resources in Uganda and what the Government is undertaking to do. 

We have discussed this document in Cabinet and I would love to bring it to the honourable members; the people’s representatives so that it is replicated. That will be more detailed and maybe it will give more light about what we are doing for the whole environment. 

I would also like to give information that most of these issues raised need a law in place. I would like to inform you, especially the new Members, that the previous Parliament processed the Climate Change Bill. We are just awaiting His Excellency the President to assent to it and it will help us to implement a lot of issues.

Lastly on that, Mr Speaker, I am sure that His Excellency the President will, at an appropriate, also add onto this issue, so that you know how serious the Government is undertaking to turn around the destroyed environment for the future generations. 

Nature is speaking and indeed, we must listen and Government is now listening. So, the change of mindset is now real. The political will is real and we want you to feel this and believe in that.

Colleagues raised a number of issues. Let me start from where it ended. Shadow Minister, I appreciate. What I want to tell you is that on the alternative use of energy - colleagues, you are aware that as a country, we are soon going to be among the rich ones. 

We are about to produce gas that will be one source of the alternative sources of energy that will go a long way to reduce on destruction of our trees. I also know that as Government, we are looking towards reducing the cost of electricity, so that it is actually bearable. 

However, the use of –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you are to respond to all those things one by one, you will have killed my Order Paper. (Laughter) As I said at the beginning, this is a debate without decision. You are just giving us information that these events are going to happen. 

What I actually propose – and I am not buying your status update because the status update will be another debate without decision. I am trying to encourage our committee responsible for this sector to develop a strong motion very soon, touching on all aspects. 

Is the chairperson here? Is any member of that committee in charge of environment here? Yes, the honourable member for Butambala and hon. Otaala -(Interjection)- is he the chairperson for the Committee on Natural Resources? 

Hon. Otaala, this is a matter you should take up very urgently. We want a motion on this matter, properly capturing all aspects, we debate and pass a resolution, to give our opinion as Parliament to the Executive, so that we see how to find common ground on how to deal with these things. These debates that we have without decision are not very helpful procedures to deal with these things.

Honourable members, it has come to my notice that a statement from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is ready, in response to a question about our people in Afghanistan. So, I will cause an alteration in the Order Paper and add, under item 4(1), that there will be the last statement. 

Is it a full statement or this is in response to a question? I think it is a question that was raised; so, it is a response to urgent matters. So, we categorise it under responses of ministries to urgent matters. 

I cause an alteration to add, after item 3, “a statement on the situation of Ugandans in Afghanistan, evacuations from Afghanistan and situation of Ugandan traders in South Sudan.” It is a whole mix of stuff and I hope that the minister is aware that it is a response to an urgent question, which he must deal with in a short way. Do not come here and start telling us about Government policy on foreign affairs and things like that. It will not help us. Focus on the ball. The questions are clear and I will pause that.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SITUATION OF UGANDANS IN AFGHANISTAN

THE SPEAKER: No, no. I said that one will come last. We want to deal with these ones which are already there. I was just informed from here; it cannot take priority.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH ON THE OPERATIONALISATION OF TRANSPLANT SURGERIES IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: This was a very quick, short question and I would like to correspondingly deal with it. Honourable minister?

3.48
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to welcome you back and please accept my prayer that the good Lord should bless you.

Mr Speaker, a question was raised by hon. Kiwanuka Abdallah, MP Mukono County North, on the status of operationalisation of transplant surgeries in Uganda. 

Allow me, first of all, to give the state of the Bill. The Uganda Human Organ Donation and Tissue Transplant Bill was considered by Cabinet early this year. However, there was a need for further consultation on three issues, which required legal input. 

The three issues were:

    i) The presence of a Tissue Transplant Council or Board.
    ii) The sharing of organs with other transplant centres.
    iii) The consent to donate organs or tissue and the option of opting out, following change of mind.

The First Parliamentary Counsel, working with the transplant surgeons, Ministry of Health, the office of the Attorney-General and consulting various other transplant laws, have resolved these three issues.

The Bill is now ready for consideration by Cabinet and thereafter, it will be laid on the Table for debate by Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to inform the august House that construction of the Transplant Unit at Mulago National Specialised Hospital has been completed and is ready for operations.

The Dialysis Unit has been re-established, with 24 brand new machines and is fully functional to handle patients. The transplant teams are ready to begin the first surgery. However, the challenge is the presence of COVID-19 severe cases being managed in Mulago Specialised Hospital and lack of a dedicated budget, as Mulago Specialised Hospital was not allocated a budget.

In conclusion, the ministry is committed to ensure that the process of finalising the Bill is concluded as soon as possible. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Any supplementary question from the Member who raised this matter? There being no supplementary question from the Member who raised the matter, next item. [Mr Basalirwa rose] No; next item.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE INTERIM ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT TO ADDRESS THE PLIGHT OF THE FISHING COMMUNITIES THAT HAVE SUFFERD AT THE HANDS OF THE UPDF FISHERIES PROTECTION UNIT

THE SPEAKER: The way you frame your topics – There is a procedural matter, honourable minister. Just give me a short moment. 

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I seek relates to Rule 48 of our Rules of Procedure, with regard to answers by ministers. It particularly states, “(1) As soon as a question is answered in the House, any Member, starting with the Member who asked the question, may, without notice, ask a supplementary question for further elucidation of any matter of fact regarding the answer, which has been given.”

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Health has answered the question. There are supplementary issues that we thought we could raise after the minister’s submission. I seek your indulgence that perhaps, we could be permitted, especially the shadow Minister – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, Rule 48 relates to questions for oral answer. Those are written questions that are submitted to the minister and she or he comes with a response in writing and it is circulated to all Members. 

Rule 46, under which this is brought, permits only the Member who raised the matter. This is because it is a matter of urgent public importance. That is the distinction, honourable member. 

On what matter do you rise, Government Chief Whip? 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Mr Speaker, under item 4(b), we had a response and the minister is ready. So, I request that you first allow us to do away with that item. 

THE SPEAKER: We are proceeding well. Let us follow the Order Paper. Please stop interrupting.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH ON THE STATUS OF –

THE SPEAKER: That is Fisheries. What is Item 4(b)? Oh, it is a response on the status of procurement of marine ambulances for the island districts. How did you miss that, Clerk? Honourable Minister of Health, I am sorry about that. Clerk, please stop misleading the Speaker. 

RESPONSE TO URGENT QUESTION ON THE STATUS OF PROCUREMENT OF MARINE AMBULANCES FOR THE ISLAND DISTRICTS

3.54
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This question was raised by hon. Robert Migadde, Member of Parliament for Buvuma Island County. The concern was over exclusion of Buvuma District from acquisition of boat ambulances procured by Government to manage the health crisis in the island district.

The Ministry of Health recognises the challenges faced by patients in the island districts on Lake Victoria, Lake Kyoga, Lake Albert and the communities along Lake Bunyonyi and River Nile in accessing ambulance services. 

The ministry developed an emergency medical services strategy that prioritises establishment of water ambulance service as a sub-set of the national ambulance service. The ministry planned to procure 15 boat ambulances in the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

There are five types of boat ambulances: 

    a) Type A Ambulance is only a transport ambulance. 
    b) Type B is for emergency care and basic life support. 
    c) Type C is intensive care ambulances. 
    d) Type D is medical response vehicles. 
    e) Type E is medical rescue vehicles. 

Allow me to appreciate the following institutions that made it possible for us to have boat ambulances in Uganda: 

    1. The Tenth Parliament who prioritised and appropriated funds for procurement of the boat ambulances.

    2. GAVI; the Vaccine Alliance, was the first partner to procure boats for immunisation services in islands. They have also contributed to the current procurement. 

    3. The Global Fund to Fight AIDs, Tuberculosis and Malaria.

    4. UNICEF that has worked as a procurement entity. 

The Ministry of Health ordered for 14 boat ambulances and the progress is as follows:

    a. Three highly specialised boat ambulances were received in the country in February 2021, tested and issued with a water worthiness certificate by the Ministry of Works and Transport. They have been deployed to Amolatar, Buvuma and Kalangala Districts. However, they are at the marine base in Lake Victoria.

    b. Four boat ambulances were received in the country last week on 13 August 2021 at Bollore Yard Bonded Warehouse and they have been cleared by Uganda Revenue Authority. They are now at the marine base on Lake Victoria to undergo testing and issuance of a water worthiness certificate. 

    c. Four boat ambulances will arrive in Uganda at the end of September 2021 and three boat ambulances will arrive at the end of October 2021.

Mr Speaker, allow me to inform the august House that three Type C boat ambulances - the specialised ones - were funded by the Government of Uganda COVID-19 supplementary fund. Two Type B boat ambulances were funded by the Global Fund and nine Type B boat ambulances were funded by GAVI.

It is important to note that three of the ambulances are of the highly specialised type; that is the Type C boat ambulances while 11 are basic life support boat ambulances. I defined this earlier. 

Management of the Boat Ambulances

Boat ambulance service is a specialised service that requires management by specialised staff. These are coxswains, navigators, boat mechanics and paramedics whom we do not have as the Ministry of Health. 

Due to limitations at the ministry and the district local governments, we opted for joint management of the ambulances. The joint water ambulance management system involves the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Works and Transport (the Marines Department), Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the District Local Governments. 

This has largely been informed by the following reasons: 

    1. Expensive medical equipment in the ambulances and brand of the engine that is attractive to pirates.

    2. Lack of marine specialised staff at the Ministry of Health and the District Local Governments.

    3. Insecurity on the water due to sharing the water with the neighbouring countries.

    4. Past experience where boats for immunisation went missing after handover in some districts. Some of them now have no engines and are abandoned.

    5. The docking sites are owned by the Ministry of Works and Transport, security forces and partners that require development and continuous presence of security.

    6. Leverage on existing maintenance frameworks in security for repair and maintenance. Security has marine engineers and standing frameworks with maintenance companies.

The boat ambulances will run under a regionalised system coordinated by selected districts where a call and dispatch system will be used. These ambulances will be linked to respective regional referral hospitals in their areas of jurisdiction. 

The reason the ambulances are with the marines at Entebbe is because of those reasons I have listed above; we cannot run them, we do not have the people. We cannot send them to Buvuma Island because they will be stolen. So, the marines are taking care of them. However, they are also doing the work when they are called upon.

A memorandum of understanding has been cleared by the Solicitor-General for the four Government ministries to work together to support districts in delivery of water ambulance services. Like for road ambulances, the districts that have docking sites, trained and have experienced staff will be requested to work with the central team. 

I wish, in a special way, to appreciate the 11th Parliament that has appropriated funding in this financial year under the COVID-19 Supplementary Funding for running of the first three boat ambulances. 

I appeal to this august House to appropriate a dedicated fund for the water ambulance services to cater for specialised staff and the high operational costs. For instance, one patient transport route consumes between 200-500 litres of fuel. In addition, the spare parts for the boats are rare.

I have attached, on the last page, the distribution of boat ambulances, the criteria of large and deep waters that can accommodate a boat and a number of emergency conditions, and the districts that will be allocated these boat ambulances that will be on the water are listed.

My technical teams have held meetings with these districts and have also planned field visits, to identify any challenges that the districts have observed. This will help them develop a consensus in the management of these life-saving assets.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Migadde, do you have any supplementary questions?

4.03
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for the response. However, our issue as leaders from these islands still remains the same.

In the last Parliament, which the minister thanked - we have ambulances that arrived in the country in February this year and we are in August; these ambulances were procured. Some of the challenges that the minister is advancing can be dealt with if we sit in a meeting with the teams.

For example, Mr Speaker, a boat ambulance cannot rescue anyone from Buvuma if it is based in Entebbe. It takes 350 litres from Entebbe to Buvuma yet the referral point for patients from Buvuma is Kawolo Hospital in Buikwe District. Therefore, there is no reason a boat ambulance cannot be based in Buvuma if it is to benefit people in Buvuma. 

Mr Speaker, we have to look at the other challenges on the lake. In case one receives a distressed call at night from someone on the lake, it is not easy for a boat to move from Entebbe to that place. Therefore, our humble appeal is that the boat ambulances for Buvuma, Kalangala and/or Namayingo should be based in those specific districts.

Mr Speaker, the other issue regards land transport because they are usually two. When the water ambulance delivers the patient at a landing site, there must be a vehicle ambulance for onward transportation of that patient to the point of referral.  Therefore, they should be two; both the boat and vehicle ambulances.

Lastly, my simple question to the minister, now that we have heard the explanation, is: when do we hope these ambulances to begin working?

DR ACENG: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I hear the honourable member but I also trust that he has heard me. We cannot place extremely expensive boat ambulances, without thinking about their security; having had experience of losing boats before - I have clearly stated that we have worked through memoranda and we are working through capacity building.

Mr Speaker, we are hopeful that by the end of October, the districts will have built capacity to guard the ambulances. And the Buvuma ambulance is a specialised ambulance; we cannot just throw it away into the water. Right now, it is offering services and we can share with the member, statistics on patients that have been supported.

Mr Speaker, road ambulances are available to ferry patients. Road ambulances are distributed per region and it was not part of the question. So, I did not come with the list. However, I know that there is another question on comprehensive health services and that information will be provided. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you seem to be having some very burning issue. On what matter do you rise?

DR BATUWA:  I rise on the same matter.

THE SPEAKER: Which one?

DR BATUWA: As the shadow minister of health - (Laughter) - on the matter of boat ambulances.

THE SPEAKER: This is not a debate, honourable member, where you close as a shadow minister for health, after Government has made a presentation. This is information that was sought and it has been given comprehensively. Therefore, we will reserve you for another day when the debate on such matters arises.

DR BATUWA: No, I am not going to debate but to offer information.

THE SPEAKER: No because that information is now time barred.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In last week’s sitting specifically on Wednesday, I raised a matter on the Floor of Parliament upon which the Speaker directed the Minister for Health to make a submission to this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: What was the subject?

MR KATUSABE: The subject was in regard to the high cancer burden that originates from Kasese District, where 60-80 percent of cancer patients in Mulago Hospital come from Kasese and about 50 percent of them from my community in Bukonzo County West.

Mr Speaker, this was in regard to the widely held fears about the water supplies especially the Bwera Water where the pipes that connect distributed water from the water source to the community could be having concentrated elements of asbestos.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as you can see, that shouldn’t have been raised as an urgent matter. It should have been formally brought so that it is dealt with formally. These urgent matters cannot solve those kinds of situations. Those are heavy policy matters that require investigations and so on and so forth.

Therefore, you need to have a formal question submitted to the minister in writing to enable them do some research, submit a copy of their findings to you and then we come and listen to what it is. Otherwise, this method that we are fond of and like using very much is not that effective. For these purposes, it does not deliver.

That notwithstanding, the question has been raised. I don’t know where it is but we will track it and have it on the Order Paper tomorrow.

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, thank you for your leadership. I will be waiting for feedback and presentation from the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much but for the future, let us stick to the rules.

Mr KAJWENGYE: Mr Speaker, ever since the Eleventh Parliament was sworn in in May this year, I have not missed any sitting. And I do not recall when this Eleventh Parliament ever appropriated a supplementary budget as referred to in the minister’s statement on page 5, and I quote: “I wish in a special way to appreciate the Eleventh Parliament that has appropriated funding in financial year 2021/2022, under the COVID Supplementary Fund, for the running of the three boat ambulances.”

THE SPEAKER: She meant the Tenth Parliament. There is nothing like further procedure. (Laughter)

MR BATUWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. I recall the moment hon. Migadde raised his concern following a ministerial statement from the Minister of Health, indicating that boat ambulances had been procured. It was after that statement that hon. Migadde went back to his constituency only to realise that the boat ambulances were non-existent. 

Today, the minister has clearly said that they were purchased, only that they are in Entebbe - at the marine. Having been to Dolwe – Dolwe Island is very far; it is in the eastern region. It cannot be serviced by Entebbe – 

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedural matter? 

MR BATUWA: Are we proceeding well when we do not allow the health committee to go and verify whether these boat ambulances exist? We need to go and verify this because that is what prompted the position. I doubt whether hon. Migadde has seen these boat ambulances. 

THE SPEAKER: As Parliament, we are proceeding very well. When you are a teacher and the bell rings, that time for entering class has come, you do not need anybody to tell you that: “Please, now go to class.” The committee has listened; let them go and find out. (Applause) We are not going to be giving directives here. Let the committee that has heard, go and find out. It is as simple as that. 

Otherwise, what is the committee for? You, as the shadow minister, what are you waiting for? (Laughter) Instead of raising the procedural matter here, you should have just left Parliament and driven to the marine base. (Laughter)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will always refer to your commitment, as you said: the Uganda we want. The minister has said the three ambulances are there but the technicality is that we have no people to operate them and the cost is high.  

The minister also said that there are ambulances that will arrive in September and nine others will arrive in October. The people of the islands are crying and I seek your indulgence on this, Mr Speaker. The minister said they are building capacity; the Members of Parliament from those islands do not know what the minister and her team are doing to build capacity. 

Wouldn’t it be right for the minister to educate these Members of Parliament from these islands and inform them of what is going on and what they are doing? This is so that by the time these ambulances arrive, these voters putting pressure on the Members of Parliament are aware of what is going on and what is expected. I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, even in the Bible, Thomas doubted – not Tayebwa – whether Jesus had risen. [Member: “Even Tayebwa himself.”] Even Tayebwa? (Laughter) Can the leader of these MPs get in touch with the minister and go and have a visual appreciation of this thing? If there is plain water, you come back and tell us: “We only found water.” If there are boats, you also come and tell us that, “okay, there are boats” so that we stop this ping-pong. Next item.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE INTERIM ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT TO ADDRESS THE PLIGHT OF THE FISHING COMMUNITIES THAT HAVE SUFFERED AT THE HANDS OF THE UPDF FISHERIES PROTECTION UNIT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, do not take us back. Proceed. 

4.17 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I share with the House what we have come up with, allow me, in one minute, to bring to the attention of those who may not know that, when the Fisheries Protection Unit was deployed on the lakes – it is now coming to four years - most of the lakes, virtually, did not have fish because almost everyone wanted to go to the lake – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, do not take us back. You are going to open up something that I do not want re-opened. 

MS ADOA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, tell us the interim - that is what we agreed. 

MS ADOA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is what we came up with yesterday after consultations: 

One, from Thursday, we are going to reach the most affected places, especially Kamuli and other areas that were mentioned, to verify the report that has been given to us. 

Two, since some of the affected members are in court and some of the mentioned soldiers are still on trial –(Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, what we have here is a statement - response from ministers. Indeed, Parliament has provided us with iPads so that we get all these responses, just like the Minister of Health has done. 

However, as we speak now, the minister is reading from her diary and we do not have this response on our iPads. Is she in order to continue reading, yet she started on a bad note, which you stopped her from continuing with in relation to this matter of fish? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, she is in order. (Laughter) Do you know why? It is because the way the question was brought requires that kind of response. 

MS ADOA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your protection. On the second issue that we are going to handle, as much as some of these affected people have gone to court, we are also going to identify some of the cases that are not yet in court and bring them to the attention of the Attorney-General for advice. 

Three, looking at most of the fishermen, they are not able to afford the recommended boats, nets and the engines. Today, I had an opportunity to sit with the Executive Director, National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) and he has given me assurance that this coming quarter, which is going to take us about three months, NAADS is going to give us some alternative livelihood for our most affected fishermen. We are going to give –

THE SPEAKER: Procedural point from hon. Ssegirinya - [Member: “Tebandeke.”] - Oh! They look alike. (Laughter) Proceed, honourable.

MR TEBANDEKE: Mr Speaker, the matter on the Order Paper is about compensation of the affected fishing communities but the matter laid on the Table by the minister is about the preparation plan for the fishing sector, which is good. However, it contradicts the agenda on the Order Paper.

Before I became a Member of Parliament, I was a secretary to one of the associations in the fishing community. I have a report of people who are affected by the Fisheries Protection Unit in Uganda.

My procedural point is, are we proceeding right, when the honourable minister is giving us a statement on the work plan to prepare for the sector vis-à-vis our interest of compensation? To put it on record – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have already posed the question. Let me deal with it. You have already posed the question; you cannot again start another speech. Let me rule. Honourable member, today, is not the first day we are having this debate on this matter, which is very important. This is not the first time this matter is coming here. Since the other Parliament, this matter has been coming up. Therefore, it is a very old issue, which we have failed to find a lasting solution to and that is why it keeps coming up.

Yesterday, the minister outlined the issue of compensation and the discussions held with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the matter ended. What remains outstanding for today, which she is trying to deal with and I hope you give her time to deal with it now, is that while all those preparations are taking place, what happens in the interim period? That is what she is dealing with today. Therefore, she is proceeding very well. Honourable minister, please continue proceeding very well. (Laughter)

MS ADOA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, as we speak, the majority of the fishermen cannot afford the recommended fishing gears and vessels. The more they continue going to the lake without the right gears, the more they will always collide with the Fisheries Protection Unit.

What I am trying to bring to this House is that as we sort out the relationship, most of them do not have what to eat. Recently, I went to Entebbe and found women breastfeeding and yet they had gone a week without eating. What we are trying to say is that as we sort out many things, we need to give them some alternatives for livelihood and that will be for the next three months. 

However, within three weeks, I am going with my technical team to the areas that have been affected more, including Kamuli, where the issue was raised and Kayunga, where they said Kawugo is the torture chambers. 

I want to bring to this House some hope –(Interruption) 

MS AGNES ATIM: Mr Speaker, I have listened and had interactions with the honourable minister. However, I am very surprised with the manner in which the interim actions are being taken. Is it in order for the honourable minister to start being selective on the specific districts that have been reported? The issue of torture, rape and killing in the waters of Uganda is not selective. Therefore, is it in order for the minister to start specifying districts and assuming other districts have no torture issues? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please be a national minister.

MS ADOA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do appreciate the honourable Member from Amolatar. She is new in the House; this is her first term in this House. I want her to know that Amolatar was one of the first places I personally reached with a team. The whole of Lake Kyoga is supposed to have 15,000 boats but Amolatar alone had 37,000 boats. It took me a lot of time to sensitise the fishermen.

Yes, there are places that we have not yet reached but we have reached very many places including Busia, Buikwe, Buvuma, Kalangala and many others. What we are trying to say is that it is better to first reach places that we have never reached, which have pressing issues. Otherwise, we cannot reach everywhere within three weeks. I am asking this House to give me three weeks to reach places with burning issues. 

In addition, Mr Speaker, I have set up a committee of Members of Parliament and they are going to help me to collect data. After that, we will meet in two weeks and bring all the information together and report back to the House. The honourable member who has raised that issue is one of the Members from Lake Kyoga, who is going to collect information for me.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let me put it this way. One, is that some people are suffering in the communities out there and they need immediate intervention. You need to act with the ministers responsible for things of this nature and deal with the situation. You need to do that.

Two, there is the broader issue of what you should do in the interim period with the people who have lost livelihood. You started very well and said something about NAADS. Instead of pursuing that line - I was hoping that you were now going to say there is going to be a facility or some support given to these fishermen who do not have appropriate boats either through a loan system or a mechanism that the Government can devise so that they also go in the waters in a proper way. I was hoping something like that would come out. These are the things we are talking about; real stuff.

MS ADOA: Mr Speaker, I was moving from one point to another.  One of the concluding points I had was to tell this House that the issues of the lakes will not be solved unless the Government gives fishermen boats, even in groups. 

I presented a paper to the Cabinet just before we concluded the Tenth Parliament. I also resolved with my technical team that we get 300 groups per fishing district, where the Government would buy for every group an engine, 180 recommended fishing nets and then a boat.

When we put the youth together, about 10 or 15 in a group and support them, they will go to the lake in a proper way. But as long as we keep chasing them from the lake without giving them alternatives, we cannot end these fights on the lake. 

I had already presented this paper but when it came to campaign time and eventually the 10th Parliament ended, I had not got the feedback. 

Therefore, as we do these other small things, I am requesting for about three weeks to put these things together and give something for livelihood, and then three months for NAADS and disaster preparedness ministry to support me.

I would be pursuing the bigger picture because if we do not pursue this big picture, it becomes very hard. 

For me who was born near the lake, I understand what the fishermen are undergoing because my father was a fisherman - I was born and raised by a fisherman. I am therefore talking about what I know. That unless we help a fisherman to go to the lake with the right gear, we shall beat him and probably kill him but he will not stop going to the lake because he does not have any other alternative. 

One needs almost Shs 10 million to go to the lake; one needs nets, a boat and an engine - without which, there is no way one can pick fish from the lake. 

I need support from this House and I need you to give me time. I want to promise Ugandans; I know what I did last year and I know what I am going to do today. It was worse than this but we were able to calm the situation down. 

With where we have put people with sensitisation, I want to promise you that fisheries is going to be the best docket that we have in Uganda and it will support the country with revenue. Thank you. (Applause)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister. Honourable minister, you are doing a good job but you are not doing the good job right. I remember yesterday, I raised this particular matter and I asked the minister to come with specifics. Madam Minister, you are aware - and we talked in the corridor - that fellow citizens are suffering at the hands of the Fisheries Enforcement Unit, especially the officers. A lot of fishermen, fellow citizens, are dying on the water because they are being pursued violently on the water. 

Through you, Mr Speaker, I do not know whether it is not procedurally right for the minister or this House to direct the Fisheries Enforcement Unit to scale down on the violent cracking down on fellow citizens that is claiming a lot of lives. We will never recover the lives that we lose through those enforcements. 

On the same procedural position, I do not know whether it is not procedurally right for the minister to broaden and cast her intervention net wider – she is talking about visiting, but how can you visit people that are starving to death? Their boats and gear have been destroyed. I would rather that you incorporate in the suggestion that when you are visiting the fishing communities – 

THE SPEAKER: Now you are ruling on your procedural matter. (Laughter) 

MR KATUSABE: I am sorry, Mr Speaker. The point I am putting across is that; is it not procedurally right for the Madam Minister to explore the possibility that as she goes with her team to those affected communities, she goes with some relief items, specifically the food to help our starving citizens on the waters? I appreciate you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have listened to the minister; I do not know whether you did. I listened to her and I picked something. That the level of commitment from her, as an individual, is high. 

She needs support from this House and from elsewhere. She is trying to rally our support so that she can do the things that she aspires to do and make this particular industry one of the best. What she needs from us is support. 

I think the issues are clear, except the way we are processing them is the one making us not make headway. I am suggesting that we give the minister the three weeks she needs. In the interim period, wherever the minister will be, the honourable members from these communities should be with her. 
We are trying to find lasting solutions here for our communities. We shall then come back and review and see whether we have progressed properly. Within that time, probably what the President is doing and what other people are doing will have also come to fruition and then we come back here and find common solutions that can help our people. 

I suggest that - and I hope that you will support me – let us conclude this matter here and give the minister time to do this, and we proceed from there. I can see your agreement. Thank you very much. Next item, please.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT ON GOVERNMENT’S PLAN TO REHABILITATE THE 96-KILOMETRE MASAKA-KYOTERA-MUTUKULA ROAD

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister – same challenge; urgent matters of this nature. Please proceed.

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I welcome you back. (Interjections) Please give me time – 

THE SPEAKER: Please proceed. Honourable members, the honourable minister is protected. 

MR BYAMUKAMA: Today, I am making my maiden speech and at the same time giving my maiden ministerial statement; please give me time and I read out my statement to you. 

Mr Speaker, I stand here to make a statement on the matter of concern raised by honourable John Paul Lukwago, MP, Kyotera regarding Government’s plan to rehabilitate the 96-kilometre Masaka-Kyotera-Mutukula Road.

This road starts in central Uganda, in Masaka through Kyotera, Kalisizo and ends at the border of Uganda and Tanzania, at Mutukula. It also links to Rwanda and Burundi through Tanzania. 

Therefore, it is important that this road is maintained. The road is a single carriage way road, paved to the bituminous standard which has served its design life and is due for rehabilitation and upgrading. 

The condition of the road is predominantly in fair-to-poor condition, which is making the transit traffic costs high with increased travel time.

The Uganda National Roads Authority carried out feasibility studies and detailed designs for the rehabilitation of the Masaka-Mutukula Road (89 kilometres) as part of the multinational Uganda/Tanzania Road Project. 

The studies were financed by a grant from the African Development Bank through the East African Community Secretariat as a multinational road project between the United Republic of Tanzania and the Republic of Uganda. This project is meant to ease transport between the East African Partner States of Uganda, Tanzania as well as act as an alternative route between Uganda and Burundi. The studies were concluded in April 2020. 

At the 17th Sectoral Council on Transport, Communication and Meteorology held in Dar-es-Salaam that was from 21-25 June 2021; the EAC Secretariat, Republic of Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania were directed to initiate the sourcing of funds for the construction of the Masaka-Mutukula/Mutukula-Kyaka and Bugene-Kasulo-Kumunazi roads for submission to the African Development Bank and other Development Finance institutions by 20 August, 2021.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has already written to the East African Community Secretariat for them to submit to African Development Bank and other institutions for financing.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the Member who raised this matter?

4.43
MR JOHN-PAUL LUKWAGO (DP, Kyotera County, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to add my voice and welcome you back to Parliament.

Mr Speaker, when this issue was raised on 21 July this year, the Rt hon. Prime Minister clearly committed to start maintenance works on 22 September. What the honourable Minister of Works and Transport is talking about is rehabilitation.

I want to be specific on this; this road is the face of shame for this country - the status of this road now. Aside from the business links with trade partners and the rest, it is a safety issue. Ever since it was raised - I am very certain if the Minister of Works and Transport gets the reports, he knows how many accidents have occurred and how many lives we have lost on this road.

THE SPEAKER: So, do you have a supplementary question to him?

MR LUKWAGO: My supplementary question to the minister is to put it on record whether Government does not have the resources to do maintenance works on Masaka-Mutukula road. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have money or you are broke? Do you have money and you are just buying time or there is nothing? Microphone!

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Money has never been enough. However, I beg that regarding the question he has asked in regard to this very issue, I should go back and consult. We shall give you an appropriate answer because the money we all use comes from the Ministry of Finance –

THE SPEAKER: No, no, no. He has said that the Rt hon. Prime Minister said on the Floor that works will commence on 22nd September. We are still in August. If you listened carefully to the issues, you deal with them properly. The 22nd of September is still ahead. So, his question is, he does not see any kind of preparation to have that matter commence.

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Since the Prime Minister mentioned it and gave a directive, let us wait when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gives us money and – 

THE SPEAKER: No, no, no! You are not going to wait; you are the minister. [Member: “Procedure”] Please do not start. What you are going to do, honourable minister, is this; go back and just establish when works on this road will commence. 

He is not talking about huge, big works; he is talking about the routine maintenance, just to make the road navigable as of now in the interim period. Just go back and find out, come back and tell us. Please, just do that. Do you want to do that tomorrow?

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, I commit myself that for these remaining two weeks, let us go and prepare. We will start on the work, like he has raised it.

THE SPEAKER: Routine maintenance. Come back tomorrow after consultation. In three minutes, you are done and then we move on with other business. Is that okay? Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SITUATION OF UGANDANS IN AFGHANISTAN, EVACUEES FROM AFGHANISTAN AND THE SITUATION OF UGANDA TRADERS IN SOUTH SUDAN

4.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL COOPERATION) (Mr John Mulimba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Permit me to begin by welcoming you back and also thanking God for his providence. I rise to present a statement in respect of a question that was raised by hon. Norah Bigirwa, who is also the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. 

Mr Speaker, I am pleased to appraise the House on the situation of Ugandan nationals in Afghanistan, the evacuation of Afghans and other persons to Uganda and the safety of Ugandan traders in South Sudan. 

At the outset, I wish to express appreciation to you personally and the honourable members for the interest that has been demonstrated in these matters. 

On Afghanistan, many Members have heard or watched on the news of the unfolding events in Afghanistan in recent days. These evolved very quickly, leading to the evacuation by several countries of their nationals and Afghans. 

Members are aware that Uganda is signatory to several international and regional conventions, by which the Government of Uganda commits to protect persons fleeing from persecution and conflict. 

The 1995 Uganda Constitution reaffirms Uganda’s commitments to international humanitarian law and in line with the above, Parliament has passed progressive laws that are held in high regard and emulated the world over. 

Mindful of the possible danger of our citizens and others in Afghanistan, soon after the situation in Kabul unfolded on 18 August 2021, the Government of Uganda, in a joint statement with 60 other countries, called on the Taliban to ensure a safe departure of people wanting to leave Afghanistan.

My ministry immediately undertook efforts to establish the status of Ugandan nationals in Afghanistan. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development was contacted to find out whether there were Ugandan nationals externalised to that country. 

We were informed that none remained in Afghanistan since their evacuation last year in 2020. We established that Ugandans working with the UN system were evacuated by the UN and taken to third countries. 

We also established that 10 Ugandans had been evacuated on flights to London in the United Kingdom. They are now in a 14-day quarantine and thereafter, will travel to Uganda. Through our contacts, we further established the presence of two Ugandans in Kabul and arrangements are being made to repatriate them. 

At this current time, the known Ugandans in Afghanistan are only two. We are making every effort to look out for any other Ugandans and appeal to honourable members of this august House, and the general public who may have information on the whereabouts of any Ugandan to share it with the ministry. 

Uganda's treatment of persons in distress and fleeing their country or place of residence is well known. We believe that no one chooses to flee their country or be a refugee, and if they do, they must be treated with dignity and kindness in their times of need. 

When the Government of Uganda was approached by the United States Government with a request to consider temporarily hosting Afghan nationals and other nationals at risk, the Government of Uganda did not hesitate to accept that request. 

The decision to host them is informed and consistent with Uganda's policy of receiving refugees and persons in distress, as well as playing our responsible role, as a member of the international community, on matters of international concern. 

Uganda and the United States of America enjoy long standing cordial bilateral ties, which are historic in nature and we continue to pursue common interests for the mutual benefit of both countries. Our engagement on this matter is testimony to the state of our relations and the attachment that the Government attaches to these relations. 

This morning, 51 evacuees from Afghanistan arrived in the country aboard a privately chartered flight and were received by Government officials and the United States Embassy at Entebbe International Airport. The evacuees included men, women and children. They all underwent the necessary security screening as well as the mandatory COVID-I9 tests and the required quarantine procedures are on-going. 

The evacuees will remain in Uganda while they are processed by the U.S. Embassy for their onward journey. It is worth noting that these are not refugees. The processing may take a few weeks or months. The cost of providing for needs and the other requirements of the evacuees are being met by the U.S. authorities. 

The Government will, within the coming period, continue to engage with the U.S. Embassy in Kampala to extend the necessary assistance to the evacuees from Afghanistan. From the onset, we engaged with our U.S. partners on the situation of Ugandans in Afghanistan and requested for their evacuation too. 

Whereas it had been arranged for two of them to be on today's flight, we have learnt that due to the challenges they faced in accessing the airport in Kabul, they were unable to make it on today's flight. However, arrangements are being made to bring them on the subsequent flights. 

On South Sudan, there have been a wave of ambushes and incidences of insecurity along the Juba-Nimule Road in the last few weeks, which have led to loss of life and property. The Government of Uganda, a few days ago, received with deep shock and concern, news about the killing of Ugandans and citizens of other African countries and destruction of goods along the Juba-Nimule-Elegu Road stretch. The Government of Uganda has expressed its concerns in the past and once again condemns the killings. 

The concerns have been conveyed to the Government of South Sudan. To demonstrate the seriousness attached to this matter, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs (International Affairs), hon. Henry Okello Oryem, is currently in South Sudan, engaging with his counterpart with a view of getting assurances on the security and safety of Ugandans travelling to South Sudan. He is also engaging on the possibility of compensation for those Ugandans killed including those who lost property such as trucks and goods. 

We believe that restoring security along routes from the Ugandan border points into Juba is essential to strengthening our bilateral relations and in particular, to facilitate the safe movement of persons, goods and services. In our current engagement, the Government of Uganda is urging the Government of South Sudan to take the necessary measures to effectively secure the Juba-Nimule Road.

Mr Speaker, as I submit, permit me make an appeal to honourable colleagues and the country but particularly the media houses that the evacuees from Afghanistan, who are now stateless, are stressed people. They need kind treatment such that they recover. We appeal to the media houses to report very consciously. Some of the persons may be wanted persons by the Taliban Government and so, publishing their photographs could continue to put their lives in danger. 

I, therefore, appeal to the media houses that as we host them here, kindly treat this matter with the confidentiality it deserves. I urge the media to report on them very consciously including for our own national security. It is very important that we report guardedly. That is why we may not go into the details of disclosing where some of these visitors or guests are being kept. We will treat this matter with the “contempt” it deserves. 

As more evacuees arrive, we shall always report to Parliament to keep you updated on the development, but very guardedly and consciously. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: I did not get the word where you said that you will treat this matter with - did you say, “We will treat this matter with the contempt it deserves?” 

MR MULIMBA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Which one? 

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, I said, “the confidentiality…” Confidentiality is what we are talking about. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. I had misheard. I am sure my people of the Hansard could have also misheard, which could have led to a misunderstanding of what the minister said. (Member rose_) No, are you the one who raised the matter? 

MR NAMBESHE: A quick one! 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe, please let us respect protocols.

4.58
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Allow me, first of all, to return all the glory and honour unto the Lord for how far He has brought you. Indeed, Ebenezer!

Thank you, honourable minister, for the response to the House about the issue that was raised last week about the plight of Ugandans in Afghanistan. 

In your statement, you are not sure of how many Ugandans are still not yet back home. I thought, as a country, we have immigration services or offices and if yes, isn’t it possible for us to establish how many of our nationals leave the country and when they get back home and their names in that regard?

I think it is very important, as a ministry, to take note of that; to be accountable for every Ugandan who is out of this country. 

Secondly, we need to know from Government what concrete plans they have for the many Ugandans who are continuously being killed along our borders. This has been happening for quite a number of years. For how long are we going to hear our people dying at our borders? Thank you and I beg to submit. 

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, in my statement, I said that Ugandans who are known to be in Afghanistan are the ones we know. You know people travel in different styles. There are those who go officially and there are those who go through their own means and get to where they are going. So, those who moved officially are known in the records of the Republic of Uganda. Those who moved on their own are not known. 

However, we are extending an olive branch by saying that should there be anybody who is aware of any other Ugandans, whether they moved unofficially but are in Afghanistan, kindly let us know. 

Secondly, on the issue of plans for ensuring that the killing of Ugandans stops, one of the issues which has caused insecurity particularly on the border with South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo has been the demarcation of the borders. 

Mr Speaker, we have already started - plans are underway to ensure that we seek for a supplementary to attend to this matter as urgently as possible because, hitherto, there was no budget provided for the same.

The other cause of these sufferings, particularly at the border with the Republic of South Sudan, has been - after the entry of Ugandans - the ambushes by the warring factions.

The engagement that we are having now between the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan, and also using the integration authority is to ensure that all the warring forces comply with the peace initiative. We are told that there was one faction - when they went to Rome for a peace pact - which did not sign the accord. Therefore, it is alleged that the spontaneous ambushes and killing of Ugandans is happening or is caused by that faction.

However, we are doing everything it takes to engage bilaterally, at the integration level, at AU and at the UN to ensure that peace prevails with our neighbours so as to put a stop to these killings. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you but, honourable minister, it is surprising that you should be asking for a supplementary for this border issue. The reason is simple: our own Members of Parliament were detained by South Sudanese forces, not this year and not last year.

Therefore, to come when events have been happening over this period and you want to ask for a supplementary - a disturbance to the budget for an activity that has been known all this time - it might be a bit little of bad manners. (Laughter) These are things that have happened and we have known them. We should have planned for them. I did not feel comfortable with you saying that you are going to look for a supplementary to deal with this matter because it has been with us for some time.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The time when our colleagues got detained in Sudan – the Members of Parliament -

THE SPEAKER: No, they were detained in Uganda and they were claiming that it was their land.

MR OKUPA: After that, I remember very well, they asked for money. It was not only that side but even on the Congo side. I am surprised that before we even get what that money did or know if the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not release the money, the minister is saying they are bringing a request for supplementary. 

Therefore, they should first clarify on what happened that time when Parliament appropriated money for that. What happened to it? Did it do half-work or the money was not released?

THE SPEAKER: No, I don’t think that we need to go into that now. Right now, we have a problem in our hands. By the time we spend time finding out what happened to the other one, we might lose sight of what is happening now and that could pose a challenge.

Honourable minister, please, find a more comprehensive way of dealing with these situations when they arise.

5.05
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I make my intervention, let me also welcome you, most heartily, back and we pray to the good Lord to keep you in good health. We are very happy to see you back. (Applause)

Honourable minister, you made a very worrying statement with regard to the killings of Ugandans on the Uganda-Juba Road, that during the Rome negotiations, one of the parties to the conflict refused to sign the documents there and that, that is the group that is causing us mayhem. However, you did not tell the country what the Government is going to do, especially given that this group is controlling those areas and killing our people yet we need to move to Juba to do business and conduct relations.

Is that one of the issues hon. Oryem is addressing? If this group is still there, it means that this problem is going to persist - the killings are going to go on. We need a stop to that. Thank you, Sir.

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the questions and the concerns of Members. Just on the first one, yes, monies were released but the demarcation of borders is a huge process. As you may know, all our borders – I think – had hitherto not been demarcated. The report we have got is that the work was done but not completed. We had not demarcated our borders from Rwanda, DRC to South Sudan.

Mr Speaker, I would like to comfort Members that efforts are underway to ensure that we do proper demarcation and then we have our boundaries clear, especially with the Republic of South Sudan. We have put that one as a priority.

Now, on what we have done, as of yesterday and the other day, the drivers went on strike and parked all the trucks on the Ugandan side of the border and refused to enter, justifiably so. One of the quick fix plans - what we did when we discovered that there were spontaneous attacks - earlier on, we had agreed with authorities in Juba to institute a convoy and escort all the trucks. However, the authority on the other side relaxed a little and when we checked with them, they told us that the relaxation was on account of Ugandan drivers also disrespecting the convoy procedures.

As of 10.00 a.m. this morning, the comfort I would like to give to Ugandans is that the convoy system was instituted and half of the trucks, which were parked at the border in Uganda, have been escorted. I have been told that some have reached and some are about to reach and there are no clashes yet. That is one -

THE SPEAKER: Some clarity here: have some reached and some not yet?

MR MULIMBA: Yes. Mr Speaker, we have also agreed with the authorities in South Sudan to deploy along the Juba-Nimule stretch and not withdraw. In the previous times, they have been deploying only during the times when killings had happened and would eventually withdraw and permit for the other disgruntled fellas to come and cause mayhem.

Regarding what happened with one of the factions not signing, that is not within our control. However, like I said, we are going to use interventions such as the regional integration authorities and AU to make sure that we persuade them, as our brothers, to sign the peace pact such that peace can prevail in that country because that is one of our major trading partners. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I think that we pause that there. These situations have got to be handled because there is a market there and our people need unhindered access.

However, if it now becomes a risky business of this nature and we have two countries that on the surface are relating very well yet the citizens, who should be enjoying this relationship, are suffering it may not make any sense. Therefore, you people need to work hard.

As Parliament, we are ready with whatever you require from the House so that we do the needful so that security and other things are restored, and people are supported to continue doing their businesses freely. The only way I understand free enterprise is that let people be free to do business.

Each time, we are talking about compensation because there are too many external problems that affect ordinary people going on with their businesses and without even seeking any help from anybody but, eventually, they are hit by situations of this nature which calls all of us to find ways of rendering support to the affected people and also preventing any future occurrence. That is what the minister is working on, which I hope is for the best. I also encourage the ministers to do more. I also hope that hon. Oryem is going to come out with some good arrangements to help us. 

Honourable members, the pending business is a huge motion and I do not want to “scratch” it this evening and leave it hanging. I, therefore, propose that item five on today’s Order Paper be deferred to tomorrow. Prepare for that debate. You can see what the subject is. 
Tomorrow is also private members’ time and you all know that. So, you will have your private matters that you want to come and deal with. You can have those hours that are given by our rules to come and bring private matters and we see how to handle them. I have not seen any requests [Hon Katusabe: “Procedure”] Honourable member, the Speaker is speaking. 

Tomorrow is also the Prime Minister’s Question Time. I am told the rules have changed; you send the questions. I hope the questions have been sent in advance. I think this is something we need to think about again in my opinion. I hope the questions have been sent to the office - [Hon. Katusabe: “Procedure”] honourable, can you wait for me to finish what I am saying? You used to be a very decent Member of Parliament. I do not know what is going on. Let me just conclude what I am saying and then I will allow you to say what you would like to say. 

As usual, we will start on time and end on time. If there are any variations on the Order Paper, you will see them but as of now, there is business to follow. We will look through which one is active and activate them for tomorrow’s purposes, considering that tomorrow, we will focus on private members and the Prime Minister’s Question Time. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise? 

MR KATUSABE: On your communication – 

THE SPEAKER: No. It should be either procedure or something –

MR KATUSABE: Procedure, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: But now that there is no procedure, would you like to resume your seat since you have no procedural matter? 

MR KATUSABE: I said “procedure”, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Did you say that? I did not hear it. Proceed. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. While the construction of the Order Paper is the preserve of the Speaker; our presiding officer, I stand as the Shadow Minister for Public Service in regard to the merger. We have had a motion on the merger on the Order Paper in the last two weeks. It has suddenly occurred to me that that motion has been dropped off the Order Paper and yet – 

THE SPEAKER: It is on the Order Paper on business to follow; it is not out of the Order Paper. 

MR KATUSABE: Okay. My procedural issue is that this is causing a lot of anxiety because it touches the nerves of the citizens. Donors are calling because of the merger – I think our development partners were not brought on board in regard to the merger. So, there is a lot at stake in this particular motion. 

My request is that you direct the Clerk’s office to give this matter all the attention and the urgency it deserves because there is quite a lot at stake in that particular motion. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable. After this, let us go and sit with the Government Chief Whip and the Leader of the Opposition to see what needs to be active and what we are ready to process. We do not want to put things on the Order Paper that are not ready to be processed and then you come and call the matter and there is nobody to deal with it or people are not ready to handle it. 

I think you have seen how we have been proceeding with clear business that is on the Order Paper, with the exception of the motion of hon. Mpaka because of shortage of time. We want to proceed that way so that we do not make matters active, when they are actually inactive for purposes of processing. 

Therefore, we will go and sit to see if that merger motion is ready for processing and if it is, it will jump up and it will be on tomorrow’s Order Paper. If it is not and there are some hitches, we will push it to next week. Nonetheless, it is already on the Order Paper. So, there is no cause for worry. This matter will be debated. The proposals are already there.  Let us just wait and see how to process it. 

This debate might also require a bit of time; it might be one of those Order Papers, where you have only two items so that you have enough time to deal with it. We are trying very hard to deal with the issue of allotment of time. If you notice, in the last two days, I have not allotted time and the reason is simple. You have complained about the two minutes and I also know that it is unfair. If you have 50 Members going to speak on an item, then, you are forced to do that rather unfair thing.  We are trying to see how to proceed. Do you still have a matter, honourable member? 

MR KATUSABE: I would like to thank you for your leadership, Mr Speaker. In this House, the Constitution gives you the power; your word is to be the last word. 

Mr Speaker, as we wait for the motion to feature on the Order Paper, I request that you direct the Government to stay everything that relates to the merger, until that motion is properly processed according to our laws and policies that govern this country. 

THE SPEAKER: The simple reason as to why this merger is coming to Parliament is because there are laws involved. When they were being created, it was the initiative of the Executive, saying it might require setting up a law. For us to come to a consensus with the Executive arm of the Government that this matter now should be removed, we have to deal with the laws that are already there. That is why this cooperation is necessary. 

You might find that some of them do not have to go and we will have to go into a discussion with the Executive to see if it is possible. However, initially, it was brought by the Executive to deal with specific issues based on their manifesto. They now think that they have served the purpose and are no longer necessary. So, they want to take them out, as the Government because they brought them in the first place. 

We have a role to play - and we are not saying that we do not have a role to play. I am saying that role will play very well with sufficient time and I have said I might have to just put two items or just a single item on the Order Paper, so that we have sufficient time for Members to speak about this matter. Is that clear enough now, honourable members? Who has amended the rules now to include further procedure? There is no oral amendment allowed to the Rules of Procedure. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue is slightly related to what hon. Atkins said. There is a matter I raised and it was on the business to follow; if it could also be taken care of in the next sitting. Otherwise, I am worried since it has been about two or three weeks – 

THE SPEAKER: Did you raise it as a private member? 

MR OKUPA: Yes, I raised it about three weeks ago. It had been appearing on the Order Paper – 

THE SPEAKER: Is it an urgent matter? 

MR OKUPA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, we are going to look at the Order Paper and see what is active. Maybe the statement is not ready. That is why I am saying we cannot bring something redundant on the Order Paper. 

Once we find that it is ready, we will activate it. Once we find that it is not ready, we will contact the minister and ask why there is a delay. The Government Chief Whip is here -so that we can activate it and it comes and we deal with it, especially tomorrow being Private Member’s Time, it would be the right time to deal with such matters.

MR OKUPA: The Prime Minister knows the matter that I raised. She will make sure that she is available. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues in welcoming you back. Personally, I felt we needed your seniority at the beginning. We thank God that you are back.

I also thank the Rt Hon. Anita Among, for really steering the House in your absence.

The procedural matter that I would like to raise, concerns matters that Members raise. I have been following since yesterday and the minister would come and make a statement when the Member, who raised the matter, is not around. I observed that we are attending plenary in turns. I would request for your indulgence such that when a matter is going to be answered by a minister, the Member who raised it should be put among those to attend the House.

If they are online, we should really observe that they are online and we let them make their submission. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: That is a very valid point and consideration must be made. If a Member has something active on the Order Paper, that Member must be in the House. That is a good one and it is only fair. (Mr Basalirwa rose_) I can see you standing but I cannot hear anything that you are saying. Hon. Basalirwa, what is the matter?

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Related to what the Bugiri Woman Member of Parliament has said, yesterday, in your communication, you did allude to the sitting arrangement, the social distancing and spacing and why it was done that way.

In the communication that we were given – on shifting from the tent to this place - part of it was a requirement that nobody would be allowed to attend the House unless they are fully vaccinated. I have seen elsewhere, in societies where vaccination has taken place, there is no social distancing.

Mr Speaker, I hope you watch football. In Europe, people have gone back to the stadia and there is no social distancing. The reason is because they are fully vaccinated. 

Through you, I would like to seek from the Minister of Health whether in light of the fact that we are fully vaccinated, whether it is still necessary to maintain social distance in this House and whether we would not allow the numbers that attend to increase for purposes of addressing some of the issues that the honourable colleague from Bugiri raised. Perhaps, the numbers to come are increased and the social distance is reduced because we are fully vaccinated. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: How I wish it was going to be that easy. However, it is something we need to consider. I will seek guidance from you people because I am also informed that vaccination from COVID-19 does not mean you cannot be infected. 

Vaccination is protection against fatality but people who have been vaccinated, I am also told, may still get infected with COVID-19. This is information that I am not technically competent to deal with. 

I will talk to the Minister of Health to come and give her guidance specifically on that matter tomorrow, so that we are okay. It is not a procedural matter that I can rule on based on my own experience and knowledge but it is a technical matter that I need somebody else to come and give guidance on how we can proceed with it.

There being no further business, House is adjourned to tomorrow, 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.26 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26 August 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
