Thursday, 2 August 2012

Parliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are welcome to this sitting. Let us see how far we can go with this general debate on the State of the Nation Address. We hope we will go a long way today and have it concluded by next week. On Tuesday, we should take a vote on this matter. Thank you. You are welcome.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SEARCH COMMITTEE FOR THE VICE-CHANCELLOR OF MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

2.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr John Muyingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to apologise. I do not have a written statement because the law does not allow me to do so. I just want to be allowed to make a verbal presentation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 provided for a position of Vice-Chancellor and Deputy Vice-Chancellors in public universities, and how they are appointed. The same Act provides for the search process which culminates into the appointment of the Vice-Chancellor and Deputy Vice-Chancellors.

There is a search committee which is composed of three members from the Senate, and two members from Council, and I am happy to report that the search process is ongoing and very soon, for the Vice-Chancellor, the search committee will be presenting its findings of the suitable candidate to the Senate of the university. The Senate will select the most suitable three candidates, submit them to the University Council, and the University Council will also make a submission to the Chancellor for appointment.

For the case of Deputy Vice-Chancellor, the Senate constituted two committees; one to handle the process for the Deputy Vice-Chancellor, Academic Affairs and the other to handle the Deputy Vice-Chancellor, Finance and Administration.

Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, I am happy to inform you that the process is ongoing and we are expecting the outcomes by the end of August. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. You should keep us updated on these matters because it is a matter of concern for Members, but since the process is on, Parliament cannot get involved until they have resolved from that side. If there are any parties aggrieved, then they will take the appropriate action. But for now, thank you for the information.

LAYING OF A REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION ABROAD ON THE NILE BASIN PARLIAMENTARIANS FORUM, KIGALI – RWANDA, 6TH – 7TH JULY 2012

2.20
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. On the 5th and 6th of July, there was a delegation from this Parliament in which I was a member as well as hon. Jimmy Akena and Mr James Wafula Bichaachi, the First Secretary Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

As required by our Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay on Table a report of the parliamentary delegation abroad on the Nile Basin Parliamentarians Forum, Kigali - Rwanda, which sat on 6th July to 7th July 2012, and hope that at an appropriate time, Mr Speaker, you will accord us an opportunity to present. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it as such. Honourable members, we will find time to have a discussion on this particular subject. The issues in that report are important for this House to address. So, we will find an appropriate time to have a discussion on this.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION ON FRAUDULENT ACQUISITION OF LAND BY TORORO CEMENT INDUSTRIES LTD

2.21
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I beg for your pardon. I was picking my document. Next time, we shall try to be here on time and we thank you for keeping time. 

Under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the humble petitioners of Oriyoi A, Nyalakot parish, Osukuru sub-county, Tororo District, represented by hon. Ekanya Geoffrey state that:

The people of Nyalakot parish, Osukuru sub-county in Tororo District, challenge the manner in which their land was allocated to Tororo Cement Industries.
 
The land situated in Oriyoi A, Nyalakot parish in Osukuru sub-county comprising of 57 acres, was initially communal land developed for cattle dips by the Ministry of Agriculture, to address the problem of tick-borne diseases.

Tororo Cement Industries Limited asked the Parish Development Association to allocate them land for development of community schools that would benefit the community. On 10 February 2010, Nyalakot Parish Development Association thinking that the LC III Chairperson was acting in good faith, offered 20 acres of the said to the Executive Director of Tororo Cement Industries Limited for development of community schools. It has, however, come to the knowledge of the people of Tororo that the land in question was given to a company called KP Uganda Education Academy, whose shareholders are the Executive Director of Tororo Cement Industries Ltd, Mr Gangrani BM and Mr Okurut David, the LC III Chairperson of Osukuru, and not Tororo Cement Industries Ltd.

By the time of processing the said lease title, Tororo District did not have a district land office. The fees paid on the tarmack road land was only Shs 3 million. The land has been graded by the developer to set up a school. What is surprising is that the equipment for the cattle dip tank has been sold off. The petitioners have also realised that the school that is intended to be constructed on the said land is not going to benefit the community because it is now registered as a private company.
 
Therefore, your humble petitioners pray that:

i)	Parliament refers this matter to the relevant committee to investigate the fraudulent acquisition of the land by KP Uganda Education Academy Limited and makes the necessary recommendations. 
ii)	Parliament causes the relevant Government institution to cause the land to be reverted to the rightful owner.  
iii)	The individual involved in the fraudulent transaction, if found guilty, should be prosecuted.
iv)	Upon completion of investigations, the land be used as directed by the President for development of a regional border market.
v)	Any development on the said land should be halted immediately.

Your petitioners, as in duty bound will ever pray.

Here your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I wish to lay the necessary attachment and signatures as required by our Rules of Procedure. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The petition stands referred to the appropriate committee, but honourable members, I also urge you to liaise with the responsible ministries in these matters, so that by the time we come here, these matters are clearer. These petitions come from members of the public and they come straight to the Speaker’s Office. That is what happens normally. That is how we process them to come here. Thank you. 

The committee should handle this within the timeframe provided by the law, but as I always say, petitions are shorter and more focal issues, which should not take the full length of 45 days. They should be able to act on it so that we can finalise with this. 

Honourable members, we have Item 6, which is basically for decision. At the appropriate time, we will be handling this. We will suspend this matter and go to the next item. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY 7TH JUNE 2012

(Debate continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Debate continues. 

2.27
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and colleagues -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And you have three minutes. Proceed.

MR GUDOI: I thank the President for having fulfilled his constitutional duty of taking us through what happened and what will happen in Uganda. I also thank the Leader of the Opposition for having given answers and alternatives to that effect. 

Ladies and gentlemen, when we listen to the President addressing on the State of the nation, we should not be biased. What am I trying to say? Let us look at what the government has done and at what is still wanting. We begin by acknowledging receipt of those good things. When I listened to the Leader of the Opposition, he did not mention any good thing this country has done. That is not a good practice. He concentrated only on thebad things. Indeed, when I read his booklet, there was no mention even of a school being built even in his constituency. To me, the Opposition should act as a mirror. A mirror will show you both parts of the face, where you have not done well and where you have done well, so that you improve only those areas where you have not probably shaved well. 

I have been listening attentively – as citizens of Uganda, we have a lot of problems in our constituencies. The President talked about the core issues in the economy of our country where I have picked three, which I am going to talk about: law and order, education, and water. 

Law and order 

During those days when I was a teacher, we used to teach children and ask questions. Which group of people ensure law and order in the country? The answer was the Police. But I sympathise with our policemen and ladies. Whenever they want to ensure that law and order is taken care of, the communities object -(Member timed out.)

2.30
MS MARY AMOIT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want first to thank His Excellency for his visionary leadership. I also want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for responding to the State of the Nation Address. 

I listened to the State of the Nation Address and got concerned particularly, on page 8, the second paragraph, where it is stated that – if I can read, “What is planned for sugar should also be planned for coffee, milk, fruits, maize, rice, Irish potatoes, beans, wheat, beef and so on.” 

My people have appealed to me to inform this House that much as these are all being planned for, cotton is an item these people have been surviving on as a cash crop. Who is going to plan for the cotton growing and selling? They are aware that it is not the government which determines the prices, but still it has a statutory role of supporting the farmers. They do not wish to have a scenario of the previous year. They need a response from Government.

Secondly, the President said that the roads - the infrastructure, is being worked upon and is being planned. I want to tell this House and appeal to the government that the roads of Pallisa District which connect Pallisa to the rest of the country are in a poor state. It is really appalling. Let this Parliament help the people of Pallisa to plan and access the roads from Category B as stated in this address, showing that Pallisa district roads will be catered for in the next financial year or in the future. This is not acceptable. The people are appealing that these roads should be considered in this financial year. These roads have been promised year in and year out. We are getting impatient.  The potholes are unbearable; they are in ditches. I pray that this House and the Commmittee on Infrastructure gets time to visit the road to Pallisa so that they can bear me witness. (Member timed out.)

2.34
MR VINCENT SEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the President for his State of the Nation Address and I want to say that the President has very good ideas in the area of agriculture. 

On page 3, His Excellency talks about subsistence farmers. He says that they comprise 68 percent of all the homesteads in this country, and he tells us that their potential is untapped because we have not yet mobilised them. But it is very unfortunate that our farmers are still using the hoe predominantly. We need to plan for agriculture by modernising the tools that the farmers use. Some people argue that the tractors failed, which is very unfortunate. We need to get tractors; some of us have physically used tractors and even tried to help other farmers to use them. I feel it is high time the plan for agriculture considered mechanisation of agriculture.

The second issue is on water. On page 15, the President is talking about core issues and one of them is piped water for towns. I want to suggest that for the rural areas where piped water may not be achievable in the near future– I want to contribute to this address by giving you three ways which can be used to provide water to drought prone areas. 

One of them is pumping surface water. For example, in my area, we have Katonga River which has been flowing past us. This water passes by and goes to Egypt where it is used for irrigation. We do not use it; we just look at it passing us. That water can be pumped and I do not think pumping water from this kind of source is really expensive.

The second way is constructing valley tanks. This is a very simple thing to do. I do not know why when we go to our plans - the ministerial policy statements have indicated very high figures for this kind of work. But some of us have dug these valley tanks –(Member timed out.)

2.37
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the President for the State of the Nation Address and for his preparation of the nation for the coming year. The President emphasised increase in agricultural export. But in agriculture, we have many sectors including fishing. I come from a border point with a vast area covered by Lake Victoria. The problem we have had is that Government has not given fishing priority; it is not looked at as a process that can support the people as an economic activity. Forty percent of the people of Majanji and Busia are involved in fishing. But Government up to now has not provided for them fishing gears. People are chased away from their boats and from the trade because of the small fishing nets which are not provided for by the law. But at the same time, the nets that people are buying on the local market are manufactured here in Uganda. Similar nets are imported from other countries and URA collects money here in Uganda. 

So, we want Government to protect the natives by stopping the selling of small nets and provide the exact size of nets that they want people to use. This will improve on the sizes of fish being caught as mandated by Government. This is a very big economic activity and I feel as part of agricultural improvement efforts, fishing could improve our export base.

Mr Speaker, we have spoken about improvement in science and technology. Every county is now supposed to have a technical institute. Right now, we have a technical institute in my constituency called Nalwire Technical Institute. That technical institute was formed in 1983, and it is one of the technical institutes in the East. Today, that technical institute is training students in mechanical and electrical engineering yet it does not have electricity. I do not know what kind of people are graduating from that technical institute. 

I, therefore, urge Government to improve on the technology we use. Government should ensure that before putting up a technical institute, they provide power in that area. This is a very big institution in the Eastern region but there has been no power for the last 28 years. That is also to call upon the Ministry of Education under which that institution lies to ensure that we get power in that technical institute to improve on the quality of the products we get through that institution. 

On several occasions, we have also talked about water extension. But we have a lot of water in Busia. The water we are talking about is from Lake Victoria. Right now, Busia Town has a population of 280 –(Member timed out.)

MS SARAH KATAIKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to contribute to this motion. I would like to support the motion and concur that it was clear, precise and consistent, and it shows that our President is committed to ensuring that our country moves on smoothly. 

I want to particularly note that our President and his leadership were able to steer our country through the hard economic crisis which hit even the First world, but Uganda was able to go through it fairly smoothly. 

I also want to comment on issues of rural electrification; this is the way forward to stimulate our young economy. I concur with the President when he insists that we have to control inputs of things like poultry, where we have the capacity to produce locally. However, I also feel that the President’s view of continuing to support the private sector, much as it may be beneficial, I feel it is time we gave support to our upcoming young investors. I say so because, most of our so-called private investors are capitalistic and are profit-oriented, and yet our biggest challenge in the present Uganda is the subsistence farmers who have been left unattended to.

I also want to concur with the President when he said that we have a lot of agricultural land that is underutilised. We have 68 percent of our people in subsistence agriculture. Here, I also noted that this is where the emphasis should be. This is where our resources and strength are, and I am sure that countries like Malaysia and China have capitalised on such resources like their population, and have been able to transform their countries to the next level. 

I would also like to concur with the President when he talked about scientific innovations. If we can combine the land, and the big innovative population, particularly emphasising skills building, I am sure there will be a difference in our economic and social systems. (Member timed out.)

2.46
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I thank you so much for giving me this chance. I thank the President of our country for a well elaborated speech. I want to thank him as a medical doctor for talking about HIV. He said that the information was available although the prevalence was rising just because people have chosen to remain promiscuous. I honestly concur with my President because if he does not tell us the truth, then we shall remain in denial. The commonest cause of transmission of this deadly disease in Uganda is from man to woman or people who are engaging in these gay and lesbian things. The President was spot-on to tell us the truth that it was either you or your partner to behave very well so that we can live in this country for so long, and I again thank him for that wonderful speech.

I want to also thank the President for taking the trouble to go to Northern Uganda to see the people with Nodding Disease and for taking the trouble to compel the Ministry of Health to go for massive treatment plus advising people on how they should actually contain this disease. He has given the money, but today, I was fighting with the Ministry of Health; that they have not given the Shs 150 million that the President ordered to be given to the Ministry of Education for education of people in Northern Uganda.

In other words, there is information that should be disseminated in schools to our children about this disease, but the money has not yet been given and that is not the President’s problem, but a problem of the technocrats who are failing us here.

I want to thank the President for talking about corruption. The President of this country cannot fight corruption without our help. It should be the responsibility of every Ugandan including Members of Parliament, technocrats in all these ministries to ensure that Government money is not misappropriated and used very badly. So, I will not blame the President that the money has been “eaten” but I will blame those ones who are “eating” it illegally. I call upon this Parliament to support our President in making sure that we expose all corrupt officials so that at least we bring our country to order. 

The President talked about agriculture. The way to go is to produce in excessive quantities so that our people do not die of hunger. We need to procure a number of tractors that can be put at sub-county level so that people who can afford can even hire them and they start producing in bigger quantities for those ones who have got bigger land. Those who have small land can combine and fuel a tractor so that they produce enough food. I can tell you –(Member timed out.)

2.49
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also take the pleasure to thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, for his clear speech and the Government for its socio-economic progress.

I wish to talk about a few things that concern agriculture, which is the backbone of Uganda, and which every Member of Parliament in his or her constituency is concerned about. It is true that agriculture has been allocated little funds, but if the Government can at least add up to 10 percent or allocate 10 percent of the budget, I believe that the backbone of the country would be stronger, and the basket will be full, and we shall be selling and exporting to other countries. (Applause)

There is another sector that would also go hand-in-hand with agriculture, and this is tourism. Under tourism, it is true that there is a lot that is being done, but there is also a lot that is still missing, because, if the country takes it up as its own and does not leave it to the private sector, I know it would be getting more than what it earns from the tourism sector. 

We have had meetings with Tourism, but all you see is that they want more support. I believe that if this sector is taken up together with agriculture, we shall not go for more loans. 

I would also want to put more emphasis on technical and vocational training and education. His Excellency the President elaborated well and is calling for more attention to be given to vocational training. It would be very smart if technical institutes are taken up to sub-county level. I know that there is a plan of going to the constituency level, but I wish they could be taken up like secondary schools because the population is increasing day and night. We are many and we are looking for jobs. There are very many youths. 

I wish that the education sector and other vocational and technical training, if taken on like how secondary and primary education have been taken up, I think that this would be very perfect for Uganda, and the AID basket be  allocated as a sustainability strategy. 

Still on education, I would call upon the national team – the Ministry of Education - to help our DEOs in the districts. Frankly speaking, one DEO takes care of secondary and primary schools and emphasis is put on attendance and performance only – I do not even know if it is performance. But, Mr Speaker –(Member timed out.)

2.54
REV. DR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the efforts that the Government and President are putting on the construction and improvement of the road networks in Uganda. You know that where there are good road networks, trade always flourishes, law and order can easily be maintained, and prosperity is usually assured. 

However, there are some remarks that I would like to bring to the attention of the President, the Ministry of Works and the Uganda National Roads Authority. 

The existing road network is poorly maintained and this is causing a lot of difficulty. I refer to the road passing through my constituency, Lira-Otuke-Abim-Kotido Road. This road belongs to Uganda Revenue Authority. There are about four spots which are impassable and we know that Kotido relies a lot on the services and goods which come from Lango sub-region. Therefore, I would like to call upon Uganda National Roads Authority to work as quickly as possible on this road. 

Secondly, in future planning, I see that there is no equity in the bituminisation of these roads. For a long time, Apac-Lira-Kitgum Road was put in the budget, but it has been dropped. It has never been considered. The same way Lira-Otuke-Abim-Kotido Road has also not been considered. Mbale-Moroto -(Interruption)

MS AMOIT: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from my colleague. He says that there are roads that belong to Uganda Revenue Authority. May I know which roads these are?

MR OGWAL JACINTO: I meant Uganda National Roads Authority and I presumed that the honourable member would understand what I meant. 

I would also ask the same body to consider Mbale-Moroto-Kotido-Kaabong Road because during the rainy season, we get a lot of communication problems in this area. 

I call upon the Minister of Karamoja, who is also present in this House, to try to push for these roads because it is these areas that support Karamoja with food supplies. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.57
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate all the contributions of Members. However, I rise on a rather disappointed note. That for 26 years, our President is still talking about recovery; I am wondering, when are we beginning to grow. For 26 years, everything we do, we name it “recovery”. So, when are we going to grow? It means all that we have attained up to this point is still 26 years backward. 

Mr Speaker, it is not understandable to a normal Ugandan that a government can be in power for 26 years and still not talk about the immediate achievements of the previous one or two years, but continue to refer to 26 years in power. I think it is important that we have connectivity. Yes, we are 26 years in power, but what did we do last year? What did we do two years ago? How is it connected to this year? How will it connect to the following year?

The President on page 10 of his State of the Nation Address mentioned that in 1986, Uganda was generating 60 megawatts of electricity per capita. And he said this was a big shame. However, I want to say it is still a big shame that we are talking of achievements of 26 years ago today. We should be talking about achievements of recent years. 

In his address –(Interjections)- shall we be honourable, Members? In his address, the President spoke about the wage bill being the biggest consumer of allowances –(Interruption)

MR KAGWERA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable colleague who has read very well the State of the Nation Address - the achievements are highlighted and those that are not highlighted she can see for herself – is she in order to say that for 26 years, NRM has done nothing? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I ruled on this matter yesterday. Even in the Bible, it is only those who have eyes to see that can see. (Laughter) I am unable to rule on the honourable Member’s ability or inability to see. Please proceed. 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are elected by our people and we are entitled to our opinion and that is why we discuss and debate as Parliament. I want to make the honourable member realise that I am in the Opposition and my role is to critic the government and make it better. 

On page 10 of the President’s address, he acknowledges that the wage bill and allowances consume the largest amount of our resources, but it is surprising that the President is still continuing to build and to put up ad hoc departments, especially in State House.

We are complaining of the wage bill being so big, the resource base being so small, but we are still creating offices for which we are paying people lots of money and yet we are complaining about the bill. I fail to realise what it is we are intending to do. 

I am reading the State of the Nation Address –(Member timed out.) 

3.02
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the response of my Leader of the Opposition to His Excellency the President’s speech. 

MR SHINYABULO-MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We were in this House last week and I remember hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi was here as well, when you called the whips of both sides to put an order in which we were going to debate. We thought everybody would have only one opportunity to debate because we are very many. I know hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi was here and he debated on this issue. Is it in order for him to come back again when he already made his contribution? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable Ken-Lukyamuzi has not yet spoken on this issue. But still, the motion before the House is a motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address of the State of the Nation by His Excellency the President. The motion is not about thanking the Leader of the Opposition. So, you might want to be relevant. (Applause) 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought the honourable minister had a point to make. 

Mr Speaker, on page 24 of the speech of the President, the President congratulated you and honourable members here for passing important business during your deliberations. The same President, in my view, should have bothered to equally lament over the slow pace at which Government has been responding to the bills we have been passing here. When we pass bills, they are supposed to be implemented. They are not supposed to remain on the shelves. 

Regrettably, Mr Speaker, under Article 178(1) of the Constitution, in 2005, Parliament passed an Article reading that two or more districts may cooperate to form a regional tier. We thought that was a very important chapter in our parliamentary history. That provision was supposed to take off as early as July 2006. Since then, that Article has never been implemented. Why has it not been implemented and why hasn’t Government bothered to know why it was not implemented?   

Busoga Kingdom tried to implement it, but failed and abandoned it. What does that mean? It means there is a gap in our laws. Instead of demanding for a regional tier, Ugandans are yearning for a federal system of government so that respective regions of Uganda like Acholi, Lango, Buganda, Busoga and Ankole, can shoulder responsibility and move forward. 

So, Mr Speaker, because of that, I would like to humbly propose that now that the people of Uganda have rejected the regional tier, what do we do? The option is to resort to a federal system of government because the federal system of government is not a new phenomenon in Uganda. It is –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR BADDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague has been here for some time and he knows all the regulations, rules and laws we have passed. I don’t remember passing any law relating to a regional tier. I know a related law called a regional government. Is it in order for our honourable colleague to mislead this House that we passed a law called the regional tier? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, what did you mean? (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am surprised that the honourable member who was a Member of the Seventh Parliament does not recall that this Parliament passed the regional tier. I would like to quote the contents of Article 178(1) of the Constitution which states: “Two or more districts may cooperate to form a regional government…” which is a regional tier. So, if a whole Member of Parliament cannot recall what he passed, where are we going? (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I was justifying my compliments by saying that now that the Ugandan Government has not been able to implement the regional tier advocated under 178(1) of the Constitution, we should consider an option because we know that the federal system of government is not a new phenomenon. It is the system under which we got our Independence. It is backed by history and science. Under the Rhodes Master Report, it was recommended that Uganda goes Federal. Under Justice Odoki’s recommendations, it was recommended that about 65 percent of the people wanted a federal system and in Buganda, 97 percent of the population wanted a federal system. So, what do we do –(Member timed out.)

3.08
MS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity to debate on the President’s State of the Nation Address to the Parliament of Uganda and the people of Uganda. I have the following observations to make. 

First of all, I would like to thank His Excellency especially on page one, when he talked about corruption and selfishness. That means he has joined this Parliament in the fight against corruption. 

As I give my submission, and I am speaking as an independent person; that is why I have not responded to the Leader of the Opposition’s response because he mentioned in Parliament that he suspended us. Mr Speaker, on page 7, His Excellency talked about the Indian industry in the country and he said that these industries are ours; Indians are just working for us. I would like to know how many Ugandans are employed in these industries in terms of percentage. 

Secondly, when he talks about infrastructure, I would also like to put across the request of the people of Lango that the Masindi-Apac-Kitgum Road to the Sudan border has always remained in design. Why can’t you also have this road upgraded as the only tarmacked road in Lango? The other one which comes from Soroti just passes by Lira. So, we don’t consider it as our road in Lango. 

I also thank him for considering the payment of the LC Vs and LC Is, but you will realise that it is the LC Vs, the LC IIIs and the LC Is who supervise and monitor our projects, programmes and the money we send to the districts and the sub-counties. Last year, I raised the issue of payment of LC IIIs and the minister in charge of local governments responded by saying that they would be considered. So, I am still requesting that the LC IIIs be included as well as speakers for the municipalities. You know we have few municipalities - less than 30 - but they are not being paid, and yet we pay all the district speakers and we have 112 districts –(Member timed out.)

3.12
MS EVELYNE KABUULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I thank His Excellency the President for such a strategically directive State of the Nation Address. I will start by talking about agriculture, specifically NAADS. NAADS is a very good programme and we do appreciate it, but I would like to see a change in the system. The way NAADS is run in most of the districts is such that the same people keep benefitting. The quality and system in which it is run leaves a lot to be desired. I would like to see a functional audit system for NAADS, where we look at the sole productivity, quality of the inputs, corruption and of course all the other aspects, so that most of the people benefit from NAADS. Otherwise, the way it is now, it is for just a few to benefit, who have continued benefiting all the time. So, I would appreciate if we have an overhaul of the NAADS programme. 

Also, when it comes to the village farmer fora, some of these are not implemented in some of the districts. So, we would like to see some supervision for the fora. 

I will talk about UPE and USE. These are very good programmes and they are helping, but there is an audit which is being done and I am wondering; is this commission of inquiry timed? When are we going to get the reports? I know it is doing a good job, but I would like to see results in this commission of inquiry. I think most of the people who were recruited have left and some of them were not paid. So, we are wondering what time limit is given to this commission of inquiry.

Then I will also talk about health. The health sector leaves a lot to be desired. Really, we need to look at health as a very important sector in the country. The State of the Nation Address talks about emphasising the delivery of the minimum health package, but the human resource within the health sector must be looked at and emphasised before anything else because it is the driver to everything. We will continue losing our very good health workers to the neighbouring countries if we do not emphasise motivating the health workers. I request that before we look at other delivery systems, lets us look at the human resource so that they are motivated.

There is also the supervision and monitoring unit which is doing a good job, but it should not be fault-finding -(Member timed out.)

3.15
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to contribute to the State of Nation address by His Excellency. I would like to take this opportunity to thank him for the passion that he has shown and the desire that he has shown to transform the agricultural sector, to transform the private sector and even the road sector in this country.

I want to also thank the President because he strategically guided KACITA. They have been advised to stay away from making Uganda a peripheral market for foreign products. At this point I want to interest you the Speaker and the committee on the issues of trade, to take a walk to the downtown part of our country’s City, Kampala to see what is happening there. A lot of fake products, a lot of dumping; it is an extension of the Chinese and Asian market in this country. If we see this kind of arrangement, how can our country create jobs for the people that do not have. 

In the same vein, I would like him to caution the investors. The investors in this country have made this place another peripheral market that is being used to create jobs for their natives back in their country, for the Indians, the Chinese and other Asian countries, while here in Uganda, for our young people in that category, it is estimated at 83% unemployment.

The other time I was walking down the streets of Kampala. I was surprised because somebody asked me to take a gift for them to the USA when we travelled, and I could not find anything truly Ugandan. I talked about it last time and I think we should take interest in this matter. I would like the Minister of Trade to take interest in this matter.

There is another company in this town which does not pay tax, does not pay NSSF for its workers and does not bank in our local institutions here. When the money accumulates, they just ferry that money back to China, and I think this is a sorry state in the area. We are not monitoring the investors when they come into this country. We do not even know who they are, who they are employing or who they are benefitting with these investments and, therefore, this is an issue that I would like the minister to take interest in.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the roads, I like what the President said in his address; 44 roads need to be worked on. Many have never even received anything like the Karamoja road. I am glad that the Minister for Karamoja is here, and right now, the two roads are in a sorry state. That part of the country is cut off.

When I move on our roads at night, it is in a bad state. One time I was travelling on this Bombo-Karuma stretch and the roads are so narrow; you risk falling off the road or the trailers knocking you off the road. It is terrible. (Member timed out.)

3.19
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana North County, Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to join other colleagues to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address and point out certain points that the President raised.

I was so much touched by the programme of rural electrification, given the current state of electricity in Uganda, at least, we are more stable now with the supply. I have been inquiring from the Members here and people are saying that the power is more stable in our country than it was some few months ago, but this power should be taken to the villages if we are to help our people.

The issue of feeder roads; these are agricultural roads and you know how much CAIIP roads have done for our villages. Such programmes to improve our rural roads are very important and I wish to support them.

Members have talked about agricultural improvement – mechanisation - and I also want to support this. I want to thank the President, but as we think about agriculture, I want the President and the Executive to think about these three items; production, productivity and marketing.

Our people are so engaged in agriculture, but they are not getting enough from it. In a whole acre, you find somebody getting five bags of maize or at times six bags. Really, we still lag behind as far as agricultural inputs are concerned.

Before you even talk about tractors, what about the seeds, what about the fertilisers or the herbicides that we can provide to our people? When you go to the parishes, you can find a school in every parish, but we hardly find a shop at least to advise the farmers on production and we cannot do a lot unless we have people to produce.

I was also touched so much by the President’s speech when I read and I saw Moroto-Nakapiripiriti Road, Muyembe-Nakapiripiriti-Kotido Road. This region really needs a lot of support in terms road network. You cannot travel to Karamoja. It is so hard - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will suspend debate on this matter for five minutes and allow us to go back to item number six and then we continue. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 74.1 MILLION EQUIVALENT OF USD 120 MILLION FROM INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was received, presented by the committee and spoken to by the minister. We had an elaborate debate, and the motion that was debated and is ready for decision is for a resolution of this Parliament to authorise Government to borrow SDR 74.1 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to support the electricity sector project. I put the question to this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY 7TH JUNE 2012

(Debate Continued)

3.24
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern in the statements that we listened to quite attentively is about unemployment. We sat in that Conference Hall and we felt that one of the most critical problems this country is facing is unemployment. I listened with great consternation when at the end of the speech the President mentioned nothing to do with unemployment. I thought the statistics are known; and everybody has been complaining. 

The youth who constitute 78 percent of this country have been crying out. Some even took it to another mile by singing songs during the Presidential and parliamentary campaigns hoping that they would get some jobs or find opportunities for employment. I, therefore, pray that if the President could be listening or whoever is listening – since the Chief Whip and other members of the Frontbench are here. If they reach the President, they should remind him that the majority of the young people in this country are crying out loud on the issue of unemployment.

DR SHINYABULO-MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to refer the honourable member to page 4 of the State of the Nation Address in which at the end of the second paragraph His Excellency the President expressly put it that: “This is because it is already being overtaken by the demand for jobs by the young people....” So, to say that His Excellency the President did not talk about employment at all is out of order. Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for the honourable member to come and obviously show us that he hasn’t read the President’s speech and yet he wants to debate it? Thank you.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I know you are itching to respond to some of the issues, but that is not the proper channel of responding to the issues. (Applause) You should wait for the proper time and then make responses to the statement.
 
MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very sure the honourable minister has very many unemployed youths in his constituency. (Interjection) I know he is an ex-officio, but he is from Mbale where there are many unemployed youth as well.
   
Mr Speaker, you know many times we come here and gloss over issues, but seriously, the recent statistics from the Uganda National Bureau of Statistics indicate that over 82 percent of the students with degrees, diplomas and certificates are unemployed. Now, if that happens for five to 15 years, you can imagine how big the time bomb becomes. So, it is not a matter - and I pray the minister could take it more seriously than just that simple sentence in passing. Because you don’t know what can happen when one day the youth say, “Enough is enough, we need to be employed; we need to find some income.” That can be so dangerous -(Member timed out.)

3.29
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a quick reference to the President’s address on the issue of salary increment with particular attention to his mention of increments for scientists specifically. Every Member of this House should have noticed that teachers are extremely badly off in terms of salaries, welfare, etcetera, and because corruption has penetrated deep down to the grassroots, they can’t even sell anything. They cannot sell chalk and even if they were to sell it, they cannot get anything to add up to the little salary that they get. So, I would like to appeal to the President to reconsider his statement that teachers can be replaced save for scientists. That statement didn’t augur very well with some of us who are teachers. 

Secondly, the President made special mention where he said, “Although I am not in favour of salary increases in the Public Service, there are two categories that are still left out.” And, he mentioned the councillors at the district level and LC I chairpersons. I would like to make specific reference to LC I chairpersons. I was really wondering what the President meant in terms of salary enhancement of chairpersons LC I with disregard to the other nine members who the chairpersons work together with. There are a lot of questions to do with what these other nine members have to do. They are actually contemplating leaving the chairpersons to work alone in the councils since they are the only ones being considered. So, this also needs attention.
  
3.33
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank His Excellency the President for such a flamboyant State of the Nation Address. However, I would like to respond to some of the issues I feel are very touchy, especially to this nation. 

The President did mention about modernising agriculture and as you may well know, 80 percent of the employment in Uganda comes from agriculture. He did mention the three categories that have played a great role in agriculture; the plantation owners, the large-scale farmers and the medium-scale farmers. But my concern goes to the subsistence farmers. 

As you are all aware, most of the subsistence farmers are experiencing land fragmentation whereby, for instance, in my constituency in Buwekula, Mubende District, we are facing land evictions. 

Secondly, most of the financial institutions are not allowing collateral security because of the high risks involved. I would have been happier to know and hear that subsistence farmers are going to be provided with subsidies from the government because what is now happening is that most of the farmers are borrowing from these financial institutions based on different collateral securities. They are demotivated and at the same time, the land issue is a very important issue, whereby most people are living in ignorance of the law. They do not feel protected and the government has not come up with initiatives to sensitise the farmers together with the locals.

The President also commented on the health sector, which is very good and important. What is happening in the countryside is that drugs are still insufficient. In my constituency, I have some areas, which are hard-to-reach like a sub-county called Butoloogo where people travel long journeys. We are experiencing high mortality rates for children and pregnant women. The government needs to come up strongly to enforce good service delivery -(Member timed out.)

3.36
MR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me a chance to respond to the President’s State of the Nation Address. I will start by thanking His Excellency for delivering a clear, precise and logical State of the Nation Address, which I have found very useful.

The State of the Nation Address focused on the economy of this country. As you know, the economy is the heart of development. With a poor economy, you cannot develop but with a good economy, everything is possible. People can take their children to school, people can find treatment for themselves, people can find transport for themselves, etcetera. So, I am happy that the President focused on the economy.

He guided the nation on how to invest in the economy. In particular, he said that it is wiser to invest in light industries because besides generating income, they also create jobs. He discouraged more investment in services particularly importation, which my colleagues were talking about.

So, I would like Ugandans to really look at this State of the Nation Address as something which is very useful and follow it. I am calling upon the various ministries to study it properly and translate it into the various programmes.

The President also identified the enemies of the economy. He outlined them, including the bureaucrats who delay projects - the Action for Change, Walk-to-Work, etcetera, because they disturbed the economy in the last financial year. If we did not have all those problems, I am sure our growth would have been better. So, I am calling upon Ugandans to watch out for some of these enemies of the economy and actually condemn them to the letter.

The only point I would like to urge the President on in the future, having made such a good State of the Nation Address, is that he should have blended it a little with the human resource component because with a poor human resource who are not in place or not well motivated, it is very difficult to drive the economy. I think that was not properly addressed -(Member timed out.)

3.40
MS MODEST AUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the chance to add my voice to the rest of the colleagues and thank His Excellency the President, for his speech that he gave to the august House.

I just have two issues to comment on as far as the speech is concerned. One is about corruption. His Excellency said that corruption is hindering development projects in the country due to selfish motives, but he forgot the corrupt officers in various ministries that are hindering services from reaching our communities. 

I would have expected more of this, and I have this to say to the august House and to the nation at large. Uganda, as somebody once said, is officially corrupt, from LC I to wherever. Corruption in the nation is like the new music, which is being invented by these artists. Today, we have this issue of corruption and you get all Members talking, and it is left like that, forgetting the losses that the government has incurred and the services that people have missed because of these corrupt individuals.

The second day more music comes and we continue dancing the same way. It is like the nation is sick, but we are living in denial. We do not want to accept the fact that we are sick. That is how I look at the nation. We know corruption is robbing us, but we are refusing to come out and say, “What do we do?” Until all of us, including the rural person in the village, agree that, our nation is rotten, and we have to get up and clean it, we will continue crying about corruption. If time comes and one day we all wake up and say, “Enough is enough on corruption,” and we all agree that we give amnesty to the corrupt people on a particular day and then say, “From tomorrow onwards, if you are corrupt -  if it means stoning somebody to death, then let it be,” so that there is some sanity in the country.

The other thing I wanted to comment on is about HIV/AIDS. His Excellency said that people have relaxed. Honourable members, for some of us who come from the hard-to-reach areas, you look at people who are suffering with this virus and you wonder whether we are in the same country or a different one. I would like to bring to the attention of the Committee on HIV/AIDS that in this country, there are people who walk 50 kilometres to go for ARV drugs. There are people who know they are sick and want to be attended to, but cannot get that service and are told, “Go and get the CD4 Count report.” This CD4 Count machine is so many kilometres away – three districts away from you. How does such a person get these reports? How can such a person be treated? (Member timed out.)

3.44
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. There are issues I wish to respond to. First, he highlighted about water, especially having piped water for big towns and also ensuring that water is accessible to all. But in the 2012/2013 budget, you will see that VAT on water was introduced at 18 percent. I am wondering if the urban poor like those in Katanga slum and Kansanga wetlands can still access clean water as per the President’s communication.

Secondly, the health sector of this country is in a dilemma. Whereas the NRM Government is trying to address the issues with regard to health and having access to medicines for all, the human resource remains a big challenge. Anti-malarial drugs, today, are still being distributed by people who are not health workers. What shall we do as Uganda, in trying to address the issue of human resource? Otherwise, Government will continue spending a lot of money trying to address some issues while leaving out others. 

I thank the President for commending the role of investors. I know it is imperative to have them so as to create employment for the young people. But where is the investment policy? It is not clear; people come to Uganda and set up hotels and graduates of accountancy from Makerere University are employed as tea girls. We need a clear investment policy so that Ugandans can fully benefit from these investors. The youth are the majority in Uganda and we are sitting on a time bomb if we do not address the issue of unemployment. We introduced the Youth Fund, but where has it ended? I expected us this year to look at other strategies of engaging uneducated youth in trying to access the job market -(Member timed out.)

3.48
MR MICAH LOLEM (NRM, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the President for the wonderful speech he gave, despite heckling from some uncultured friends. I wish to draw your attention to page 2, where the President talked about security. He said, “Security of persons and property brought about by NRA/UPDF….” This is very true; I come from Karamoja, but if you went there today, it is different from that of 1993. But I expected the President to say that since UPDF has protected the lives and property of Ugandans, their salaries should be increased, including the Police and Prisons such that there is uniformity. Since the teachers’ salaries were increased, it would have been better to do it for all civil servants, including the UPDF, because they are doing a wonderful job.

On teachers, there was a “slip of the tongue” when the President said they could be sacked and new ones recruited. (Laughter) Without teachers, Uganda cannot go far; so the President could have simply said that teachers’ salaries would be increased. 

Concerning roads, on page 11, they have mentioned Moroto-Nakapiripirit Road, but I wish they had talked of tarmacking Muyembe-Nakapiripirit, Soroti-Moroto and Lira-Kotido roads. Otherwise, even the contractors may not find where to pass in order to ferry the materials. I suggest that road works should start from the towns and move towards the other areas. 

On page 14, the President talked about LCIs and district councillors being paid. What about the sub-county councillors? Only the LC III chairperson is being paid; what about the rest? If that is the case, then the LC III chairperson should be left to man the sub-county alone. At least parish councillors should have been included too –(Member timed out.)

3.53
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address, and the good ideas he presented for the future of the country and also in reminding us about the past. If you do not know your history, it is sometimes difficult to know how to move forward.

The President, on page 2, mentioned the progress the country has made in security of persons and property, which has been brought about by the current Government. It is very true that Uganda today is one of the most secure countries. However, there is one area which has me worried, and I think other Ugandans as well. Recently, there has been a spate of murders of prominent business people. In Kiboga, there was a prominent businessman called Kayiira who was murdered in cold blood and up to now the security agencies have not apprehended the murderers. I was also reading in the newspapers that in Mbarara, a businessman was recently murdered, and so on and so forth. So, I call upon the government to address security so that the good record of Government on security is restored. Otherwise, these incidents cause problems for the whole country. 

And when I go to the constituency, the people who brought about this peace that we are talking about now, the veterans, are always asking me, “When are we going to be paid our money; we have registered and so on, but when is this money which we have been promised going to be paid?” I, therefore, call upon Government to put in place a systematic procedure for paying these people, and to indicate where in the process each individual is and when they can expect to get their benefits.

The other item which I wish to comment about is on the issue of the economy. On page 18, the President talked about the difficult times the economy has been going through. But I really commend the Government for controlling inflation in the country. You can see from the newspapers that inflation has gone down to 16 percent and I pray for the government to continue doing the good work to bring stability to this economy.

Also, on page 10, the President talks about the increase in electricity production -(Member timed out.)

3.56
REV. PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also join the rest of the Members to thank His Excellency the President, for this wonderful State of the Nation Address. He talked a lot about security and other important issues in the country, but I am more concerned about his recent attacks on religious leaders, which have not caused any happiness at all in the religious fraternity. We want to tell this country and His Excellency that - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is that in the State of the Nation Address?

REV. BAKALUBA: Yes, it is part of it, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because you might be called to order if you start discussing things that are not in the – 

REV. BAKALUBA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. That aside, I want to go ahead and thank His Excellency the President, for having mentioned the 20 roads that will be tarmacked in this country. Among those we have Kyetume-Katosi-Nkokonjeru Road, which has been mentioned in many budgets for a long time, but work has not been done. As I speak, I understand an American contractor has been given this contract to do this work, but legally I am just wondering what is likely to happen when someone is awarded a contract and he is not given permission to proceed. It means he can sue and Government can end up paying heavily. 

Secondly, we have people affected, who stay along the road, were evaluated and have been waiting to be compensated. They have not been compensated and some of these people after waiting for a long time started reconstructing and carrying on with their own business. I wonder what will happen when time comes for the road to continue. So, we need to work expeditiously so that these people do not continue to be affected.

Also, in 2010, there was a loan which was passed to reconstruct and develop Kyetume and Mityana railway terminals. But up to now, these programmes have not yet moved and they were supposed to have started some time back. We are just wondering what is going to happen. Kyetume railway terminal happens to be in my constituency. Land was reclaimed, compensations were done and even fencing was done, but as I speak, nothing much has been done. (Member timed out.)

3.59
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion because of the following reasons: One, I want to appreciate His Excellency the President, and the Executive, for ensuring security in this country, as well as the services of our security agencies in this country , because without security, there is nothing else that we can do as a country.

Secondly, I want to appreciate the reconciliation process that the President has initiated in all the groups that were being fought in this country by our agencies, and the recent demonstration of reconciliation that the President has demonstrated. Recently, the President was in our district Sheema, and he reconciled with people of former governments, one of them being hon. Rwakasisi, and sent a very strong message that we can fight, we can compete, but there is a time for everything; a time to fight, a time to compete, and a time for reconciliation and for work. And I think that is the right way to go as a country. 

I want to appreciate the emphasis in the State of the Nation Address on investing in infrastructure, so that infrastructure can in turn generate more funds for us to be able to carry out our social services. I want to appreciate the construction of roads, the construction of power lines, the construction of water services, and I would want to appeal to Government to consider the Bwizibwera–Nyakangu-Kabwohe-Rukungiri Road, which would open up a huge area economically if it was tarmacked. 

I would also wish to appeal to Government to consider sourcing funds to carry out the national water project in Kitagata sub-county. This water supply would supply the whole of Igara County plus Sheema District, which is a huge area. That would be o very great service to that area.

I want to comment briefly on social services. Any organisation cannot be better than the people in it -(Member timed out.)

4.03
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Nwoya and on my own behalf, allow me to say how wonderful it is to be led by such a wonderful man who could give us this kind of wonderful State of the Nation Address. (Applause)

As reflected on page 1, this year’s speech was mainly on four things: recovery of the economy; the disagreement on how we divide the scarce resources; the sabotage of vital development projects by some of our colleagues; and then the issue of corruption. I found this very sincere, very true to our nation and very exact at this time in question.

We thank the President because our road, Olwiyo-Kitgum-Gulu Road, is up for upgrading, which I am sure is going to improve the livelihood of my people. We also appreciate the rural electrification programme that is on-going. We know that Amuru, Nwoya and Adjumani are on the line to be connected. 

The most patriotic part of the President’s speech was when he said by 1986 we were collecting Shs 5 billion in revenue as a country but today, we are proud to say we are collecting Shs 7,000 billion. As a result, we are financing our national budget by 75 percent. How patriotic can that be? How wonderful is it to be led by such a visionary man. 

The President asked Members of Parliament in his speech, on page 13, paragraph 2, that he is still waiting for voices of patriots who would accept voluntary salary cuts from their monies. I do not know whether up to now we have got hands up. That is a take-home assignment. 

I would like to thank the President because as the Ninth Parliament, the President is walking with us and he is talking with us on the issue of corruption. We, as Members of the Ninth Parliament, only need to be committed because the President in his speech has indicated that he has all the political will to fight corruption and to be with us in our struggle against corruption. 

We know how corruption has eaten deep in this country. We recognise the efforts that have been put by Government to stamp out corruption. Maybe very soon, we need to consider passing a Bill or moving a motion that would request Government to audit all the accounting officers of Government. (Member timed out.)

4.06
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the President for his fair address to the nation. 

I am a farmer and I represent farmers from rural areas. He introduced the NAADS programme, which has done a lot to supply seedlings and animals to farmers. However, I have observed that NAADS has an element which it has left out, and that is the model farms. Giving out seeds and animals is not enough when the farmers do not have skills and knowledge on modern farming. As you are aware, most of our farmers in rural areas are school drop-outs. They cannot read and they have little time to listen to radio programmes. If we introduce model farms in each sub-county, it will be very easy for them to go, see and learn how to manage their crop and animal husbandry projects. 

You are also aware that some farmers have misused what NAADS has given them; for example, the improved seeds and animals. When they see that they cannot manage, they just eat or sell them for money because they are poor and they have no skills to manage exotic animals. So, they misuse our resources like that. I therefore, suggest that if model farms are established, it will be very easy for farmers to go and visit within their locality and - (Member timed out)

4.0
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. For the past six years, I have listened and watched the President deliver the State of the Nation Address. I would like to say that the State of the Nation Address for this year did not convince me a lot as a person, because I related it to the past five addresses delivered by the President and I realised that as a young person I was almost losing hope. The State of the Nation Address did not deliver hope to me in terms of a future.

When I go to page 13, the President highlighted the core issues this country must address or should focus on and they are listed there. He missed out something, and that is human resource. He earlier said we should not agitate for wages, but he fails to remember that the human resource will contribute to the achievement of the core issues of Uganda.

We have unemployment in this country. Young people, both graduates and non-graduates, are idle. In the last State of the Nation Address, His Excellency had pledged to sponsor IT packs, to sponsor DPO strategies and to procure and establish over 5,000 jobs, minimum, for Ugandans. We want to audit and see how many jobs in that area were created. Where is our human resource? 

Now, when you talk about not increasing salary and then you say, maybe for medics - We are all Ugandans, we all go to the same markets, we use the same roads and we use the same water and all services as Ugandans. In this country, we have people who are paid over Shs 50 million a month and we have people who are earning Shs 800,000 as wages. What are we talking about here? Where is the equity? Where is affordability? Where is the fairness in this? If His Excellency is emphasising the issue of wages, I would like to say, at least let us have everybody employed. If you are employed and you are earning a living, maybe there is fair competition, but it is not there.

His Excellency talked about corruption. He talked about selfish people who even bribe investors. He even mentioned journalists as having tried to force him to bribe them. The issue of corruption is very serious in this country. His Excellency should come out straight and openly address it. If he says that journalists were trying to force him to bribe them, I would have wanted him to read a list of those journalists or those radio stations or television stations and we blacklist them.  He just said, “They cannot bribe me.” Why can’t he expose these people?

Yes, we want the investors very much, but we have got quack investors. In the Eighth Parliament we sat and we allocated land to an investor - the Shimoni land – but what happened to that land? (Member timed out)

4.14
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me make a contribution to the State of the Nation Address. 

As a mother, Ugandan and senior citizen, I had expected His Excellency the President to address key issues of a devastating nature as an introduction to his statement. I was very shocked because although Bugisu has suffered waves of landslides, the President rather celebrates FDC being elbowed out of the East African Legislative Assembly than acknowledging the disaster, which has befallen the people of Bugisu. 

I was extremely disappointed with my brother and friend for not mentioning the devastating effect of the nodding disease, which is spreading in Northern Uganda. He just mentioned it at the end but not at the beginning. When you enter a home which has lost a child, the first thing you do is to acknowledge that problem and comfort the family. It did not come from his mouth and as an elder, I just want to advise him that next time he comes to address us he should behave like an African. (Applause)  

Allow me also to address the issue of the private sector. The President is saying that the private sector is the driving force, but how do you expect the private sector to involve Ugandans when about 80 per cent of the population of Ugandans are engaged in agricultural activities. How do you embrace these people to be part and parcel of the driving force for growth when the President up to now, despite signing the Maputo Protocol, is still allocating 3.8 per cent of the budget to agriculture? In fact, it has gone down. For those of you who care to look at the figures, it has gone down from 4.5 per cent to 3.8 per cent. How serious is the President to the majority of the voters who voted him into power, who constitute 80 per cent in the agricultural sector? 

Mr Speaker, I have exchanged this view with you several times. Cotton farmers have cried to this Parliament, have cried to the President and nothing has been done. Shs 46.8 billion was eaten in the season of 2010. Again, Shs 30 billion was collected last year through taxation. Right now, that money is being distributed to the ginners who are already investors. They have come to this country to bring money. In fact, they are robbing from the poor farmers in order to develop their business. If we deserve the name and status of Parliament, we should address the issue of robbing the farmers of the little money, which they get from cotton. I hope this time you will move this matter forward.  

Finally-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, did you say taxation? Is that taxation passed by this Parliament?

MRS OGWAL: It is an illegal cotton levy. Mr Speaker, you took 30 minutes of my time, - (Laughter) - allow me to say - (Member timed out) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, 30 seconds.  

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the President went to give the achievements of his 26 years. The President forgot that the NRM was a monolithic system where DP, UPC, CP and all political forces were involved, including me who participated in the making of the Constitution. I want to say, what improvements did we make to the economy of Uganda when we sold UCB? How did we improve the economy when we sold Uganda hotels built using our own money? How did the Ugandans benefit from the sale of all the industries, which were spread throughout the country? 

Now we are trying to revive cooperative unions, which had grown and had become a model in Africa. They were deliberately destroyed. Now we are trying again to use the taxpayers’ money to revive cooperative societies. That is a wrong policy and I want to condemn it. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.20
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I draw your attention to the issue of security of persons and property. The President mentioned the issue of improved security, but I think he was referring to national security more than to personal security. The issue of security of persons and their property is deteriorating. We have a report of crime and road traffic safety from the Police indicating that on average, 10 people are killed per day. That was for the year 2011. By projection, 3,600 people will have been killed by the end of this year. These are worrying statistics. This is from the Police. If you compare the same report for the previous two years, there is an increment and, therefore, a cause to worry about the security of the people of Uganda. 

In the interest of time, if you go towards the last pages, on page 32 the President talks about Bills which the Executive intended to bring to the House, again there is a gap, which is a very serious thing to be taken note of by those who are concerned about our security forces. Under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Executive intended to bring a Bill here about regulation of non-governmental organisations, forensic evidence and something. There is no Bill intended to be brought here to regulate deployment of the Police forces outside Uganda. This is worrying because today as we speak, Uganda has Police forces deployed in several countries and this Parliament is not aware about them and the terms and conditions under which we have forces of the Uganda Police in Somalia. Suppose something happens there, what are you going to say? How are you going to ensure that the Police are safe? How are you going to monitor their safety?

For the UPDF, it is provided for here in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda how they can be deployed outside Uganda, but today the Police are crying even within the country. They are expected to be 60,000 men and women of the Police forces but we have only about 30,000. If we can have members of the Police force deployed outside Uganda yet we have a deficit in our own country, what are we going to do? How is Parliament going to reweigh that? 

I would like to appeal to the President and to this House to look into the welfare of the Army and the Police forces. Many soldiers are complaining to-date of non-payment of the people who are injured or people who are even killed in action in Somalia, in Congo. I have statistics; I have data here which I cannot lay in the interest of time. (Member timed out)

4.24
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I join my colleagues to thank His Excellency for the good speech. His Excellency indeed mentioned some core issues in development and among them were education and electricity. However, these core issues may not be achieved if we do not rectify the issues hindering them. 

The education sector might not achieve its objectives if we do not address the reasons why the education sector is not performing well. In my district, we have a big issue of secondary teachers. I beg that recruitment of secondary school teachers be decentralised rather than centralised. We are advocating for decentralisation and creating new districts now but most of the issues at the district level are still centralised. You find that some districts do not attract teachers. In my district, for example, we have no secondary teachers. Let us look into the issue of recruitment of secondary school teachers.

The President also talked about transport, but he did not talk about water transport. We have been having a ferry, which appears in the budget each year but nothing has been done about it. Money is always allocated in billions to that ferry but it has always remained in the same state. I ask the ministry and also the other parties who are involved in the issues of the ferry to do something to rectify it. Every year, money is allocated but nothing is done. (Member timed out)

4.27
MRS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to the rest in thanking the President for this wonderful speech. On behalf of the West Nile region and on behalf of Maracha in particular, I want to say that the President gave this speech as a great teacher. A great teacher talks about theory and practice. To us in the West Nile, he talked about the theory and then put it in practice. 

I say that for two reasons: One, he talked about power and two, he talked so much about roads. On 10th June, he went and launched the great road from Arua to Orabo passing through Maracha– Koboko and we are grateful for that. Also on 30th of last month, I was there to witness the switching on of Nyagak. We may recall that Nyagak was supposed to take only three years but it has taken seven years, and we are grateful for that – (Laughter) – Finally it has come. 

As I talk now, I just compared notes with Omwana w’ekka, hon. Minister D’Ujanga. I was there on 30th and he remained behind. He just told me that today, the power has reached Paidha and tomorrow it will reach Arua. I asked him when it will reach Maracha and he has reassured me. We are grateful to the President for that as well. 

However, as Oliver Twist, we are still expectant. The whole of West Nile should be given power and it should reach every homestead. The few people who have excelled in education from West Nile have performed against the odds because we use tadooba. Tadooba is the small lighting facility that uses paraffin. But now we are able to compete. You wait, now with power in our area you can imagine how much better we will perform. 

I also want to thank the President for having appointed a female minister for energy. I think it is because of the woman that we are able to get power. (Member timed out)

4.31
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for continuing to give clear focus and a coherent vision for the development of our country. The people of Igara West appreciate him and they wish him very well.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the President for providing Shs 20 billion to enhance the allowances of our councillors at the districts and our chairpersons LCI. I was with the speakers in their general meeting last Friday and they told me that the deputy speaker of a whole district is getting only Shs 200,000 a month. They request Parliament to step in to assist increase the advocacy so that their allowances and remuneration can be increased. I would like to ask the government to expedite modalities on how this money, the Shs 20 billion, is going to be allocated and to ensure that all levels of our councillors are included - the LC IIIs and the executives at LCI. 

Secondly, I would like to agree with His Excellency the President that rural electrification is important for the development of our rural areas. I was listening to my sister here celebrating Nyagak. I am glad that somebody from the frontbench has at least remained behind to listen to me on this. His Excellency made a concrete promise to the people of Igara West, specifically the people of Bitoma, Kakanju and Nyabubale, to extend electricity to them. I would like to recommend the inclusion of Nchwera small power project. It has a capacity of more than two megawatts and it can catalyse the development of Igara West. Please consider it for inclusion among the small hydro power projects. 

Finally, I would like to agree and thank the President on the vision of the light manufacturing industries as a springboard for the development of our country. We would like to thank His Excellency and the government for giving us a tea factory at Buhweju. The tea farmers have increased their gardens but we need another factory at Kakombe for tea. I would like to also urge Government to consider supporting our tea farmers to improve research on the better clones for tea. (Member timed out)

4.34
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address. The President pointed out the core sectors in the economy. He talked of health, education and roads. The reason I support the President in these areas is because the state of our roads and health sector is not good. I come from Abim District and I represent the people of Labwor County; Abim Hospital is in a very sorry state. This is a hospital without water, toilets or an ambulance. Is that a hospital? It is kind of a first aid – You cannot call it a hospital. (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am rising on a point of clarification. If everything that the honourable member is reporting is in a mess, why is he congratulating him; for what? (Laughter)

MR AYEPA: Mr Speaker, allow me to continue. (Laughter) The hospital is actually in a mess, and that is why I am thanking the President because this time he says we have to focus on this area. It was like an area that was forgotten. The situation in that hospital is very bad; sometimes the doctors use the light from their phones as they move up and down to check on the patients.

Mr Speaker, I do not know how to swim. On Monday I was moving from Abim to Moroto for a meeting on minerals and I was almost taken away by the floods. You would have been paying me last respects here today. The roads there are terrible! Something must be done about these roads. 

The President talked about the roads to Karamoja but there are some roads that have been left out. Soroti-Amuria-Abim Road is terrible. If it rains today – I came from home yesterday – people will not be able to cross from Amuria to Abim. Another terrible road is the Lira-Otuke-Abim-Kotido Road. These are roads that enter Karamoja, and you know that the people of Karamoja mostly rely on their basic needs from Lira and Soroti; if these roads are closed, sincerely, it becomes very terrible for them as many people are not going to get the basic services that they need. Mr Speaker – (Member timed out.)

4.37
 MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for according me this opportunity to have my views heard. I would like to thank the President for the good State of the Nation Address. 

I appreciate Government for the efforts put in to improve infrastructure, especially roads, in the whole country. I would also like to thank Government for the Kaiso-Tonya Road which is under construction. However, I would like to comment on the compensation rate. Compensation rates are very low and our people are not benefitting; they are just given peanuts. I appeal to the Government to revise the rate so that it matches with the current rate of land and the current rate of whatever we are buying in the current situation.

On page 12, the President lists the roads to be tarmacked. I want to thank the President for including our road, although it was wrongly quoted. It is stated as Kyenjojo-Kabwoya, but that is not the road that we have been craving for. The road we have been dying for is Kitara Road, and it starts from Kigumba to Masindi, Hoima, Kikube via Kagadi - the proposed new district - to Kyenjojo. But in the State of the Nation Address, we have Kabwoya-Kyenjojo and this implies that they will tarmac from Kyenjojo to Kabwoya. 

There are reasons why we have been advocating for this road; it joins many districts, crosses Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom and it joins our area to the Northern region. We believe that if that road is tarmacked, it will boost trade in our area and the oil city, Hoima, which is coming up.

On page 14 of the State of the Nation Address, and I will read verbatim, the President commented about the salaries - “I know inadequate salaries are also a challenge to the families of public servants.” I concur with the President because the salaries are really low and it is a challenge to the families of public servants. He continues to say, “Uganda, however, is not like Europe. Many of the public servants have land at home and can grow food to supplement the yet small salaries until the situation improves.” I appeal to the Government that we borrow a leaf from Europe whereby civil servants have land and supplement their salaries by involving in agriculture. 

The problem we have here is that our civil servants cannot acquire land. Land is very expensive here; we can take the example of teachers who are getting Shs 270,000 while an acre of land in Bunyoro is at Shs 2 million and this is deep in the village. Around the oil city, an acre is like Shs 20 million. So, let us develop a programme to help these civil servants acquire land so that they can practice agriculture to supplement their salaries. (Member timed out)

4.41
MR STEPHEN BAKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Before I go to the substantive issues therein, I wish to just echo two concerns.  My recollection is that during such debates, we used to have a full frontbench such that ministers would be able to pick the issues that the members are raising - because the President is not here - and respond to our concerns. The ministers would be here to take those concerns, but I can only see one minister and I think that is an issue of concern to me.

The second issue is that the mover of the motion, I remember, would also be stuck there throughout the debate. I cannot see any of the two movers of the motion – (Interjections) - Thank you.

Going to the substantive issues, I wish to say that the President mentioned in his speech that he would concentrate on four issues. Issue No. 2 is the disagreement amongst key actors in the economy on allocation of resources and the consequent delay in infrastructure development with its implications on the delay of socio-economic transformation. I wonder if this idea that the President talked about has been, first of all, harmonised at the level of Cabinet. We need to allocate our scarce resources to vital projects in Government and in the economy. 

We need money to work on infrastructure for energy, roads and agriculture which is the backbone of our economy. We need money to work on health, which is in shambles. We need money to increase salaries for vital civil servants like teachers and health workers. It is perturbing that up to now, we get signals from Cabinet that do not reflect urgent allocation of scarce resources to urgent sectors of the economy. Therefore, I wonder if Cabinet is serious and if they are determined up to now to increase the cost of public administration. The cost of public administration is going to rise if Cabinet up to now is still suggesting creation of new districts where we are going to have – (Member timed out.)

4.44 
MR JOHN BOSCO MUBITO (NRM, Budiope West County, Buyende): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the President for the successful State of the Nation Address. I congratulate him because I know it is not easy. I have never even dreamt about becoming a President because I know it is a serious office. 

In his State of the Nation Address, the President highlighted, on page 15, the core issues that can propel the growth of the economy, and I agree with him entirely. However, I have issues as a patriot in Uganda. I do not know whether the President considers how the death of patriotism, especially among the policy implementers and makers, is causing problems in Uganda. 

It is in Uganda where you find cooks who do not want to taste their food. We have policy implementers – if, for example, you were to conduct a survey in the education sector, from the ministry up to primary teachers in Government schools, you will hardly find a stakeholder having his or her child in UPE schools, yet we are busy supporting and passing the budget for UPE. I do not know for whom. I do not know whether we are taking voters to be fools, that they can easily accept whatever we offer and yet they do not see us tasting it. 

If you were to consider the frontbench, you would not find a minister’s child in a UPE school. Even Members of Parliament do not take their children to UPE schools. Last year, my first son was in P.4. I had kept him, for purposes of grooming him as a true patriot in Uganda, in a UPE school, but I got a lot of criticism from people. They were saying as a Member of Parliament, I am not supposed to take my child to a UPE school. The same applies to the teachers. One of the reasons those primary teachers are pushing for an increment in their salaries is because they have their children in very expensive private primary schools and yet they teach in UPE schools but do not want their children to go there. (Member timed out.)

4.47
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to commend the President on these matters: law and order has been observed; all of us know it and we thank him for that. Electricity generation has increased. Dams have been built. Many roads are under construction and others have been commissioned. For those ones he mentioned, we are sure we are going to work on them because we have appropriated funds through loans and through our own local revenue. 

On security and defence, I commend him. I also commend his effort to support the fight against corruption, given the fact that he does not shield those who are caught in the act or caught through investigations but he lets the law take its course. 

However, there are some issues where we, as Parliament, need to help him. Mr Speaker, we have heard of many people who keep hard cash under their beds and in their rooms, thus preventing it from going into circulation. At one time the Governor of Bank of Uganda mentioned this and I read it in the newspapers. I would suggest that we carry out a devaluation of the Ugandan currency so that we change once and for all. If they do not want to bring back that money which is kept under beds into circulation or to Bank of Uganda, let it “die” there, so that we can stabilise our national economy. (Member timed out.)

4.50
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking His Excellency for the State of the Nation Address. 

I am going to talk about two issues. The first one is about health. I know that for each and every person to work and for a country to develop, we need to have healthy people. The other day, we talked about Ebola which has attacked our country. It is in Kibaale and other areas mentioned. Kamwenge District does not have a district hospital and yet it is a stopover for people who normally come from Kisoro, Kabale going to other areas. I call upon the person who is in charge to assist us. We only have two health centres IV in the district, and they are not well facilitated. In case of any outbreak of a disease like Ebola, because we have Congolese who are now settling in our district as refugees, we do not have any place to isolate them for treatment. 

I will also talk about agriculture. We all know that agriculture is the backbone of this economy. We have been giving money to our farmers in form of food security, and we give our farmers seedlings which are not improved. Instead of addressing the problem, it has made the problem worse. Since they are being given poor seedlings, their output is always low and we are now in a vicious cycle of poverty and there is food scarcity.

I am of the view that this little money that is being given to farmers could be put in a resource pool in sub-counties in form of SACCOs so that these people can be able to borrow money. This is because they take these products they get as free and they are careless about them. So, it is very important to pool that money at sub-county level and form SACCOs for farmers where they can borrow this money and buy the things they want. It would be better that way. (Member timed out.)

4.53
MS IDAH NANTABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would love to join the rest of the members in congratulating the President upon delivering the State of the Nation Address. 

I have spent the rest of my first year in Parliament dealing with land grabbing in my district. On page 18 of the State of the Nation Address, the President expresses himself on the relationship between land owners and bibanja holders. He poses questions like, “If there are bibanja owners, how are you engaging them?” “If there are illegal squatters, how do we handle them?” In Kayunga District, I have encountered land grabbers who are using guns. Some actually kidnap some of the people who tend to resist them and they take them to places where we do not know. Very many people are missing, especially those who have tried to resist them. 

The issue of land grabbing and illegal land evictions is rampant in the region of Buganda and threatening many bibanja owners because they are soon becoming landless. I have also noticed that estate developers and land dealers are actually dealing with land owners to sell off their bibanja and later on come up with letters of eviction. Therefore, many bibanja holders especially in Buganda region are threatened with these land grabbers and are soon becoming landless, which has even caused famine in Kayunga. 

On page 20, the President expresses that we need to expand sugar growing in Uganda to curb the scarcity of sugar in the country. I agree with him.  However, to a certain extent, Madhvani is encroaching on the land in Kayunga. He wants sugar to be grown almost everywhere and people are losing their land on which they used to grow food. Sugarcane is replacing gardens which used to be for food and this has left my people hungry. (Member timed out)

4.57
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like join my honourable colleagues to support the motion. When I read this document, I realised that in appendix 2, there are some serial numbers missing and I thought this is where my district would benefit from. On page 30, I can see serial numbers 1 to 10 are missing and I do not know if some of the roads like Tororo-Nagongera-Busolwe and Namutumba-Busolwe-Mbale were left out intentionally.

I have heard many people talking about corruption. This word “corruption” is a problem to everybody. I do not know whether we shall get a very good scholar to define, describe or categorise what issues are embedded in the word “corruption” before we can manage to handle it. 

On page 18 of this State of the Nation Address, the President talked about it when he was talking about the investors and he said, “I intend to bring a law to punish severely those who endanger our future on account of corruption”. If we do not have a law to handle those who are corrupt in Uganda, then there is a problem. It is very difficult to fight air. This means corruption is almost like a monster. It is like a vampire. We need to use a terminating system if we are to fight corruption in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.59
MR BAKER SSALI (NRM, Buikwe County West, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to the previous speakers to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address and to say something about the issues mentioned in his speech. His Excellency mentioned some matters concerning the roads. First of all, I want to thank him and the government for issuing graders and road units to all the districts of Uganda so that in future, there will be no fighting or burning of tyres on the roads to demonstrate about bad roads. 

I would like to air out my complaint about the Kyetume-Katosi-Nyenga Road, which is 74 kms. This road has appeared in the Budget for the last many years. That road was worked on partially and was never finished because of lack of funds. I want to request the ministry and the government as a whole to stop procuring contractors to construct those roads when the funds are not enough. That road was partially constructed and when the rains came, they washed away all that had been worked upon. They now have to redo that road. 

The President mentioned matters concerning health, and among them was Kawolo General Hospital, which is in my constituency. It has been in the budget since 2005 but up to today, construction has not started. Another issue is that we do not have a steriliser in the hospital. The doctors use unsterilized equipment on our patients. (Member timed out)

5.03
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to react to the President’s State of the Nation Address. 

On page 1, the President said, “As usual, I will start my State of the Nation Address with the economy. This time, however, I will concentrate on only four aspects. One, the recovery of the economy in the last 26 years…” So, this means that whatever we are discussing is for the last 26 years. On page 3, he says that Uganda is an agricultural country and that the subsistence farmers, according to the 2002 Census, comprised of 68 per cent. So, even our figures are very obsolete. This is 2012. 

We have a lot of potential to be tapped if we are to industrialise and improve. We need to invest a lot in agriculture and yet it has been given only 4.1 per cent of our budget. We are not serious. We have been talking about modernisation of agriculture. Modernisation of agriculture was a very good thing, I embraced it and I thought we were on the right track, but we just ended up with NAADS; NAADS is the National Agriculture Advisory Services. For the last 26 years, Mr Speaker, we are just trying to advise; when shall we start the implementation?

Somebody mentioned the security at national level but not personal security. Recently, my people of Busia were killed in Bukedea because of Police who hid from a road block. They did not know whether it was an illegal road block or not, and they were showered with bullets. (Member timed out.)

5.06
MR HARUNA KYEYUNE (Independent, Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me also thank the President for fulfilling his constitutional obligation to address the nation about the state of the nation. 

During the State of the Nation Address by the President, he talked about unemployment. In so doing, he suggested a youth fund as a way of addressing this problem. I want to suggest that as a country, we should look at industrialisation. There is no way we can curb the problem of unemployment if we do not industrialise. 

We should also admit that it is only agriculture that employs the majority of Ugandans, about 63 percent. A Ugandan goes to his garden to employ himself but as leaders, we should put more emphasis on industrialisation. Why is it that other countries are going ahead of Uganda? Look at Kenya and Rwanda. Here in Uganda, we cannot even produce a safety pin. What don’t we have?

The President was promoting the Indian industries. He was provoking people who used to say that those are factories of Indians. But are those Indians using raw materials which are locally produced in Uganda? No. You find a juice factory importing syrup and they are not producing juice from mangoes and other fruits produced in Uganda. That is why people are going to die of poverty. People are unemployed. As leaders, we should put emphasis on industrialization if we are concerned about our people. (Member timed out.)

5.09
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the President for his wonderful State of the Nation Address, 2012. 

My comments are drawn from two important statements made by the President. The first one is regarding factors responsible for the high level of recovery of the economy since 1986. He said one of the factors is the ever expanding consumer demand in Uganda. I thought he should have added that there are growing income inequalities, especially the growing disparity between the rural and urban population.

In the second statement that supports that argument, he notes that 68 percent of all homesteads still have much of their potential untapped, therefore they still exist in subsistence farming. In other words, as we grow, we are leaving the rest of the population behind. This is totally untenable. 

It is important, therefore, to engage ourselves in especially supporting the primary growth sectors of the economy as we grow. If we do not do this, the statement made by the President – He says, “...yet the economy cannot stay where it is now. This is because it is already being overtaken by the demand for jobs by the young people as well as the demand for dollars for imports.”
In other words, the trade deficit is ever expanding. There is growing unemployment in the country. Unless we address ourselves to the need of financing and supporting, aggressively, the primary growth sectors  that lead to the growing production of goods and services in this country - light manufacturing, agriculture, forestry, mining and the building industry - it is going to be a real stalemate for this country. (Member timed out.)

5.12
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in appreciating the State of the Nation Address by the President and the points which he raised that really opened the eyes of Ugandans. I will take a lot of time explaining, but I will concentrate on one or two issues. 

On page 3, the President talked about the discipline of the Army. I want to join him and appreciate the efforts and the discipline that the Army has shown, especially in this time of NRM leadership. During the past days, you know what happened. We as women were sceptical and scared of the Army but this time, when you move at night, you would rather find an army man than find a civilian. I appreciate the discipline that the Army is exercising. 

However, there are a few things which should be considered for the Army, the Police, security officials plus civil servants; the facilities which they use sometimes do not give them the respect they deserve. When I go upcountry and see where the Police and Army officers sleep, it draws my concern as a Member of Parliament. We need to do something to see to it that the life of our security personnel and their salaries are improved. The President said he does not support an increase of salaries for civil servants, but really, when you consider the type of work the Army does and the risk the Police is exposed to, they really need something to boost their morale.
 
I would also like to appreciate this government because my district has completely changed. Under this government, the road goes up to the border. I will not talk much but I appreciate the efforts that Government has put in. (Interruption)

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I draw your attention to rule 27, which reads: “Statement of business by Leader of Government Business. Every last sitting day of the week, the Leader of Government Business shall make a statement in the House regarding the government business of the succeeding week.” However, when I look around -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not concluded business. Honourable member, proceed. We are in the middle of a discussion. 

5.16
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 10 of this booklet, the President talks about improvement in the electric power generation for this country. Indeed, power supply has increased considerably in the past years because, as he ably stated, in 1986 only 60 megawatts were being produced and it is now 781 megawatts after the completion of Bujagali.

Colleagues, you will note that Government’s major priority in the electricity sub-sector remains focused on increasing generation and transmission by constructing large hydropower generation dams. Despite the significant rise of the power generation, access to electricity by our people remains minimal. It is only five percent in the rural areas and nine percent nationwide. In fact, for Nakifuma, the constituency I represent, with a population of about 200,000 people, it is only three percent. 

The address of the President did not highlight the strategies for electricity network expansion especially in the rural areas. Despite that impressive development within the electricity sub-sector, Uganda’s power tariffs remain among the highest in the world. Due to those high power tariffs, the increase in electricity has not translated into more active investment within the economy. So, I had expected that the President, in his address, would throw some more light on the strategies to address power tariffs in the economy. Power tariffs are really affecting our economy both directly and indirectly. (Member timed out.) 

5.20
MR ROBERT KASULE SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would also like to commend the President for his address on the economy. That is the mirror of our economy and he stated it right. 

I would like to remind you that around this time last year, this economy was almost going to shambles. We had high inflation, high interest rates, there was global contraction, demand in Europe and the USA was declining, but a few patriotic Ugandans stood with the President and the government and tried to revive the country. Right now, inflation has gone down to around 14 percent. National security has also improved; I remember that time we had walk-to-work or walk-to-no-work that showed how destructive some Ugandans are. Thankfully, we went through that state of affairs and the country is now calm. So, this country has gone very far in as far as improving the lives of its people is concerned. 

Other than the President, what is left is for us as leaders is to give direction to our youth who must carry this country forward. In Uganda today, most people have low skills although they have academic qualifications. People go for degrees in history and psychology and yet there is no market for such jobs. Therefore, I would urge Government this time round to encourage people to go to the BTVET institutions that have been established so that before one pursues a degree course, they have a certificate in a skilled subject like plumbing, electricity, sewing and embroidery - things that give one assured employment. I recommend that Government encourages citizens to attend these studies.
 
Recently, we had a workshop in Kawanda. As always, they organise for the people around the research stations. We got information that even in Kalengyere, where they discovered and did research about apples, which are very lucrative and are being imported from as far as South Africa, and people who sell them get big profits when they sell at Shs 1,000 each, many people have refused to adopt this new technology.  (Member timed out.)

5.24
MS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to join my colleagues in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address. I particularly want to thank the President on the issue of security. Aware that we are neighbours of the Karimojong, who are our uncles but have disturbed us for quite a while, I want to thank the President for his effort in disarmament. This has enabled our people in Amuria to repossess their land that they had abandoned for over 50 years. 

However, something disturbing is the roads. I wish the Minister of Works was here. It is not possible for these people to settle where they are because there are still some thugs who possess arms and ammunition, who come in to disturb our people. Therefore, my request is that something be done on the roads, just like my colleague from Labwor commented, so that security is able to pursue these thugs and safeguard our people who have returned to possess their land.

On the issue of electricity, I am very pleased to report that we have poles standing and we cannot wait to see Amuria and Katakwi lighting up. Most of the colleagues who travelled to bury our late colleague must have seen the nature of our roads. They are only worked on when UNRA gets to know that MPs are likely to travel there and may make a lot of noise. I am sure many people saw what happened. The road was worked on while they were travelling and it has ended there. I do not know what we have to do with the Minister of Works.

I would like to thank the President for his comments on agriculture, although one thing was not mentioned - Uganda is dependent on agriculture but in Teso, we depend on cattle and ox ploughs. Unless compensation is done, we cannot open our land because we cannot afford fuel for tractors, and you know that we have land fragmentation. Therefore, I am requesting the President to consider expediting the compensation and re-stocking of Teso sub region. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.27
MRS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 

I would like to particularly thank the President for considering Olwiyo-Gulu-Kitgum Road among the 19 priority roads that will be worked on during the course of the year. However, like I have been hearing from a number of colleagues, some of the roads may appear like this in the plan but somehow work never starts on them. Therefore, I want to appeal that since this road has appeared in the plan, work should really start on this road. The situation in our area as far as roads are concerned, just like you hear a number of colleagues complaining, is terrible. In fact, I think this road and the one from Lira to Kitgum are the only colonial roads that have not yet been worked on. I appeal to the ministry concerned to ensure that work starts on this road.

I also want to thank the President for bringing up the issue on nodding disease among the key issues that he brought out. For the last four days, a very important meeting has been taking place here in Kampala - an international meeting that brought together quite a number of experts from all over the world. These experts came to put their heads together to try and answer the puzzle on the nodding syndrome but many questions still remain unanswered.

As far as the issue is concerned, I want to appeal, as a representative of the most affected district, that emphasis should not only be put on addressing the problem clinically. This is because it has come out very clearly that almost all these children who are affected come from the poor of the poorest families. They come from very disadvantaged families and the issue of the socio-economic situation of the households needs to also be addressed. I appeal to the concerned ministries, following the constitution of a committee recently by the President, to come up with clear and deliberate plans and if possible even ring-fence some funds that will be used to address these problems that are still alarming. (Member timed out)

5.30
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues in thanking His Excellency the President for the good speech that gave a sense of direction to this economy and the budget as a whole.

On page 20 in his speech, the President cited some areas, which are expected to contribute to the economy. He mentioned Sango Bay Estate in Rakai. We are optimistic that if it takes off, it will create more employment especially for our youth, and we pray hard that the initiative goes ahead and takes off. 

However, there are some challenges. First of all, the ministries that were supposed to carry out their roles, like Ministry of Lands, which was supposed to survey 237 square miles of land, went there accompanied by the Police and they just ignored the department of lands at the district. That is a very big challenge. Secondly, the Ministry of Trade was supposed to erect billboards on which they could notify the public about the process. The billboards have never been erected in the area as the law requires.


The Ministry of Trade again has not carried out adequate sensitisation to the masses about the re-entry process, which is also a challenge. The office of the Attorney-General is very critical in this aspect but it is believed that some officers in the office of the Attorney-General have personal interests in the matter. There are even allegations that the Attorney-General himself, being the personal lawyer to the Sango Bay Estate, has an interest as well. In this regard, I request the President to investigate the matter before it proliferates into something bigger to handle. I thank you.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 15, which talks about suspension of the rules, and particularly I refer to rule 61(8). Given that the general impression has been that members have had very little time to contribute on this motion, I beg to move that this rule be suspended and members be allowed to contribute for the second time. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not in a position to take a decision.

5.33
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the President for his usual address to the nation, which normally comes at the beginning of each Parliamentary session.

On page 1, the President mentioned corruption. Corruption has persistently continued to operate within the departments of Government. It is really disgusting to see Government officials who have constructed houses that are comparable to hotels, like what happened in the last three weeks when somebody from the Prime Minister’s was arrested. When you see what is happening in the health and education sectors, I think we should take action. These people’s property should be impounded and auctioned so that this money goes back to the Treasury to cater for such services that are lacking in the country.

On page 11, the President mentions infrastructure. There is a long list of roads which are being targeted for construction in this financial year. My road, which comes from Villa Maria to Sembabule, has been mentioned but when you look at the previous budgets, this road was mentioned several times to the extent that my people got disgusted. They even want to demonstrate against this Government because of that road. When you look at the state of the economy and you compare this long list of roads which are being targeted, I doubt that it is feasible. Maybe we are just sugar-coating the situation. 

On another page, the President talks a lot about the economy but he did not address himself to the issue of bank interest rates, which have recently changed, thereby affecting salary earners. Many Government workers’ salaries have not been increased recently but when you look at the interest rates, they have affected teachers, health workers and some Members of Parliament who had acquired loans from banks. Mr Speaker, I urge the President to do something about this. Thank you.

5.37
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Mr Speaker, I join my colleagues in thanking the President for the wonderful speech he gave during the State of the Nation Address. However, just like my colleagues were thanking him, let me assure this House that the people of Luuka have suffered in this country. I have suffered and enough is enough. 

While the President was delivering his speech, I was listening attentively. If you look at it critically, there is nothing he mentioned concerning my district. The roads, schools and hospitals are either in a dilapidated state or not there at all. 

The other day, I was moving around my place and I saw some contractors putting up a structure, which looks like a residential house, and somebody told me it was supposed to be a health centre in future. Honestly, I do not think this is good for the people of Luuka. Ever since this Government came into power, we have been supporting it and we shall continue doing so, but we request the President to consider –(Interruption) – Mr Speaker, I have really suffered. Even in the House, you can see how the microphone is behaving (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I want to draw the attention of this House to page 18. In the previous State of the Nation Address, immediately we had assumed office, he promised to fight corruption. However, this time round, he said it is corruption and selfishness which frustrate investors. Corruption in this country does not only concern the investors; it is everywhere. It is in the local governments and everywhere. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have come to the conclusion of today’s business. Thank you very much for sitting through this particular sitting. This House is adjourned to next Tuesday, 2 o’clock. Thank you.
 
(The House rose at 5.41 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 August 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 

