Wednesday, 7th August 2013

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. On a sad note, I would like to inform the House of the death of Engineer Charles Kazibwe, who died last Monday at Nsambya Hospital. The body is still there up to now, but it will be leaving for Gayaza this evening where it will rest overnight; burial will be tomorrow at 12.00 noon. Those of you, who can make it there, please make arrangements to join the family during this difficult time. May I ask the House to rise and observe a moment of silence in memory of the late?

(The House rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Honourable members, depending on what happens tomorrow, we are expecting that the Ramadhan season might come to an end tomorrow or the next day. But we are not sure at this stage. Depending on what happens tomorrow, we intend to adjourn plenary to facilitate the process of committees finalising with their work. But I am informed that most of the committees have already done a lot of work and I am happy about that. I am sure the whole House is equally pleased. 

When we adjourn plenary, the committees should be enabled to do their work and complete all of it; and by 19th of this month, all the committee chairpersons should file their reports with the Clerk’s office so that we know how to schedule the programme for the debates that will come thereafter.

We had planned to have a general debate on the Budget, but as you can see, it will not be possible now because we lost a whole day last week when we constituted a special sitting. Also, this week, we have not been able to deal with this matter because there were matters that ran over from last week. So, the planned general debate on the Budget might now not take place; rather what will take place is that we will receive a statement from the Shadow Minister of Finance in reply to the Budget read by the Minister of Finance. That will form the foundation for us to go into committees and deal with these matters and then all our concerns will be accommodated in the course of the debate on the report from the sessional committee on the Budget. 

By now, I am sure all the shadow ministers have files from the committees on their respective policy statements, which will now be discussed with the Government policy statements and harmonised so that when we come to debate, we debate both of them, seeing the alternatives provided by the Opposition so that we move this matter forward. 

So, if we receive all the reports by 19th then plenary will resume on the 20th of this month to enable us to discuss, bearing in mind the framework provided by the law for 31st of this month to have us finish all the committee reports, and also be able to deal with all the financial instruments that accompany the budgetary process. So please, let us observe this and work hard in our committees to finalise these processes. So, if we rise today and plenary adjourns, it will resume on Monday, 19th.

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, Member of Parliament for Rubaga South, for achieving what many of us cannot even begin to imagine to do – by publishing a book, which he has called Nature’s Talk to Man; 20 Years of Kabaka Mutebi II; Poems, Essays on Federation and Environment. He has autographed for me a copy. The book looks like this. We congratulate him for achieving this. In that same spirit, he sought the authority of the Speaker and he was granted that the Order Paper would be amended to allow him present a motion congratulating the Kabaka for completing 20 years in leadership, to the people of Buganda. This motion will be moved and I amend the Order Paper to accommodate it immediately after the statement from the Shadow Minister of Finance. Thank you.

MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have a procedural issue. Under Rule 78(2) on the decision of the Speaker/Chairperson: “The decision of the Speaker/Chairperson upon any point, shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House, except upon the substantive motion moved after notice.”

Mr Speaker, the procedural issue I want to raise is that yesterday, Members stood up on procedural issues, but were not given an opportunity. And one of the issues which they wanted to raise was that last Thursday, when we left the House, you had decided that the voting on the Public Order Management Bill would be by roll call and tallying. Yesterday, when you came, you changed and asked Members to vote by voice. And this rule – Rule 78(2) – has been violated. So, the procedural issue I am raising is that as the Speaker of Parliament, you are the custodian of the rules. Was it procedurally right for you to do this, in light of what is taking place in the country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yesterday, I explained why we were going to change the voting method before we voted. I said that we had commenced voting by roll call and tallying, but the list which was to be used for voting was seized by Members and torn into pieces in our faces. Those of us who were here saw, which rendered that method of voting improper for purposes of concluding business. I said this yesterday and continue to say that since that was not properly done; we would then use voice voting and that is what we did.

MR ISAIAS SSASAGA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of guidance. I have been in this House for slightly more than two years. But I do sometimes feel, more so subject to that rule, where the decision of the Speaker cannot be contested, but often, I feel there are instances when the Speaker is also out of order. The guidance I am seeking is, under such a challenge where Members feel aggrieved to the extent that they envisage the honourable Speaker as being out of order and in our Rules of Procedure, there is nowhere where that a Speaker can also be called to order, under such a challenge and circumstance, Rt Hon. Speaker, what can the House do? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We may need to organise another seminar to train Members of Parliament on procedure. There are procedures on how you challenge decisions of the Speaker. There are procedures on how you challenge the conduct of the Speaker. They are there in the Rules. It is unfortunate that for the two years you have sat here, you have not been able to pick them, but they are there in the Rules.

2.41
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am making a rejoinder to what the Leader of the Opposition just said this afternoon. I would like to observe that whereas you rightly stated that the paper on which the list of voters in this House was printed, was torn into pieces, I do not know how this would have stopped this House from producing another list so that we effectively carry out the votes through voice voting.

Mr Speaker, you will trust that this Bill has turned to be a controversial Bill; something that we now call a law as the other side passed it yesterday. Drawing from precedents of this House, you remember when you presented a report here on constitutional amendments, Mr Speaker, the debate became acrimonious and there was pulling and pushing, and in the wisdom of the Speaker then, it was decided that this would be put to voice voting. Roll call was taken and voting went ahead. 

The procedural point I would like to raise is, what difficulty the Chair had in proceeding the way the Chair had prescribed the voting to take place before we adjourned. Was it because we could not reproduce the list? Was it because the situation could not allow for such voting? I really want to clear my mind on this, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you were in this House with me when I made that decision. That decision is made and if you want to challenge it, you know how to do it. 

MR KATOTO: Mr Speaker, in our Rules of Procedure, Rule 7, “General Authority of the Speaker” under sub-rule (5), “The Speaker may permit limited debate on any contribution.” I want clarification on whether the Speaker is given authority in this Parliament because issues were debated upon and decisions made, and Members are now standing up and taking us back. Is the Speaker empowered to accept anything from Members? I need clarification on that, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a decision was taken by this House and the proper way of challenging that decision is known. So, we should stick to that and challenge it if we so please. We have every right to do so. Can we proceed with the business of the day?

2.45
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. Before I raise the point of guidance that I wish to seek from you, this Parliament had a dark Thursday last week. There were those of us who travelled from upcountry, having gone to bury the late Gen. Mustafa. We arrived here at around 4.30 p.m. and we found ourselves too dirty to enter and sit in these Chambers. However, we were able to follow the proceedings of the House up to the time when Parliament was adjourned the way it was done.

I remember that very day - and the Hansard will prove me right - that you had already taken a decision that we go for roll call and vote on that Bill, which was being handled that day. The next day we resumed was yesterday. Under normal circumstances, I would have expected that we would have resumed from where we left in the sense that we were already at the stage of obtaining the list, which list was here and that we were going to go for roll call. Therefore, Rt Hon. Speaker -(Interruption) Yes, Nabachristo.

MS LUMUMBA: The Nabachristo of Parliament is hon. Victoria Rusoke, the Woman MP of Kabarole. Rt Hon. Speaker, when you look at the Rules of Procedure, Rule 78(2) reads, “The decision of the Speaker or chairperson, upon any point, shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House except upon a substantive motion made after notice.” Is the honourable member in order to continue taking us into all this when there is a procedure for making an appeal? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is exactly what I said at the beginning. I said the procedure for challenging the decision of the Speaker is in the Rules. Just follow them and challenge the decision of the Speaker. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable member had not made his point, and I think he should be given a chance. The problem is that the Government Chief Whip has interrupted without knowing where we began. We read that same Rule and the reason why we read it was that the Speaker could not change his own decision without a substantive motion. And the Speaker is a custodian of the Rules of Procedure. That is - (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Rt Hon. Speaker and my honourable colleagues, it is good that you are presiding over today’s sitting, and it is good that you have been presiding over the sittings since last week when we started having these problems. You have not been told; you have seen it; and many of us saw what happened. What happened on Thursday, the way Members of Parliament behaved to the extent of tearing Parliamentary documents in front of you and where yesterday, some Members of Parliament from the Opposition were fighting with the Sergeant-At-Arms over the Mace, and I can name them -(Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. We were here yesterday, and I was among the Members who stood up to protest. Why, because we were raising points of procedure and points of order. But I did not see any Members struggle and fight over here to grab the Mace, as she is putting. Maybe my understanding of fighting – and I believe if they did so, then the Rt Hon. Speaker who was presiding over the sitting could have seen the fights and would have called those Members to order. So, is the honourable minister in order to insinuate that Members were fighting in this House yesterday? Who boxed who? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suspended the honourable member for Soroti District, hon. Angelina Osege, for grabbing the Mace and wrestling with the attendants and the Sergeant-At-Arms under my own view. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I want to thank you very much, Mr Speaker for your ruling and I will, therefore, not substantiate further. However, the point of procedure that I was raising was that we saw the behaviour and tempers rising as the honourable member representing Gulu said yesterday. Today, we are seeing same Members rise up on guidance, procedure and on points of order. So, I don’t know whether it is procedurally right for us to pretend that we didn’t see what happened yesterday; that we didn’t see the kind of – I don’t know the right word to use, Mr Speaker. 

Therefore, the rules are clear and you have guided well, Mr Speaker. I just pray to you, Mr Speaker, that you guide and we proceed with the business of Parliament as is indicated on the Order Paper, but not forgetting that there are issues that we are supposed to handle using the rules of this Parliament that were set up by ourselves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let us proceed; let us move with the Order Paper.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is: When we read our Rules of Procedure very well, under Rule 62, which talks about close of debate and it reads thus: “No Member may speak on any question after it has been put by the Speaker, that is, after the voices of Ayes and Noes have been given on it.”

Honourable members, we don’t need to ashame ourselves. The question was clearly put; the people voted on it and the Speaker made a decision. So, why pretend as if you are reading the rules very well, when actually some of you are ignorant about them? Why are you holding these books? Mr Speaker, I would suggest that – the procedural matter, which I am – are we in order –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. This rule on close of debate – you see that problem comes about on how we name our children. You must be careful. This rule talks about closure of debate. But we are not talking about closure of debate; we are talking about rules of procedure; and we are saying that if a rule has been violated, how do we deal with it?

The point of order I want to raise is in respect of what hon. Katoto has said – and who was badly named – is he in order to talk about close of debate when we are talking about other Rules of Procedure of Parliament, which we want to apply when handling business in the House? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Once a decision has been taken and the Speaker has pronounced him/herself on that, that matter is finished.  When that is done, it is finished. If people are not satisfied or if Members disagree with the Speaker’s ruling on the subject, the procedure on how to handle that is also there.

So, please, if you are aggrieved by the decision of the Speaker, can we follow the rules to challenge that decision? Can we follow the rules or should we act outside the rules? Do you want to act outside the rules? If so, go ahead.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you are right, but that is if the Speaker has ruled and there are problems. The reason we are citing this rule is because we intend to move a motion. This is because there were rulings you made as a Speaker, which we believe were not right. For example, Mr Speaker, when you look at Rule 82, it talks about defamatory statement to be investigated by a Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. And having done that –(Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to continue struggling to explain to you after your ruling several times, and yet he is holding Rules of Procedure, which they have constantly flaunted; and do rules only work when they want to push for what they want and rules don’t work when the matter at hand is not in their favour? Is he in order, Mr Speaker, to demean the Office of the Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have said this so many times, that a decision was taken and there are procedures for challenging that decision. If you are rising to give notice of that motion, just give that notice of the motion that you intend to bring to challenge the decision of the Speaker instead of going round in circles. You can give notice, which will be accepted and you bring the motion to challenge the Speaker’s decision. That motion will be debated and a decision will be taken again. The Speaker’s ruling will be set aside and you can move on with the next step after that decision has been set aside. So, can we move on the basis of that, please?

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move under Rule 70 that the Member may not be heard because he is persistently irrelevant after your ruling. I beg to move.

MR NGOZHU: Which rule, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suggest that we go to the Order Paper, and if there are issues that are outstanding on the decision of the Speaker, we can deal with them when the proper motion is brought. Can we handle it that way? 

MR OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We would have wanted to move, following our procedure, a motion concerning the way you handled Parliament. We had prepared the motion, and were supposed to move the motion before you - against you. We find it difficult to proceed if we are moving a motion petitioning against your conduct, and we are moving it before you. The guidance I seek is, how do we proceed? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I have said, honourable member, is that you can give the necessary notice. I will accept the notice for you to bring the motion, and then you wait when the Speaker is to preside over the House and then you present that motion, when I am not in the chair; it is debated fairly in my absence and a decision is taken. Isn’t that the proper way to do it? But today if you ask for notice I would accept it and say, “Notice granted for you to proceed with the motion.”  

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance not relevant to the matter which is being pursued. I have got the Order Paper in my hands, and yesterday as I was driving from my constituency to catch up with the business of the day, I was advised as to what was on the Order Paper, and I thought that it was done in accordance with Rule 26, which clearly states that the Office of the Clerk circulates the Order Paper to the Members, and if there is to be any change, it would be made three hours before the sitting. But when I arrived here, I found that the Order Paper was different, and so, I entered with two sets of Order Papers. So, Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance as to which Order Paper we are following today. Is it the one I am holding now or is there a new one? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have just amended the Order Paper which you have, to allow hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi to move a motion on thanking the Kabaka for achieving 20 years. That motion will be moved immediately after the statement by the Shadow Minister of Finance. I have just altered the Order Paper to that effect upon the request from the Member who said he would be travelling tomorrow and he needed to move that motion today. So, I have allowed him to do so. 

MRS OGWAL: Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are welcome. 

MRS OGWAL: The microphone is off. (Laughter) Thank you, Mr Speaker for the clarification. As I told you, I was driving from upcountry, so I am wondering whether that clarification was given to the Members present, as to the immediate alteration of the Order Paper. I do not know whether that clarification was done. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was done in your absence.  

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are welcome again; thank you.

3.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I intend to move a motion without notice under Rule 50, because it is an emergency. The motion I want to move is about the suspension of our colleagues, the rules applied and the conduct of the Deputy Speaker and the MP for Omoro County.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay; the notice of that motion is acceptable, but as you know, the kinds of motion that are called substantive motions require proper placement on the Order Paper and articulation. They cannot come as a matter of this kind of debate. When you are debating the character of the Speaker, it is no simple matter that you can just come and play about with it. That one will require that you come and properly serve the motion, it is properly put on the Order Paper and then Members come and submit; and that time, I will not be presiding. I am sure. 

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, what I am seeking for is guidance, because I think many of us are Christians. If we are not Christians, at least we believe in God. I believe we must be honest to each other and say that what happened here last Thursday and yesterday was very unfortunate. 

Also, Mr Speaker, you must admit that as you are proceeding today, we do not have much time. We have an institutional framework for addressing challenges of this nature. The institutional framework for handling these issues in our parliamentary system is the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline . Where Members feel that some things have not been done well we say, “Okay, let the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline look at it and produce reports.” I am worried about a situation where we bury our heads in the sand and pretend that everything is alright. 

Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance from you. Is it possible for us to refer the events that happened last Thursday and yesterday to the rules committee, so that they come and give us the way forward? I think that if the truth is not established, the same thing will occur again and again, and maybe in the course of time, we may fail to do the work for which we were elected to come here and serve this country. Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the necessary consultation and formulation are being done for the proper referral to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline of this House. That will be handled in due course. So, can we now move to -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, since you have rejected my motion and yet you had promised that you would accept it, it looks now in this move -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have asked for notice of that motion to be moved, and I have granted you leave to present that motion. But it will have to come at an appropriate time when it can be debated. That is what I have said.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, can I present it? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not now. It cannot be now.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, why I am -(Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you Mr Speaker. As we came in here, you guided and ruled on two issues being raised by Members. You clearly stated that you cannot be the chair who is being petitioned and then respond to or to allow the motion to be moved. Moreover, people are very aware of the processes to take, and surely you granted them. Is it procedurally right for the honourable members to cling on an issue which you have allowed, and clearly stated that if allowed, the person who should be in the chair should not be the person who is under contention? I seek your procedural guidance on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the fundamental rules of natural justice states – and it is very elementary - that you cannot be a judge in your own cause. By bringing my conduct in debate and I am presiding, I would be a judge in my own cause, because by accusing me you make me party to the proceedings.  I cannot preside over basic, simple and ordinary principles. I cannot be a judge in my own cause. Is that too difficult to comprehend?
                  
LAYING OF PAPERS

3.10
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table financial statements, together with the report and opinion of the Auditor General, of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation for the year ended 30th June, 2012. 

THE DEPUTY: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statements, and the report and opinion of the Auditor General, of the Amber House Limited for the financial year ended 31st December 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statements, together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor General, of Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) for the period ended 30September 2012.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.  

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report of the Auditor General on the financial statements of Pride Microfinance Limited for the year ended 31 December 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable Members, items 3(1) to (4) stand committed to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for expeditious handling and reporting.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is the third session of Parliament. There are constitutional requirements which require the Auditor General to have audited the organisations of Government which get funds from the consolidated fund, but in the third session we have not received any report from the committees where these reports are being sent. There is a possibility at this rate that we are likely to conclude the entire term of Parliament without us discussing the reports from the committees about these audited accounts. I wanted to find out, Mr Speaker, are committees finding problems?

In your remarks you said for expeditious handling. That has been said in the first session, in the second session and now in the third session. How soon will this expedited handling be? Otherwise, how are we going to be judged as a Parliament? When the Auditor General reports, he does his work and we are holding the work of the Auditor General behind. Can we seek clarification from the responsible committees? Are we on schedule, and if not, what should we do? Should Parliament sit as a committee of the whole House to consider these reports? Otherwise, the work of the Auditor General is being rendered useless, and the office of the Auditor General is complaining. I wanted to seek your indulgence to seek explanation from the chairpersons of committees. What exactly is the problem?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, thank you for raising this. Let me allow the chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts to lay documents before the House, conclude that then we will have a response from the respective chairs so that it is synchronised properly.

3.16
THE CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Auditor General on the financial statements of Uganda National Council for Science and Technology for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Auditor General on the financial statements of Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor General on the financial statements of Uganda National Examinations Board for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let records capture that

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report on Uganda High Commission, Nairobi, financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012, together with the report and opinion thereon the Auditor General

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Auditor General on the financial statements of Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let records capture that.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a report on the Uganda embassy, Beijing financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor General on the Treasury operations financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let records capture that.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor General on the financial statements of Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the report on Uganda High Commission, Kigali the financial statements for the year ended 30 June, 2012 together with the opinion and report of the Auditor-General. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Judiciary Department for the year ended 30 June 2012. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Those items of papers 3 (v to xiv) stand committed to the Committee on Public Accounts. Mr Chairman, you may want to sit nearby and make some response after we lay this particular document. 

THE REPORT OF THE DELEGATION FROM THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TO THE ACP-EU JOINT PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY HELD IN BRUSSELS IN JULY 2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bwambale-Bihande?

3.19
MR YOKASI BWAMBALE-BIHANDE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Mr Speaker, African languages are very rich. My name is Bihande, and when you replace “a” with “e”, it means something quite different. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My apologies. (Laughter)

MR BWAMBALE-BIHANDE: And I do not want to mention it here. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a report of the Parliamentary Delegation to the 25th ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and the 32nd African-Caribbean and Pacific Group of States ACP Parliamentary Assembly held in Brussels, Belgium between 12 and 19 June, 2013. But before I lay, I wanted to bring to the attention of Government two issues in this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is now just for laying. We will schedule a time when the report will be presented to the House for proper briefing.

MR BWAMBALE-BIHANDE: I beg to lay. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; that particular document is for the House to debate. At an appropriate time, the members of the delegation will be asked to speak and report on this so that the whole Parliament and country is briefed on what is going on in ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, and also, what steps we need to take to move forward. 

There was an outstanding matter; the Chairperson of Public Accounts Committee.      
 
3.22
THE CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, I want to submit a report on the status of the performance of the Public Accounts Committee. By the time we started the Ninth Parliament, we started with the Auditor-General’s report for the financial year 2009/2010, which report we have completed and sectoral reports have been prepared, and out of all this, we have been paying more attention and focus on value-for-money audits, and forensic audits that have been carried out in a number of Government ministries and departments, and some of these reports have already been handed over to Parliament.  It is now the duty of Parliament to find an appropriate time to put it on the Order Paper for us to present and debate. So, that is already out of our hands.

Number two, I also wish to submit that because of the very heavy workload that we have in our hands, we have not carried scrutiny of the Auditor-General’s report on 2010/2011. We have not touched it because there are a number of forensic audit reports that have come up and which are time bound and more focused on the issues that have been raised and my committee has been involved in that regard.

Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that the original arrangement was that standing committees only meet once a week. I have had to ask for permission from the Speaker because of the volume of work, that the Public Accounts Committee sits more or less every day, even during recess. The honourable members who serve on that committee will agree with me that we have been meeting Monday to Monday, except Saturdays and Sundays, and all these require time. For example, when we received a report on the forensic audit carried out on the Office of the Prime Minister, it appeared to be very simple work.  

I remember it is on record that Parliament gave the committee only two weeks within which to digest the whole report but to our surprise, it took us four complete months with its associated problems that we had – “stop here, the matter is in court, get this, don’t get this” to the extent that we interfaced with over 100 witnesses which could not be done within the two weeks that Parliament had asked us to do. These reports are ready in the Office of the Speaker. So, our work is to produce the reports and hand them over to Parliament. The choice is not ours as to when it should be debated. As and when appropriate time is found on the Order Paper, we will come and present it.

You will also agree with me that the Auditor-General’s report of 2011/2012 has just been given and I remember that the Auditor-General made a special appeal to the Rt Hon. Speaker in black and white to say, “Give us extra time and do not limit us only up to March of every year when we come with our report.” This is all because the Office of the Auditor-General has been involved in 16 forensic audits in Government ministries and departments and this is not something that can be done overnight. That is a starter as far as PAC is concerned and as and when the time is given for us, we are ready to present.

Lastly, we are now not digesting these reports as it is used ministry by ministry. We are now going sector by sector such that if you say health sector, you are dealing with the Ministry of Health, the national referral hospital, the cancer institute, blood transfusion and the regional referral hospitals. All these are done together and a report is brought in one volume and if you are dealing with Justice, Law and Order Sector, you bring all the institutions like Police, Prisons and all those that carry out similar activities in one volume. So it is with agriculture and education and the work is a little heavy. 

Mr Speaker, we need to appreciate – and my colleagues, the members of this committee, are here and they have asked many times as how we can be meeting every day. Can we give time for ourselves but we cannot save it because really, we have a duty and I would just want to make sure that we digest this report and bring them for plenary to debate. The rest of colleagues – local government is here, state enterprises is here and they will be able to talk for themselves. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Local government – please let us finish with this.  

3.27
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiti): Mr Speaker, the law is clear that when we present these reports, within six months, we should have come up with reports so that they are debated. As you are aware, in the Local Government Accounts Committee, we have well over 130 districts and each district is a vote. We have well over 50 towns and municipalities. We have work which we found previously that had not been handled but as far as my committee is concerned, we have handled over 70 districts for 2008/09 and the reports are ready; 2009/2010, the reports are ready. We have even touched the value-for-money for NAADS and roads. All these reports were presented to the Speaker’s and Clerk’s office and they appear on the Order Paper.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have enough information to take a decision on this matter. The Business Committee should sit urgently and resolve all these issues so that we can schedule a period when these reports can be handled comprehensively and finalised so that we can at least, for this period, start on a clean slate.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have students and teachers of St Francis Primary School Rwashamaire from Kajara County Ntungamo District,  represented by hon. Stephen Tashobya and hon. Naome Kabasharira. Please rise. You are very welcome. Are those students? (Laughter)

We also have students and teachers of Kayunga Girls’ Primary School from Kayunga District represented by hon. Amos Lugoloobi and hon. Madada Kyebakoze Sulaiman and hon. Patrick Nsanja and hon. Aidah Erios Nantaba. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, this came late. I have a sad notice to make. Hon. David Bahati regrets to announce the death of his father-in-law, the late Everest Ruzindana, former NRM chairperson of Katabi Sub-County and resident of Kisubi in Busiro County South. The late Ruzindana passed away yesterday morning Tuesday, 6 August 2013, in Mulago Hospital after a long illness and hospitalisation. Burial details will be announced later. That is the information.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you are aware we have sad news. The former Vice-President lost a husband.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I announced that already.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think you have seen the reason why we are raising these procedural issues. These accountability committees are facing a big problem. Yesterday, 6 August 2013, I got a report written to the President of Uganda on 30 July 2013 and it says: “Investigation in National Water and Sewerage Corporation…” It is a 13-page document. If you read this document, Mr Speaker, you would know that the National Water and Sewerage Corporation is a rotten entity and if the committee decides to look at this alone, it will take a long time. They have talked about recruitment; they have talked about tribalism; they have talked about Kamuntu; they have talked about Muheirwe; Mwesigwa, Kajura, Nduhura, Tumwebaze; they have talked about how money is being stolen, threats and intimidation; how documents are being burnt and I am going to lay this on Table and I think the House should take interest in the National Water and Sewerage Corporation as quickly as possible. I will give you a copy of the report, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay.

Mr Speaker, the reason our colleagues do not want the reports of the accountability committees to be brought is because they are biting committee reports – (Interruption)

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, on the composition of the accountability committees, majority of the members are of the NRM and it is the Business Committee of Parliament, which is chaired by the Speaker, where both sides of the House are represented, that decides the business and the priorities for a particular session. Is the hon. Member in order to insinuate that certain Members have been infiltrating the Business Committee to which he is a Member as the Leader of the Opposition, and infiltrating the Office of the Speaker and the Office of the Clerk and that is why this business has not been put on the Order Paper. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have just clarified here and the Member for Rukiga County who chairs the Local Government Accounts Committee has also articulated this issue that these matters have been appearing on the Order Paper but for some reasons, priorities show up and they are shelved. Even on today’s Order Paper, you have a series of reports that appear as business to follow. So, it is not a deliberate act of any particular person except that as I said, the Business Committee should give priority and share the opinion on when these reports can be handled. No imputation could be made on anybody in particular as being responsible for these delays and so forth. Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please take note of this information and please close.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I thank you for that. Having said that, I think you are right. As we give priority to the budget process, we should give priority to disposing of this because this is what we appropriated, how it was spent and how people should account. I think it would be in the interest of all of us to do it because if what we have read in the papers is right, then even hon. Nankabirwa would not accept these reports to come here quickly. (Laughter)

Having said that – (Interjections) - yes, the Public Order Management Bill would have come later. If we were serious, we would have dealt with the reports to deal with the problems in the country. Why are people complaining? Maybe that is the reason and if we had dealt with it, we would have known. But having said that, at an appropriate time -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, please. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, yes, we have said we shall grant time and we shall deal with that but as soon as my shadow minister for finance finishes the presentation, we will lay the alternative policy statements we have made so that you can see how serious this team is. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is okay. Honourable member, I have seen your note. Please, ACP will find time and debate it. Let us go to the Order Paper, please. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF: 

    (I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2012/2013
    (II)  (II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2013/2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this motion for the House to resolve itself into a Committee of Supply was moved by the hon. Minister of Finance on 6th June this year. So, that motion remains before the House and to kick off this debate, I will now ask for the response from the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the budget for the financial 2013/2014 and you have an hour to do this. 

3.37
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, in accordance with Rule 140(5) of our Rules of Procedure, allow me present the Opposition’s response to the financial year 2013/2014 national budget. This response seeks to provide practical solutions to the troubles Ugandans face.

The national budget is the official instrument through which we are able to channel public funds in a manner that re-engineers our economy to spur growth, transform the economic landscape of our country, and most importantly, stimulate the creation of jobs for young Ugandans who have been systematically pushed into joblessness and hopelessness as a result of two decades of jobless growth.

Mr Speaker, we have studied the budget proposals presented by the Government for the FY 2013/2014. These proposals are clearly consistent with the fundamental problem that the National Resistance Movement Organisation suffers; failure to direct public investments in a manner that balances long-term structural transformation with immediate term needs to grow the economy and create jobs. The NRM-O suffers a perpetual problem of lack of consistency and infects this ailment on our Government. We believe that a disciplined Government should have a consistent theme for five years it is in power and so it is held accountable for its development objective. 

The NRM-O Government changes its budget themes every year and ends not only confusing itself but also the Ugandan taxpayers and citizens. The theme of this year’s budget is “The Journey Continues: Towards Socio-Economic Transformation for Uganda.” The theme for 2012/2013 budget was “Priorities for renewed economic growth and development.” The theme for the 2011/2012 was “Promoting economic growth, jobs creation and improving service delivery.” There is an appendix for details.

All the issues raised by these themes remain “moving targets” and have not been accomplished. The themes keep changing and the priorities shifting year after year implying a clear lack of leadership on the transformative path that we seek to pursue through public spending. And to us this is not surprising because it is the hallmark of NRM failed policies.

Mr Speaker, consistent with the challenges that we face today – many years of jobless growth, a young and largely unemployed youthful population, a corrupted political and public service, a population that is slowly but consistently disengaging from productive economic activities, a disempowered citizenry, and an incomplete democratic transition process, the theme for the budget over the next financial year should be: “Restoring Good Governance for Sustainable Economic Growth in Uganda”. 

Mr Speaker, members of Parliament, fellow countrymen and women, we disagree with the minister’s assertion that there are no quick answers to the challenges that face us today. All the challenges that the minister outlined in her speech are not new. We have had no credible road infrastructure for the last 50 years. For the last 27 years, we have known that we have a problem of power. In the last 27 years, rather than build the rail network and expand our aviation capabilities, the NRM-O Government has dismantled all these assets that are the backbone of any economy. 
The minister is only right to the extent that there is no country that can transform when you have the same people pursuing the same failed policies over and over again but they expect a different result. We wish to state that Uganda’s problem is a leadership and governance problem. This is what the NRMO Government has failed to offer to Uganda and there is clearly no indication in the minister’s budget proposals to show that they have a clue on how to fix our nation’s problems. We offer these proposals to help the Government move out of a 27-year logjam created by the NRMO.

The challenges to the budget process are: ineffective prioritisation, excessive supplementary budgets and misappropriation of public resources with impunity. These have rendered the budgeting process an academic exercise. As result, an important area like agriculture is neglected. This is coupled by endemic problems of the widening trade deficit, failure to meet revenue targets and disregarding vital government programmes like the population census.

Many Ugandans live in fear because of lack of clarity in the political future of the country besides government’s failure to tame nature, hence subjecting close to half of the population to starvation due to the current famine. What has happened to the food security initiatives that President Museveni has been harping about? The NRMO has presided over the widest and longest systematic destruction of our environment than any other government in our post independent history. Parliament has acquiesced in this destruction, failing to allocate adequate funding to the agencies that are charged with looking after our environment and natural resources.

The old problems of low salaries and wages, non-payment of salaries and non-payment of pension have worsened. Many civil servants miss their salaries for months while others die chasing their pension and President Museveni has failed to honour his promises of increasing civil servants’ salaries. Is this not a shame to this Government?

The Performance of the Economy and Future Outlook

Economic Growth

Mr Speaker, the growth rate of the economy improved marginally but remained below the medium term target of seven percent. It is important to note that the agriculture sector, which is the backbone of the economy, is still lagging behind other sectors. Economic transformation connotes systematic and measurable improvements in the macro-economic performance as well as the micro and household indicators. Countries that witness a process of economic transformation must see the majority of their populations transiting out of abject poverty and deprivation. Economic transformation also leads to national economies that are based on industrial skills and intellectual labour than archaic reliance on human muscle. 

Mr Speaker, the minister told us in her budget speech that 66 percent of our people are locked up in low productive subsistence agriculture. In other words, what the NRMO leadership calls economic transformation only shows that the bulk of our population is contributing less and less to the total wealth of this country.

The tragedy of this country is that the NRMO Government continues to pursue policies that directly undermine the need for achieving structural changes that are required in order to achieve a full structural transformation of our economy and society. Mr Speaker, structural transformation of an economy and society takes place when an increasing proportion of economic output and employment are generated by sectors other than agriculture. In effect, the economy becomes less agriculturally oriented in a relative sense; relative because although the agricultural domination of the economy is diminishing, the agricultural sector continues to grow in absolute terms and generate important growth linkages to the rest of the economy.

Structurally, the economy experiences a net resource transfer from agriculture to other sectors of the economy over the long term. In our case where our economy is dominated by agriculture, transformation is achieved when the economy is moving away from subsistence-oriented household-level production towards an integrated economy based on greater specialisation, exchange rates, and the capturing of economies of scale – 

Mr Speaker, to eliminate this deception we are presenting before this House a package of alternative policy options and budget priorities that Government should pursue to strengthen governance, trigger and accelerate the process of socio-economic and structural transformation of our country. 

However, when our people are wallowing in poverty, many households across the country are failing to afford a meal a day; we cannot provide lunch for our children when they go to school; we cannot pay a living wage to our teachers, health workers or the men and women in our security forces; this is no time to congratulate ourselves on these growth figures. 

As leaders in this country, this is the time to be asking ourselves the hard questions: why is this growth not translating into jobs and opportunities for our people? It is when we ask these questions that we are able to move out of our comfort zones and confront the reality that our people are faced with. It is only then that we can use the Budget as an instrument to correct some of the failures that we encounter in our pursuit of economic transformation.

Our fundamental concern therefore is not that the economy is growing. Our concern is that we have had jobless growth for years and this growth has not triggered the transformation that is required to fundamentally change the economic landscape of our country. This is so because the Government, under the NRMO, has pursued policies that are not people-centred or are only designed to perpetuate political patronage and dependence. What we need to do with this year’s Budget and the subsequent ones is to redirect our public expenditure in a manner that we do not only grow the economy but we also create opportunities and jobs for millions of Ugandans that have been left at the periphery of the NRMO “miracle” .

Mr Speaker, a strong and stable macro-economic policy environment must remain one of the pillars of our economic foundations as a country. However, we believe that the target of seven percent economic growth per annum is less than ambitious for a country that is at the bottom of many development indices. All possible projections suggest that for Uganda and many other countries, we need to grow at least 12 percent to be able to take a shot at moving into the middle income category of nations. 

We have no doubt that the potential for higher growth is possible, if only we can reduce on public administration expenditure, create higher levels of budget discipline and channel our resources towards the productive sectors of the economy. It is therefore our proposal that this House redirects the Budget resources available for this financial year, aiming to achieve at least 10 percent GDP growth per annum. 

External Sectors

Mr Speaker, Uganda’s exports declined from 13.9 percent of GDP in 2011/2012 to 13.4 percent of GDP in 2012/2013. As we predicted last year, Uganda’s poor performance of exports is expected to continue in the financial year 2013/2014. 

It is surprising that the Budget Speech did not come out strongly to address the underlying constraints that would propel the external factors to perform much better. The Opposition proposes that more funds be channelled to value addition through processing of exports.

Inflation and Interest rates

Mr Speaker, although headline inflation has dropped to 3.4 percent, Uganda’s inflation is mainly driven by food prices. Government should therefore put more effort in addressing the supply constraints in the agriculture sector. We call upon Government to come with implementable plans to be discussed by this Parliament to curb the current drought that may push inflation back to double digits and wipe out the gains so far made.

High interest rates have limited the level of credit available to the private sector for the enhancement of production to create employment and increase domestic revenue. The challenge of high interest rates stem from bad governance, corruption and high domestic debt by Government. The decline in inflation and reduction in the Central Bank Rate (CBR) to 11 percent has not resulted in the lowering of the average lending rate on shilling denominated loans (see figure 2). 

Financial Sector Developments

Mr Speaker, only 21.4 percent of all private sector credit is channelled to agriculture and manufacturing and that is the panacea of the current unemployment. More than a third of all private sector credit is used to finance real estate, construction and household loans. We urge Government to adopt sound policy reforms like establishing a land and agriculture bank to redirect investment, with measurable targets and tangible outputs to rural areas. 

We know that the Central Bank of any country is the cornerstone of macro-economic policy management. The Central Bank is able to achieve the objectives of macro-economic policy only when it is independent of interference and influence peddling, especially from pedestrian politicians. Unfortunately, the independence and autonomy of the Central Bank has been eroded by the predatory tendencies of the NRMO. 

At the moment, the Central Bank is in a state of bankruptcy and in urgent need of capitalisation. For instance, it is shocking to note that in spite of the rosy picture as at 30th June 2012, Bank of Uganda’s capital, excluding translation reserves, was a deficit of UShs 226 billion from UShs 116 billion in 2011. The lender of the last resort has been eroded over time mainly due to political interference and as of now, the Bank is operating losses and accordingly, the capital is impaired and requires immediate redemption. As of now, the Bank is operating in losses of UShs 600 billion. We propose immediate amendment to the Constitution and Bank of Uganda Act to remove control of the bank from the Presidency. 

The Opposition supports the proposed innovations including agent banking, Islamic banking, micro insurance and mobile money regulations. Some of these proposals, however, have been on the shelves for more than 10 years. Is President Museveni again waiting for 2016 in order to table these reforms? 

Fiscal Developments

Mr Speaker, as we noted last year, fiscal performance in 2012/2013 was below expectation on the revenue and expenditure sides. Government has acknowledged that the revenue to GDP ratio of 13 percent is below expectation. We challenge the Minister of Finance to report revenue performance in real terms other than in nominal terms. 

Resource Framework for financial year 2013/2014

Mr Speaker, the total amount of resources available in the financial year 2013/2014 is re-projected at UShs 13,169 billion and just like last year, this will not be attained. Government can only achieve the revenue targets if they adopt the following well thought out reforms:
    • Immediate removal of tax exemption and incentives;
    • Creating high level of efficiency and effectiveness;
    • Strengthening regulatory institutions to mobilise Non-tax Revenue (NTR)
    • Stamping out corruption; 
    • Addressing bottlenecks in loan disbursement and utilisation- President Museveni is waiting for 2016 in order to table this reform.

Fiscal Developments

Mr Speaker, as we noted last year, fiscal performance in 2012/2013 was below expectation on the revenue and expenditure sides. Government has acknowledged that the revenue to GDP ratio of 13 percent is below expectations. We challenge the Minister of Finance to report revenue performance in real terms, other than in nominal terms. 

Resource Framework for FY 2013/2014

Mr Speaker, the total amount of resources available in the financial year 2013/2014 is re-projected at Shs13,169 billion and just like last year, this will not be attained. Government can only achieve the revenue targets if they adopt the following well thought out reforms:
    • Immediate removal of tax exemption and incentives;
    • Creating high level of efficiency and effectiveness;
    • Strengthening regulatory institutions to mobilize Non-tax revenue (NTR);
    • Stamping out corruption; 
    • Addressing the bottlenecks in loan disbursement and utilisation;
    • Removal of the various revenue leakages; 
    • Introducing taxes on windfall gain profits;
    • Increasing tax audits especially of large enterprises; 
    • Abandoning supplementary budgets that draw resource from production to consumption; 
    • Taking policy initiatives to lower interest rates; 
    • Redirecting resource from defence to agriculture to boast production; and
    • Addressing the political question to enhance donor funding.

External funding Sources

Mr Speaker, the 2007 Debt Strategy was intended to reduce Uganda’s indebtedness, but Government continues to mortgage the future generation. We benefited from huge debt write-offs that saw our debt level fall to $ 1.1billion, but this figure has now gone back to unmanageable levels. Uganda’s total public debt in 2012/2013 stood at Shs14.578 trillion up from Shs13.7 trillion in the previous financial year.

Mr Speaker, a number of loans that were contracted as early as 2011/2012 have not realised full disbursement, while others have even reached their loan closure date without any disbursement. Thirteen new loans equivalent to Shs 1.3 trillion had their loan agreements signed without parliamentary approval in total disregard to Article 159 of the Constitution. 

Development assistance managed outside the government budget is a problem as it causes fragmentation of resources and duplication of activities thus distorting the budgeting process. A total of $ 413.71 million worth of off budget funding has been disbursed to various sectors in the financial year 2012/2013. This is more than the total number of loan disbursements amounting to $ 407.48 million as at 31 May 2013.

The interest cost on public debt is estimated to have increased by 47.6 percent in the financial year 2012/2013 to Shs 890.5 billion compared to Shs603.3 billion incurred in the previous year. Interest payment on domestic debt is projected to have the largest growth of 52.8 percent. The cost from external debt service for the financial 2012/2013 is estimated at $ 67.4 million, as at 30 April 2013.

I am calling upon the Committee on National Economy and the Ninth Parliament to only approve loans after establishing that the necessary capacity, institutions and tools are in place for utilising the loans. The government is currently paying billions in commitment fees on undisbursed loans. This is unacceptable!

Key Sector Priorities for FY 2013/2014:

Agriculture Sector:

Mr Speaker, Uganda’s population growth rate of 3.2 percent per annum; growth in food production has lagged behind population growth - pointing to the increasing risk of food insecurity. The sector will be allocated Shs 394.4 billion in 2013/2014 from Shs 378.9 billion in 2012/2013.  Out of the total budget of more than 13 trillion, a total neglect of more than 66 percent of Ugandans who depend on it. The Opposition demands that the 2013/2014 Budget prioritises agriculture sector so as to deal with the biting poverty and the looming drought and famine.

Transport Sector

Mr Speaker, Government has prioritized spending on infrastructure from 15.1 percent in 2012/2013 to 18.9 percent in 2013/2014. However, most roads in the country are still in a very poor state and road users are dissatisfied with the condition of the road network.

Mr Speaker, it has been established that 99 percent of projects in Uganda overshoot their planned time. As acknowledged by the Minister of Finance, the situation is even worsening. The major causes of delays and cost overrun are: changes in scope, delayed payment to contractors, poor monitoring and control, inflation and high interest rates.

The Tororo-Soroti project that started in November 21, 2010, and should have been completed in May 21, 2012 will only be ready by April 2014. The project is being implemented by Dott Services who have failed to complete many contracts and recently secured the Mbarara bypass even before Parliament had approved the loan. 

Mr Speaker, if the President Museveni completed the listed roads in the next five years, Uganda would be ranked as the most successful country in infrastructural development in the world (See facts in Appendix 2). The Oppositions expresses its disappointments to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for promising to accelerate the revitalisation. One wonders how one can fast truck the rehabilitation of a railway line, neglected for many years with only Shs 24million! It’s foolhardy for President Museveni to imagine that they can hoodwink Ugandans and get away with it. 

The Opposition proposes that the works and transport sector be reorganised, down-sized, with a view to establish very strict procurement with commitment to stamp out corruption. 

Energy, Minerals, Oil & Gas Sector

Mr Speaker, last year I cautioned President Museveni not to concentrate on only prioritizing increased power generation capacity, expanding the transmission and distribution network but to also find ways of reducing the electricity tariffs. This has not happened; instead we have seen an increase in power tariffs. As if that is not enough, the famous Umeme comes out with super abnormal profits of Shs 57 billion.
The introduction of prepaid meters may not help if Government doesn’t set a threshold, that is, Government fixing the margin based on what Umeme pays UEDCL above which Umeme cannot charge and should be based on what they buy the power from the distributor. Going forward therefore there is need to rethink the energy policy and regulation so as to allow new initiative and innovations.

The policy should enable each household, urban or rural, to have mandatory solar panels. It should embrace the use of organic energy. The policy should be cultured in our communities and should start right from the top leadership and even local governments. We need to see street lights being lit by solar energy. Non-compliance with this should be a source of revenue. 

Mr Speaker, the Opposition applauds this Parliament for passing the oil and gas sector legislation. However, transparency in the oil sector is still lacking. It is impossible for Members of Parliament to access and use agreements on oil production freely. Once again we urge the Executive to adopt an extractive industry transparency initiative policy. 

The endowment in the mineral sector is more than oil. We demand an amendment of the Mineral Act and the Water Act and we need to regulate the exploitation of our natural resources in order to reflect the investment in the sector and generate appropriate revenue. 

Trade, Tourism and Industry 

This tourism sector, according to Vision 2040 and the National Development Plan, is vital for moving this country from a peasant-based economy to a middle income and even first world country. However, the funding to the tourism sector remains extremely low. This casts doubt on the commitment to move the country forward. 

The Opposition maintains last year’s recommendations that the budget allocated to the tourism sector be increased to at least two percent of the GDP in the financial year 2013/2014. If we do not invest in this sector, the tourists will continue to blacklist Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, the allocation to the trade sector is projected to drop by 26 percent from Shs 36.25 billion in 2012/2013. This clearly depicts the neglect by President Museveni of the ailing sector at the time when Government is introducing Pre-Inspection Verification of Conformity to Standard Programmes (PIVOC). The Opposition recommends that Government strengthens National Bureau of Standards or implements World Trade Organisation anti-dumping rules. Non-compliance to the above should be another source of revenue. 

Regulations in Uganda

Mr Speaker, the non-adherence to regulation in Uganda stems from the political crisis the country is facing. If Government makes effort to address the current regulatory challenges, it would be a source of NTR and also widen the tax/GDP ratio from the current 13 percent to even 20 percent. But for that to happen, we need an urgent political and leadership paradigm shift and end to the fear of losing votes in case you start cracking the whip to end non-implementation of regulations. The current non-compliance and corruption in NEMA, UCC, UNBS and ERA is costing this country so dearly. 

Are all institutions, which are supposed to regulate the following: salons, butchers, small scale restaurants, seeds and food in the market septic tanks and sewerage, food stores, movement of animals, use of Government vehicles, compliance to budget management, land utilisation, the mushrooming private health centres, the construction sector and water sources, active? 

The failure to regulate all the above is a function of poor governance and the indiscipline that emanates from the presidency to every citizen in this country. How do you expect a peasant in a village to grow food and keep it in the granary for the next season if the President misuses the resources appropriated to him and seeks for supplementary three times before the end of the financial year?

This reminds me of “Bigirimana”, a young boy who lived in the slums of Kampala and struggled to attain education. He sat on a boda boda every day to reach school, sometimes drenched in rain, only to see his friends being dropped in Government vehicles. When Bigirimana became a civil servant, he could not stop the appetite but followed suit using Government facilities for personal errands and being corrupt. 

The Opposition is calling upon President Museveni to bury his pride and strictly strengthen regulatory regime and compliance like what other leaders around the world did to propel their countries to middle income and first class status in less than 30 years. The so-called big man syndrome and the privileged elite group must stop and institutions must be allowed to work independently. 

Revamping the Economy of Local Governments

Mr Speaker, the Government under NRMO has pursued economic and development policies based on the “big brother” mentality claiming that all development comes from Kampala. It is because of this mentality that Government allocates the bulk of public funds to central government ministries, departments and agencies. The share of public funds going to local governments has been declining or has been subjected to all kinds of conditionalities by the “big brother”. In fact, the NRMO Government imposes more patronising conditionalities on our local governments than our development partners impose on us. As a result local government and local leaders have been made powerless and reduced to beggars and have therefore not been spared the now common pilgrimage and begging mission to State House or Rwakitura. 

Mr Speaker, we propose a shift in quality on how we fund local governments. Our policy options are designed to build our local governments especially district, sub-county and urban councils into powerful pillars of economic organisation and production. 

Local governments must be enabled to develop the local socio-economic infrastructure that can re-engineer the local economy, increase output and create jobs. We would like to see Government take the following policy actions:

    i) With the exception of specific sectors such as defence and national infrastructure projects, at least 40 percent of the budget resources should be allocated to local governments in discretionary funds charged directly from the Consolidated Fund. There is no justification whatsoever why a ministry that should be responsible for quality, planning, coordination and monitoring should also control all funds allocated for service delivery. The Minister of Finance should be tasked with working out a formula on how the local governments will share these funds, taking into account agreed criteria.

    ii) Criteria for allocating these discretionary funds to local governments should include a requirement for setting production and output targets by the recipient local government, consistent with priority set out in the National Development Plan and comparative advantage of each local government. 

    iii) Uganda Revenue Authority should provide integrated data on revenue collection from all local governments so that we can see how best to support those local governments that do not contribute substantially to the total revenue of Government.

    iv) We implore this House to take up the issue of reforming the Local Government Act to strengthen accountability relationships and governance at the local level, including the possibility of decentralising chief administrative officers who have unleashed financial tyranny on elected political leaders. 

    v) This House must stop the NRM Government “Ping-Pong” about the LCI elections. It is unfortunate that this House has continued to allocate funds to illegal LCI structures. Ugandan taxpayers demand of us maximum discipline and responsibility in the way we do our business as Parliament. That is why we should demand from Government that they either provide funding for LCI elections or simply defund any programmes that spend public funds through these structures. We must tamper the political expediency and adhocracy of NRMO that seems to infect every aspect of our Government. 

Education Sector

Mr Speaker, the budget proposals for 2013/2014 did not address the critical challenges, like low teachers’ pay and high dropout rates. The problems of standards and quality of education in UPE and USE are worsening to the extent that higher institutions of learning have also been afflicted. The UPE dropout rate was reported at 71 percent yet teacher absenteeism in Uganda is among the highest in the whole word. What a legacy under President Museveni? 

However, we would like to state that the pace of development and transformation of any nation can only be commensurate to the quality of its human resource capital. Consequently, investments in creating the most competitive human resource capital can never be negotiated for any other priorities. 
We need Ugandan talents and companies designing and building roads and bridges, and airports and hydro-power stations.

Our education system has been undermined by lack of effective leadership to manage education policy reforms and regular policy reversals that has undermined credibility in the policy process. It is outrageous that neither the parents nor the Government has the commitment to provide lunch for our children when we send them to school. The NRMO leadership pretends to love our children more than their parents and the President goes around the country declaring policy commitments that Government does not honour.

Mr Speaker, a Government that does not provide for its children has no right to rule or be considered legitimate. Our continued failure to feed our children when we send them to school is a shame not only to the parents of this country but also to the government. And because as Parliament we have failed to hold those responsible to address the problem, it is also a shame to us.

We, therefore, propose the following policy actions to dramatically transform and systematically build a quality human resource base that will keep Uganda competitive in a fast regionalizing and globalizing world:-
    (i) High Level Panel on Education Reform: We propose the establishment of a high level panel of experts to review our education reform programmes and propose time bound measures and the level of resource commitments to transform our education system to meet the development challenges of the 21st century. This panel should report its findings and recommendations to Parliament.

    (ii) Feeding our children while at school is not only a constitutional but also a moral responsibility. Government should immediately issue policy guidelines to enable parents to provide funds for lunch unless Government is able to allocate funds to address this problem.

    (iii) Transform all funding for public universities funding into student grants in order to increase accountability between students and the university; all Government funding for universities should be provided as student grants. This implies that students should apply directly to the agency administering the grants. Funds would be disbursed to any university based on the students who have secured grants and admitted to a particular university.

    (iv) Introduce a challenge fund for all universities – in order to increase competition among public and private universities, we propose that funds be set aside for a competitive challenge fund that can be given to universities that demonstrate innovation in the delivery of university education. The challenge fund would be competed for by all universities including private universities.

    (v) In addition,  to the redeem the education sector we propose that:
    • The minimum required amount per pupil/student per term from Government should be increased to Shs 100,000.
    • Increase primary school teacher’s pay to a minimum level of Shs 500,000 revised annually to keep pace with the cost of living or indexed for inflation.

Mr Speaker, we thank the Minister of Finance for accepting to introduce the higher education loans scheme. First and foremost, we can learn from the youth venture fund which was introduced before designing the model for delivery of the funds. 

The financial year almost came to an end before the funds were spent and it took some members of this House threatening to strip in public for the Government to implement the scheme. It is, therefore, important that the responsible minister commit to introduce the mechanisms through which these funds will be delivered within the first quarter of the financial year.

This House must ensure that the funds will be administered in a judicious, transparent and accountable manner.

Motivating and inspiring the public service

Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that after 27 years of President Museveni, many Ugandans cannot get employment. Instead of addressing the problem, Government is hoodwinking Ugandans with numerous initiatives like Youth Entrepreneurship Venture Capital Fund without adequate resource allocation and proper planning. 

Our nation’s public service is part of the human resources machinery that drives our economy and is at the rear end of our service delivery system. Unless public servants are motivated, inspired and corrupt free, the budget resources that we are investing under this year’s budget and beyond will go to waste. Unfortunately, the NRMO Government has over the last decade demobilized, demonized or ignored the public service as an important institution in our pursuit of socio-economic and structural transformation.

By neglecting to remunerate our teachers who teach our nation’s children, the NRMO is systematically decimating an entire generation of Ugandans who cannot read and write. By failing to pay health workers, the NRMO Government has put our health services infrastructure that is, to its credit, it has delivered across the country, with our tax payers’ money. It is still a puzzle why the NRMO Government does not consider it important to pay a descent salary to the men and women who pay the ultimate sacrifice of saving life.

Mr Speaker, the President has declared that increasing teachers’ salary and the salaries of other underpaid public servants, in particular health workers, police men and women and soldiers, is not a priority. We are reliably informed that it only requires Shs 148 billion per year to increase the salaries of teachers by 20 percent this financial year. We are also reliably informed that the potential cascading effect of such an increment arising of similar increases for health workers, policemen and women and soldiers would be in the range of Shs 400 billion.

The future of this nation’s children who are receiving a substandard education because of slow down strikes by poorly paid and unmotivated teachers should be a non-negotiable. We cannot seat in this House and agree to negotiate away the lives of the 16 mothers that die in this country because we have to build roads and bridges and railways. We cannot continue to embarrass our police men and women and our soldiers who cannot get a descent salary to take care of their facilities and then expect them to protect us and our properties.

Health Sector

Mr Speaker, our health sector is sick. In September 2011, the media carried a painful story of Cecilia Nambozo, a teacher at Busamaga Primary School in Mbale District. Ms Nambozo was left to bleed to death after she failed to raise Shs 300,000. According to Nambozo’s friend, Ms Grace Acham, they arrived at the hospital at 6.00 a.m. but Nambozo was neglected in the labour ward until she breathed her last together with her baby. 

A post-mortem by a police surgeon, Dr Bernabas Rubanza, indicated that the baby weighed 5.2kg and that Nambozo died due to failure to push the baby, rupturing the uterus. Before Nambozo died, her friend had begged the health workers to attend to her as the husband ran to the village to sell property and raise the required funds. The poorly paid medics declined. Does President Museveni care when poor people like Nambozo die unnecessarily? Is this part of the fundamental change that he promised?

There are still regular outbreaks of diseases like cholera, dysentery, diarrhoea and typhoid mainly in urban slums. The other week, a woman, Ms Generous Atuhaire, delivered on the streets of Masindi. Each time I visit hospitals in Uganda, I see abominable conditions. As a result, children continue to die of malaria; 16 mothers die in labour every day and many cannot access ARVs. 

The health sector sunk further and registered a decline in growth by 3.8 percent in the financial year 2012/2013 from Shs 271 billion in the financial year 2011/2012 to Shs 260 billion. All the problems we highlighted last year, like poor remuneration of health workers, have persisted.

Mr Speaker, maternal health in Uganda is still high according to the World Health Organisation Report 2013, standing at 310. This is over twice the 150 targets set by the United Nations to be realised by 2015. If this is not a result of poor governance and political crisis, then what is it colleagues? And is the President bothered about this? We will continue asking President Museveni’s Government to prioritise the health sector to 15 percent in the budget so as to save the lives of Ugandans.

Water and Environment Sector
Mr Speaker, as earlier noted, the funds allocated and activities undertaken under water for production are inadequate. According to the World Health Organisation, 17 percent of deaths among children under the age of five are due to diarrhoea caused by contaminated water. Epidemiology studies show that 75 percent of the disease burden in Uganda can be prevented through health promotion and prevention.
At a time when governments world over are trying to make safe water cheap for every citizen, in Uganda our leaders are busy curtailing access by announcing VAT on water for domestic consumption. Taxing water is dangerous and is definitely going to cost us more than the Shs 8.0 billion the Government wants to recoup. 

We are not opposed to the tax parse. But we demand that the tax be charged based on thresholds reflecting volume of water usage where those using below 200 litres of water per day are exempted from the tax. (Applause)

Environment

Mr Speaker, we would like to emphasise to President Museveni that the current environment climatic change is part of the political crisis the country is facing. How can a country gifted by nature suffer the brunt of drought, environmental degradation, famine and starvation if it’s not a leadership problem? 

Statistics from the latest National Forest Authority reports show that over 90,000 hectares of Uganda's forest cover is disappearing per year. Thus, for the last 27 years, President Museveni has looked on as 2,430,000 hectares disappear. For that matter, therefore, to whom is President Museveni transferring this cost to?  Isn’t it to Ugandans below 40 years? 

Mr Speaker, the Opposition is proposing the following:
    1. A compulsory investment into wastewater recycling by industries and factories that release effluents into lakes and marshland.

    2. Develop an enabling environment; clearly outlining decisions on which wetlands should be protected, those that should not and which areas can be considered for development with the lowest risk of environmental degradation.

    3. The government should augment its efforts to get rid of encroachers and investors in wetlands in order to minimise environmental degradation.

    4. Establishing water-harvesting systems in every homestead in urban and rural areas. And non-compliance of the above should be a source of revenue to finance restoration.

Justice Law and Order Sector

Mr Speaker, the Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS) is one of those neglected sectors, with challenges of understaffing, underfunding and inadequate facilitation. Coupled with a case backlog that can only be cleared in 30 years if funds are availed; it is a constitutional crisis!

For instance, in a clear case of “misplaced budget priorities” the Government paid private lawyers Shs 2.5 billion in 2006 in its legal onslaught against former FDC President (Rtd) Dr Kizza Besigye and provided Shs 147 million in 2013/2014 budget to defend the taxpayer in a Shs 7 trillion bill. If this is not hypocrisy, then what is it?

The Opposition is recommending increased funding to JLOS so that we can promote the rule of law, complete a backlog of cases, increase staffing levels, timely recruitment and improve staff welfare.

Security 

Over the years, defence has consistently been the most funded sector in this country even when we have relative peace. But, we in the Opposition believe this is misallocation of funds especially in a country where people still die of lack of blood and where civil servants go for more than three months without getting their salaries, and where women deliver from the streets. 

Although we believe in strengthening our defence awareness, the use of trillions of taxpayers’ money to buy jet fighters and yet the country is neither in war nor anticipating to be attacked and without parliamentary approval, was the biggest sign of the death of democracy, good governance on the altar of a one man’s selfishness.

The defence budget should be cut and the money be put into productive sectors. We also demand a full accountability on our continued stay in Somalia. 

Improving Government Effectiveness

Mr Speaker, Uganda’s high population growth rate of 3.2 percent implies that over one million people are added every year. At this rate, Uganda’s population will be 54 million in 2025 and 130 million by 2050. Yet Government has failed to carry out a population census, a key determinant in national planning.

In fact, the government does not know the extent of poverty in Uganda today; they are using 2010 figures in 2013. This is a shame! We demand that the government provides Sh 150 billion to UBOS to conduct the 2013 National Population and Housing Census.

The Opposition wishes to restate its position that, as a way of achieving efficiency and effectiveness in Government, we need the downsizing of the entire structure of governance including ministers not exceeding 42, Members of Parliament, RDCs and presidential advisors.

To reduce the cost of public administration and wastage, the Opposition urges President Museveni’s Government to facilitate officers to purchase private cars at concessionary rates and they are paid millage including ministers. The saving from this measure estimated to a tune of about Shs 500 billion can be used to finance the health sector and increased salaries for health workers.

Tax and revenue measures

Mr Speaker, in the financial year 2013/2014 budget, President Museveni’s government proposes to balance the books on the back of the poor. The minister presented a tax-filled budget to the nation, hoodwinked Ugandans that 81.1 percent of the budget will be financed by locally generated revenue and grossly failed to explain to the taxpayers why the western donors withdrew up to 93 percent of the aid. The truth is that foreign donors cut aid because of stinking corruption in public offices and Ugandans are now paying the price.

The elimination of VAT exemption on supply of water for domestic use will hurt the low income consumers especially in urban areas because they buy water from piped water dealers. As well, eliminating VAT exemption on wheat flour that has become a source of employment through Chapatti making is bound to affect the low income consumers.

The Shs 200 tax on kerosene is a clear acceptance of governance failure as more people in rural areas will have to go to sleep early and will affect the quality of UPE and health centres. Treatment of mothers in maternity wards will fail and this will increase maternal mortality. The argument that the tax is meant to wipe out adulteration of petroleum products doesn’t add up. 

Excise duty on promotional activities akin to gambling should be increased by 100 percent to protect society. Although, introduction of a 10 percent excise duty on money transfers is meant for revenue generation, it is important that the impact of this measure is monitored seriously to avoid the resulting distortions in the market. We further ask Government to drop the intended tax on boda-bodas because such a tax will impact negatively on the very poor that Government is trying to help. 

Mr Speaker, now that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has imposed an extra Shs 30,000 on stamp duty on third party insurance policies for motor vehicles to raise more revenues, we call upon the regulator to ensure that victims of accidents are compensated adequately and in time.

As a means of widening the tax base, as earlier indicated, we urge Government to strengthen regulatory systems in all institutions, MDAs from central to local governments; and noncompliance should be a major source of revenue to be channeled to URA. 

Corruption 

Mr Speaker, in the biggest part of the last financial year, Government was bogged with unending corruption scandals. An example is the fiscal hemorrhage that took place in the Office of the Prime Minister and the Public Service. This made donors to withdraw aid and because of that, the external support to the budget is expected to decline by 93 percent — from Shs 749 billion in 2012/2013 to about Shs 50 billion in 2013/2014! The Opposition is convinced that without eliminating corruption, the annual budgets we keep reading will never be realized.

Mr Speaker, I want to tell this House that the story of an ordinary Ugandan is a story of uncertainty and gradual loss of hope in Government. The institutions that are supposed to be custodians of value are losing their role. It is no longer news to see church leaders, clan leaders and community elders pilgrimaging to State House to seek for forgiveness, instead of reconciliation, simply because the flock shouted that the President is wrong.

We wish to re-emphasise that there is no way Uganda can develop without transforming the agriculture sector. If President Museveni cannot get guidance from the Opposition, he should at least respect the opinion from the Auditor-General, the Economic Policy Research Centre, the World Bank, the National Farmers Association and the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda (PSFU) on the call and need to increase funding to the agriculture sector.

Mr Speaker, this is our time. What shall we tell people who think that with us here, they are safe? Who will cry when we die? Will our children weep saying that when we were here we did nothing to protect this country? What will they tell their wives and husbands? What will their grandchildren say when there is totally nowhere to get water, firewood for energy because of environmental degradation; nowhere to till and even bury their dear ones because the rich have taken their land? 

As the Opposition, our role, since the return of multiparty politics, has been to make it difficult for anyone in Government to say, “We were never advised”. Thank you very much. For God and My Country!  I beg to respond.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the shadow minister of finance, for keeping within the timeframe agreed of one hour. We will take this time now to receive the policy statements from the shadow ministers if they are ready to lay them before the House. Please proceed. 

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Mr Speaker, in the shadow minister’s response on page 21, mention is made of a one Bigirimana, a young boy who lives in the slums of Kampala and some derogatory attributes are made about him and there is an important person called Bigirimana who, because of what has appeared in the public domain, may be construed to be the person meant by the shadow minister. Unless – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the President came to power in 1986, he put it very clearly and it was among the ten-point programme that he was going to fight corruption and the hon. Member submitting on the Floor is a Member of the Executive and he is essentially supposed to implement what the President directs him to do. Zero tolerance for corruption has been the message that the President has been moving with. Is it, therefore, in order for the hon. Minister, who is a Member of the Executive, to defend someone who has been mentioned by the Auditor-General that he has failed to manage the Office of the Prime Minister and has made many people in the North lose their lives? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, my understanding of the “Bigirimana” referred to in paragraph 56 - and the name is in quotes; it means it is just a symbolic name for these purposes. It does not refer to a particular individual and even if we are to go by the one the hon. Member was talking about, his age alone would not answer this description. Please, let us respect the proceedings. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, since clarification has been made on the Hansard to show that this Bigirimana mentioned here has nothing to do with Pius Bigirimana the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, I will rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the one bringing him up on the Hansard otherwise from the submissions from the shadow minister, he was not part of the Hansard. Can we have the policy statements from the shadow ministers? 

4.46
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH (Mr Benard Atiku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I congratulate my senior colleague, our shadow minister of finance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Laying of papers. (Laughter)

MR ATIKU: I congratulate him because he has said it all on our behalf. But also more importantly, I stand under Rule 136, to lay on Table alternative policy responses beginning with the social development sector, which I shadow. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table alternative response to the ministerial policy statement of social development sector for the financial year 2013/2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands referred to the appropriate committee to handle it together with the government’s policy statement.

MR ATIKU: Mr Speaker, in the same vein, there are alternative responses for the colleagues who are not present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR ATIKU: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Opposition’s policy statement in response to the agriculture, animal industry and fisheries ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2013/2014, presented to Parliament by hon. Dr Epetait, who is the Shadow Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Office of the Leader of the Opposition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands referred to the appropriate committee to handle it together with the ministerial policy statement from the government.

MR ATIKU: I beg to lay on Table the Opposition’s response to the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for the financial year 2013/2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling together with the ministerial policy statement.

MR ATIKU: I beg to lay on Table the Opposition’s response to the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for 2013/2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands committed to the Committee on Foreign Affairs for expeditious handling together with the ministerial policy statement.

MR ATIKU: I beg to lay on Table the Opposition’s response to the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the financial year 2013/2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands committed to the appropriate committee to handle together with the ministerial policy statement.

MR ATIKU: I beg to lay on Table the Opposition’s alternative policy statement on the Public Service for the financial year 2013/2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling.

MR ATIKU: I beg to lay on Table the Opposition’s response to the ministerial policy statement for the presidency for the financial year 2013/2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands referred to the relevant committee to handle together with the ministerial policy statement.

MR ATIKU: I beg to lay on Table the Opposition’s alternative policy statement for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for the financial year 2013/2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. Are there more statements? Okay.

4.50
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nzoghu): Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule 136, which compels us to lay on Table alternative responses to the policy statements by the ministers, I take this opportunity to present the Opposition’s response on housing and urban development for the financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands referred to the appropriate committee for handling together with the ministerial policy statement.

4.51
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR LANDS AND PHYSICAL PLANNING (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Opposition’s alternative policy statement on lands and physical planning for the financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands referred to the appropriate committee for handling together with the ministerial policy statement.

4.51
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table Opposition’s alternative policy statement on works, transport and infrastructure for the financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it is committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling.

4.52
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr John Ken-Lukyamuzi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the official response from the Shadow Minister of Water and Environment to the official policy statement of the same ministry. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. All those policy statements from the Opposition are handed to the appropriate committees to handle with the ministerial policy statements to inform the budget discussion.

Hon. Members, you remember we had given a time frame of 20th July to receive these policy statements but I am advised that informally, these policy statements have already reached the committees but this is for formal laying of these documents before the House. For those who have not yet laid, please do it quickly so that as we adjourn to committees, these documents inform the discussions in the committees and when we come back we shall just go straight to discuss the reports. Thank you.

Hon. Members, you will recall that I altered the Order Paper to allow hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to move a motion -

MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, before we proceed to hon. Lukyamuzi’s motion, hon. Ekanya, in his presentation on page 38, has made a serious statement of disrespect to the President by referring to His Excellency, the President as “it”. He says: “If President Museveni cannot get guidance from the Opposition, it should at least respect the opinion of the Auditor-General…” 

Mr Speaker, I know that we shall debate this statement later but it is my opinion that hon. Ekanya should apologise and correct this. This is grossly disrespectful of the person of the President.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Shadow Minister, was that intended or was it in error?

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not read “it”; I said “he”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I heard, too. So the records show “he”; it is you again bringing that matter on record.

MOTION TO CONGRATULATE THE KABAKA OF BUGANDA UPON HIS 20TH ANNIVERSARY

4.54
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga County South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I move this motion, I would like to thank you for the compliments that you have extended to me upon producing a book of relevance to the coronation of His Majesty, the Kabaka.

On behalf of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus in this House, allow me to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate the Kabaka of the Kingdom of Buganda for successfully leading Buganda in the last 20 years under Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure:

“WHEREAS the Kingdom of Buganda was established back in the 14th Century by Kabaka Kato Kintu who became the first Kabaka;

AND WHEREAS the great Kingdom of Buganda has been subsequently ruled by numerous kings namely; Kabaka Kato Kintu, Kabaka Kimera (as early as 1374), Kabaka Nakibinge (as early as 1524), Kabaka Ssekamanya (1614), Kabaka Tebandeke (1704), Kabaka Kamanya (1814), Kabaka Mutesa I (1856), Kabaka Mwanga (1884), Kabaka Kiweewa (1888), Kabaka Daudi Chwa II (1897), Kabaka Mutesa II (1939-1956);

AND WHEREAS His Majesty Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II, the current Kabaka of Buganda, was born in Mengo parish on 13 April 1955, being the son of the late Maj. Gen. Sir Edward William David Walugembe Mutebi Luwangula Mutesa II;

AWARE that on 24 May 1966, acting on the orders of the then Prime Minister, Dr Milton Obote, Government forces attacked the Lubiri Palace on a mission to capture the then Kabaka of Buganda, Maj. Gen. Sir Edward Fredrick William Mutesa II;

FURTHER AWARE that the then Kabaka of Buganda, Maj. General Sir Frederick William Mutesa II managed to escape and was exiled in the United Kingdom where he died on 21 November 1969 under mysterious circumstances;

NOTING that the current Kabaka of Buganda, His Majesty Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II was appointed as heir to the throne but was prevented from being crowned as the 36th Kabaka of Buganda because the then government led by the Late Milton Obote had abolished all kingdoms in Uganda;

FURTHER NOTING that the current government restored traditional leaders paving the way for the enthronement of His Majesty, Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II on 31 July 1993 at the official coronation site in Naggalabi, Buddo;

APPRECIATING that His Majesty, Ronald Muwenda Mutebui II has, for the last 20 years, presided over the Kingdom of Buganda, transforming it economically, socially and culturally as well as encouraging development and unity in Buganda and Uganda at large;

FURTHER APPRECIATING that His Majesty, Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II has initiated a number of socio-economic and cultural programmes including Buganda Tourism Expo, Enkuuka, Ekitoobero, Masaza Cup, Entanda ya Buganda, Ekisakaate, Buganda Royal Arts Shield Festival and other projects undertaken by the Buganda Cultural and Development Foundation (BUCUDEF);

TAKING COGNISANCE of the fact that the above projects have created and expanded income earning opportunities specifically sustainable agriculture and enterprise development; investment and commercial undertakings in Buganda fostered by the promotion of community development; food sufficiency; health and education services; water and sanitation and communal infrastructure as well as assisting disadvantaged social groups in Buganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
    1. That it collectively congratulates His Majesty, Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II, the Kabaka of Buganda, for successfully leading the Kingdom of Buganda for the last 20 years.
    2. That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contribution made by His Majesty, Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II, the Kabaka of Buganda, to the people of the Kingdom of Buganda and the country at large.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the hon. Member for Mityana North, hon. Member for Bukhooli West, hon. Member for Kasese District, hon. Member for Luweero, hon. Member for Bukwo District. I think those are enough secondments. Hon. Member, you have five minutes to speak to your motion.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Briefly, my justification for the mention of this motion includes a book I have produced to state all the good things the Kabaka has been able to do through literature in poetry, essays and articles of influence, which talk to man.

The book is wholly dedicated to the Kabaka and I invite you to read it so that you see the notion of nature talking to man. The Kabaka is a unifying force of the people of Buganda and, Mr Speaker, allow me to read a poem from this book on the significance of Naggalabi. Naggalabi is the place where the Kabaka was enthroned and it remains symbolic of so many things in the cultural framework of the Buganda Kingdom:

“The significance of Naggalabi

It is 20 years since the Kabaka was reinstated
It is 47 years since the Lubiri was invaded
It is 44 years since Mutesa II died
It is three years since Kasubi Tombs were burnt
It is 50 years since Uganda became independent
Those are significant years in Buganda’s history.

During the dark days when the Baganda went on strike 
In the triangular war, Luweero became Luweero.
Liberators were stuck, we were all stuck 
Till the Sabataka came in the battle field
To change the tide and strengthen the liberators
So as to move and progress

At Naggalabi, the historic site
When the spears rattled, we got scared that we would be hurt
You fought bravely, you won the war
You were lifted shoulder high by the Buffalo clan 
To succeed Sir Edward Mutesa as the Kabaka of Buganda

When the great moment came, the kites cleared the sky
The doves sang with melody that Buganda had received a king in the names of Muwenda Mutebi II, the son of Sir Edward Mutesa.

After the royal function, you went to church to praise the Lord for what had occurred. 
You greeted the Bishops, His Excellency the President and fellow kings
God bless our King, he is a great man, he has kept us united even in dark days. 
We remember the Kayunga tour, which was cut short to please the guys without mercy and without love for a united kingdom.
Long live Mutebi II! Long live Mutebi II! Long live Mutebi II!”

I beg to lay a copy of this book on Table to support the wealth of our archives as Parliament. The title of the book is, ”Nature’s talk to man: 20 years of Kabaka Mutebi II” written by John Ken-Lukyamuzi, the man, comprising poems, essays on the environment, the land question and the principle of federalism.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records gladly capture that. 

5.06
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for altering the order paper and allowing hon. Lukyamuzi to move this very important motion.

On 3 August 2013, we celebrated the 20th coronation anniversary of the Kabaka of Buganda and today it is very appropriate for this motion. Everyone in this House must know that the stability and happiness of this kingdom is very vital for our country.

I also want to inform Members that Buganda is not actually for Baganda. It is a region and the Kabaka is not a Kabaka of Baganda. He is a Kabaka of Buganda and Buganda does not only include Baganda, no. Our Kabaka is a Kabaka of Buganda not the Kabaka of the Baganda.

Basing on that point, therefore, I invite everybody to feel very comfortable in this region and to feel very comfortable with our king.

Mr Speaker, the Luganda language is understood by almost 28 million people in Uganda and over 22 million people speak this language. That indicates the importance of this language and really the ability for Buganda Kingdom to accommodate everyone.

The harmony with the people of Buganda – I want to confirm to this House - shall continue to prevail; we shall continue to accommodate the rest of Ugandans. We want to live in harmonious relationships with the rest of Ugandans. 

I also want to congratulate the President of Uganda – you know when the king of Buganda was exiled in 1966, it took 20 years for the Sabattaka to come back; that Ronald Mutebi II. But it also took seven years for him to be enthroned as the Kabaka of Buganda in 1993. For those reasons, I want to thank the NRM Government for the goodwill it has shown to the Kingdom of Buganda. 

The return of those many properties has come about because of the goodwill of the NRM Government and the President as a person. For those reasons, I want to emphatically thank the President especially for the things and that statement that we received on 3 August 2013. It brought big hope to the people of Uganda. I, therefore, would like to ask Parliament to support H.E, the President on his plans to return the property that belong to the Buganda Kingdom. The return of this property reduces the tension within the politics of Uganda and that of Buganda and enhances the stability of our country at large.

I also would like to thank the mover of this motion. It has been timely. But also let me inform all Members that as Baganda, we are open and we shall remain that. We are with you even when the 9,000 miles - it is not true that when these miles are returned, some people will be chased off this land. No, no. We shall remain very accommodative and we shall remain united as people of Uganda. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this motion had five seconders. There is only one seconder in the House who has spoken. The motion is for a Resolution of Parliament to Congratulate the Kabaka of the Kingdom of Buganda for successfully leading Buganda in the last 20 years of his enthronement and particularly, that it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contributions made by His Majesty, Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II, the Kabaka of Buganda, to the people of the Kingdom of Buganda and the country at large. 

That is the motion before the House – we cannot amend before debating. We will amend when we start to debate. I will start with the Member for Buikwe and please limit it to only three minutes so that we can have as many contributors as possible. Thank you.

5.10
MR KAKOBA ONYANGO (NRM, Buikwe North, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My Sentebbe, hon. Kiwanda Godfrey, couldn’t have said it more that the Kabaka is for Buganda. Most of you know me here as Onyango Kakoba but my other name is Lubega and I am of the Ngabi clan. My constituency is Buikwe North in Buikwe District of Buganda.

Therefore, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate my Kabaka, His Majesty, Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II, for the celebrations that we have just had in commemoration of the 20th Anniversary of the Coronation.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank the Almighty God for having given him life to live to date. I am saying this because as I was going through the archives, I realised he is so far the longest serving Kabaka of Buganda – 20 years! I think that is very important and that is why I thank God for the life given to him.

Mr Speaker, a number of things have been done in Buganda as have been pointed out. But one thing I cherish about the Baganda is the spirit of unity in diversity. Buganda is an area that is quite accommodative. That is why you find many people in Buganda and also many leaders in Buganda - the hon. Madadas, the hon. Kakobas and the rest in Buganda. This is the spirit that all other tribes and regions in Uganda should embrace because as Ugandans, we should be able to accommodate each other.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank the NRM Government and H.E, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, in particular for having restored kingdoms. This is a good gesture – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is Kassiano Wadri Kayemba – (Laughter) – because when you get to Bukeeka in Kangulumira Sub-County of Kayunga District and you ask for the home of Mulangira Kayemba, they will just show you the place and there you will find me.

Well, the information I want to give to my brother who is also my MP, Hon. Onyango Kakoba, is that much as we have heaped praises on the NRM Government and President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni in particular, there are also senior leaders in this country and in Government who refused to recognize and install their own institutional heads or their own kabakas; their own mugabes. I want to start with my friend, the hon. Dr Crispus Kiyonga who resisted the restoration of the king in the Rwenzuru land. Even President Museveni resisted until his king died before being crowned. That is the information I wanted to give to you. (Laughter)

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr Speaker, I am sure that information was intended for the House and I, in particular – (Member timed out.)

5.16
MR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi has moved a good motion. I also want to thank hon. Godfrey Kiwanda for giving very good information that in Buganda, there are many languages. That is true. Considering the history of our country, of course, people are aware that there are counties which belong to Bunyoro but which were forcefully annexed to Buganda and what do you expect in these counties, which up to today have remained under Buganda and they speak their local languages that they used to speak? 

What I would propose is that for more harmony, Government should consider sitting down with other kingdoms so that some of the problems that have existed in the past can be sorted out. 

I want to thank Government for having thought of the return of the properties to Buganda. I am hoping that the properties for other kingdoms, which were confiscated by past governments will also be returned because, Mr Speaker, you are aware that it is not only Milton Obote’s Government that confiscated properties. Even before Milton Obote became President, other governments confiscated properties including territory. Seven counties belonging to Bunyoro were annexed by the British Government and given to Buganda and five counties have remained unreturned. There are properties in the museum in UK belonging to Bunyoro. When will these ones be returned? Can Government take advantage of this and talk to Britain to bring back the properties?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, hon. Kiwanda talked of the 9,000 square miles. I was minister for lands and I am very cognisant of these things. The 9,000 square miles include land in Bugangaizi and Buyaga. Now, I wanted to know what is going to happen. Is somebody coming to Buyaga and Bugangaizi to claim this land or what? That is why we need to sit on a round table and discuss these things very well and see how to go about it. 

5.20
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to react to paragraph four of the preamble of this motion where the mover of the motion states that, “Aware that on May 24 1966, acting on orders of the then Prime Minister, Dr Milton Obote, Government forces attacked Lubiri Palace on a mission to capture the then Kabaka of Buganda….” 

I stand to defend and put the record straight that first, at the dawn of Independence, both Milton Obote and the Kabaka were very strong allies. They even formed an alliance between Kabaka Yekka and UPC and that is what led to the UPC Government. What led to this needs to be captured in the preamble. At the appropriate time, I will move that amendment. What made them to differ was when the then Prime Minister, Dr Obote, supported a referendum for the lost counties of Buyaga and Bugangaizi and Mutesa was opposed to that referendum. After that, the Kabaka demanded that Obote, the Prime Minister, leaves Buganda land. 

On May 24 1966, the Buganda ex-servicemen converged at the palace ready to depose the central government from Buganda land as had been ordered by the Kabaka that Obote should leave Buganda land. Therefore, when you say in your preamble that, “On May 24 1966, acting on the orders of the then Prime Minister…” we should also include, at the time, why the Prime Minister ordered that. The Prime Minister ordered that because the Kabaka had ordered the Prime Minister to leave Buganda land and he was acting in the best interest of Uganda and –(Interruption)

MR AYENA-ODONG: Thank you very much colleague for giving way. I rise to give very critical information, which may only be available to students of constitutional law. The information is that those who are schooled about matters of constitutionalism and constitutional changes in this country will know that before Dr Obote died, he persistently said that the attack on Lubiri was without his instruction. And that as a matter of fact, Idi Amin went to attack Lubiri when he was provoked at the precincts of the Lubiri and, therefore, the emphasis that the army attacked Lubiri – (Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the motion for debate here is a very important motion and for that matter, for purposes of history, we ought to put the record straight. I did not want to interrupt my senior colleague with whom we share the side of the Opposition. The late Gen. Field Marshal, life President Idi Amin -(Laughter)- whose home happens to be in my constituency, at that time, if I can recall very well and according to the history books, was serving the UPC Government as a soldier and therefore there is a chain of command. A soldier cannot act without orders from above. (Applause) So, for this very important historical matter, is my honourable colleague in order to insinuate that Gen. Idi Amin Dada acted of his own volition to invade the Lubiri, yet the then Prime Minister who happened to be the fountain of honour and Commander in Chief was the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, by 1966, at the occurrence of this event, I was one year old. (Laughter) The historical accounts of events that transpired at that time are different; it depends on which book you read and who wrote it. It is impossible for me who was only one year old to base it on my actual knowledge of the event to make a ruling on the factual situation obtaining then. (Laughter)

MR AYENA-ODONG: Mr Speaker, I could not agree with you anymore; at one year, you did not have the capacity to appreciate what we are talking about here – (Laughter) - and I am sure my brother who is now talking here was not even born then. (Laughter) So, let him benefit from the institutional memory of those of us who followed the events live. My duty in informing my sister is only to give the synopsis of events and also the historical truth from the person who is alleged to have ordered. That is what he said. I can say no more. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also state that I speak with authority because while I was not born, I have been privileged to hear the story from Mama Miria Obote. So what I want to put correct is that the May 24th 1966 event was precipitated by the Kabaka then ordering the then Prime Minister to leave Buganda land.

At the right time, I will move an amendment to that paragraph where you are saying “On May 24th 1966, acting on the orders of then Prime Minister, government forces attacked Lubiri Palace on a mission to capture the then Kabaka of Buganda, Maj. Gen. Sir Fredrick William Mutesa II” after the Kabaka had ordered the Prime Minister to leave Buganda and remove the central government from Buganda land. I will move that amendment to set the record straight.

5.33
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion and also to congratulate the Kabaka on the 20th Coronation ceremony. Since the restoration of the Buganda Kingdom, a lot has been realised and every year when we go for this ceremony, it is very significant to the people of Buganda because when you refer back to the years when we did not have the kingship, the people of Buganda were non-productive, agitated and were not happy. But today, it has been a unifying factor for the Baganda.
 
We have increased production because there are several projects as mentioned in the motion that have really been put in place to empower the people of Buganda. I think this should serve as an example to other regions that you should also focus on re-establishing your kingdoms because these leaders can be a voice for those who dissent from other leaders. I propose that the government looks at helping other kingdoms re-establish their leadership.

I also want to call upon the government; there has always been a cry from Buganda. The government carried out a survey some time back and there was a voice from Ugandans saying that they would prefer being under a federal government system. Time has passed and I heard that the President was willing to return the property of Buganda and I think that is just part of what the Baganda and also Ugandans are requesting for. 

The government should also consider revisiting that proposal from the people that different regions want to be under regional governments whereby they are led by their subjects. This is a very big question that I put to my friend that we should consider because we have seen results, we have seen development, and we have seen unity through cultural leadership. If we focused on that, I think we would have some change that we do not have toda. We would enhance development locally whereby that tax, which is got from the people in that setting of federalism directly, helps develop specific regions. You can see that we have oil in Bunyoro region but at the end of the day they may not even benefit.

5.38
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, allow me to join other Members in congratulating His Highness Kabaka Ronald Mutebi for being the Kabaka of Buganda for the last 20 years. On behalf of my people and the people of Lango, I would like to congratulate him for peacefully and successfully leading the kingdom.

You are aware that Buganda Kingdom is very connected to the Luo kingdom because in the past, the earlier Kabaka called Kimera was a twin brother of Rukidi of the Luo-Babito kingdom. When he moved to Buganda here, he became the Kabaka of Buganda and therefore there is Luo blood in Buganda here. We are brothers and sisters.

Allow me to inform Members that when Kabaka Mwanga was deposed fighting the colonial government, he took refuge in Dokolo and our people in Lango protected him for three years. The site is there where together with Kabalega they were captured from Dokolo at a place called Kangai. That is why you hear many people calling us Badokolo - that is the connection.

When they took refuge in my place, our people who were giants, tall, courageous and tough people defended the Kabaka who could not be defended by the people in Buganda here. We did that because at that time, Uganda was one and we continue to be together as the same people.

I would like to use this opportunity to appeal to the kingdom to use this opportunity to unite the country. As you are aware, in 1958, when Milton Obote arrived from Lango here, he was seconded and nominated by the late hon. Abu Mayanja to lead the Uganda National Congress. There was a good connection between Lango and Buganda and we still want that connection to continue - (Member timed out.)

5.42
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): I rise to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate the Kabaka of the Kingdom of Buganda for successfully leading Buganda in the last 20 years of his enthronement. Most of you are aware that I come from Kayunga, a place commonly called the united nations of Uganda. There is no tribe in Uganda that cannot be found in Kayunga but in any gathering, we sing the Buganda Anthem because of the inspiration we take from the Kabaka of Buganda.

He has been such a great inspirational leader, a source of direction for most of us and visionary. We know some time back there were riots arising from the fact that the Kabaka was not allowed to go to Kayunga. Riots happened, not because the people of Kayunga were the ones rioting, but the problems actually came from outside Kayunga. But so many of us are supportive of the kingdom irrespective of our cultural differences; we are working together in harmony under the Buganda Kingdom and under the king of Buganda, Kabaka Muwenda Mutebi II. 

Mr Speaker, Kabaka Mutebi has been behind a number of projects in Buganda which have been a source of employment for many of our youths. He has mobilised many of us under various programmes through the various radio programmes on CBS which so many people listen to and many, if not all, of us politicians have been to CBS and we have used this radio station. This has been a creation of the Kabaka of Buganda.

Now, Mr Speaker, at some appropriate point I will like to add one resolution relating to the national language –(Member timed out.)

5.46
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in total support of the motion and I am humbled to state that 13 of the kings that have been mentioned in the motion were once residents of the area that I represent. 

As a good subject of the Kabaka, I am fully aware that the 20 years in question have been years of big challenges; to the Kabaka, as a person and to his subjects in Buganda and the world at large. But also, they have been years of total shame to his enemies.

As we congratulate the Kabaka, I believe that it is timely to remind the Government of Uganda that Buganda still yearns for its lost political glory. Today, the Buganda we are talking about is a very powerful cultural institution and we are very grateful to our king, the Kabaka, for his wisdom, skilful and visionary leadership.

However, the future of Buganda can only be secured with a politically empowered Buganda. There can never be any better political empowerment short of the federal arrangement – (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, I need you protection. 

We cannot stop as the subjects of the Kabaka lamenting about what Buganda used to have like the high standards in terms of health, education and everything. That we lost in effect of the loss of the federal arrangement. This august House should begin to think of the lost glory. The federal arrangement was not only special to Buganda but to the rest of the regions of Uganda.

Today, we are talking about the evils of corruption and everything else – (Member timed out.) 

5.49
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABI (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to congratulate His Highness, the Kabaka of Buganda – our Kabaka - upon celebrating 20 years on the throne of Namulondo of Buganda on which he was enthroned or crowned in 1993 at Naggalabi.

As we congratulate him, we extend thanks to him for various programmes that he has advanced in our Kingdom of Buganda especially the BUCUDEF project that has taught my people in Kyankwanzi modern methods of farming. Previously, from one acre, before his programme came, they could harvest just six bags of maize but today, from the science that they have taught my people, they can harvest at least 15 sacks in an acre.

I thank His Highness for putting up Buganda Land Board, which has helped to lease plots of land to all Ugandans living in Buganda and to even some investors who have put up real estates and industries. In Kyankwanzi, the Kabaka has leased out part of his land to my cattle keepers, who were pastoralists living a nomadic way of life, but are now living a settled life on his land under lease. 

I thank His Excellency, the President and the National Resistance Movement Government for allowing the reinstallation of traditional leadership from what the Kabaka came about and for also providing security for our Kabaka. The UPDF is fully in control and we know that no harm can happen to him although some problems and hiccups had come during the Kayunga visit but those were temporal.

We are grateful to the President for having made a written agreement to return our things of Buganda – “Ebyaffe” - all the land of Buganda, the buildings, the markets, the beaches. A lot of things were agreed upon to come back to -(Member timed out.)

5.52
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale):  Mr Speaker, I thank the mover of the motion, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, the man and I support the motion.

Much as the Bakiga have no king –(Laughter)- but live individually as kings in their homes – (Laughter) - we fully respect those traditional leaders who helped in the development of the country of which the Kabaka of Buganda has been very instrumental. 

We thank the Kabaka and indeed other kings who have allowed the Bakiga to migrate and live in their respective districts, counties and provinces such as Toro, Bunyoro, Ankole and Buganda. We promise that we shall continue to cooperate and work with them and help in the development of Uganda and their areas.

We hope and pray that President Museveni’s promises shall be fulfilled and we hope that these promises are not used as a launch pad for the 2016 elections. We hope he is serious and that he should continue respecting cultural leaders, and allowing them to move freely in their respective areas. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

6.02
MR STEPHEN BAKA MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion that this House congratulates the Kabaka of Buganda upon leading his kingdom for 20 years successfully. I wish to inform this House that the successful leadership of the Kabaka of Buganda has seen the culture of the Baganda grow from strength to strength. As I speak, very many areas in this country have been adopting the Ganda culture in various fields and various spheres of life. For example, if you look at the marriage ceremonies in this country critically, you will realise that there is an element of the Buganda culture. This idea of the traditional marriage ceremony where the bride introduces the groom to the family, if you look at the style and the way it is done, is a replica of the Buganda culture, which, I think, is a result of the good leadership of the Kabaka of Buganda. 

Mr Speaker, it goes without saying that the unity that we see in Buganda, the way they do their things, the way they move together, the way they fight for their rights and all that is again attributed to the leadership of the Kabaka of Buganda. That is why I support the motion by the House to congratulate him upon his successful leadership. 

I wish to applaud the Baganda in totality for the resilience they exhibited during the bad times when the kingdoms were abolished in this country. In the 1960s, when the kingdoms were abolished, the Baganda remained resilient until when the NRM Government came “back” in 1986 and subsequently, we saw the restoration of kingdoms. I wish to thank the Baganda for the resilience and for keeping it at heart until when the NRM came and restored kingdoms in Uganda.

In the same vein, I wish to appeal to all areas where we have cultural leaders, and make a specific appeal to my own area Busoga, that we need to borrow a leaf from the Baganda. We need to be resilient, we need to know our rights and demand for our rights whenever an occasion arises. This is an appeal for Busoga to come together. Let us strengthen the institution of the Kyabazinga such that we can also reap from the unity that the Baganda have witnessed.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I wish to propose an amendment when the time comes, to this motion, that resolution number four should be to the effect that the NRM Government that has created an enabling environment for the Kabaka and the Baganda to successfully run their kingdom – (Interruption)

MEMBER: Mr Speaker, we know for sure that the NRM Government came into power in 1986 and the hon. Member says when the NRM came back into power, they restored the kingdoms. From the way he explained, it was as if the NRM Government had been in power before the Kabaka was exiled. We need to put the history right for our young generations. Is the hon. Member in order to distort the history of Uganda that the NRM came back and restored the kingdoms. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, some of these points of order actually should be addressed as points of clarification to the people addressing us but suffice to say that the leader of the NRM was in Government before 1986. So, let us leave it at that. Let me have Kassanda North.

6.05
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to congratulate the Kabaka. I have some facts why I should. First of all, the Kingdom of Buganda has been very accommodative and that is why everybody is enjoying a say in our kingdom. The Kabaka has also contributed a lot to the sector of education by introducing the Mutesa I Royal University. He has also assisted farmers by introducing BUCUDEF. He has also contributed a lot to games and sports by introducing the Masaza-Bika Football Tournament.     

He has also promoted culture, not only in Buganda but elsewhere; that is why I appeal to all the people of Buganda, the Bakiga inclusive, that there is still room to introduce these cultural leaders. I also want to thank the President of Uganda for having accepted dialogue between him and the Kabaka because it is out of this discussion that we have achieved all this. So, we pray that whatever has been discussed is put, as promised, to the Buganda Kingdom. Thank you very much. 

6.07
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I stand to second the motion and to support hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi – the man. I congratulate the Buganda Kingdom upon the 20th Anniversary and also wish to congratulate hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi for launching his book that will help in further understanding the culture of Buganda. 

In Buganda, they say, “Ssabasajja Kabaka awangaale.” Mr Speaker, I do agree that I am young. In 1993, when His Highness the Kabaka of Buganda was  being installed, I was in p.6 in Wandegeya Muslim Primary School and our school actually took part in some of the commemoration activities. So, I have fond memories with this kingdom. 

Mr Speaker, a lot remains to be said about this great kingdom and at a personal level, I really do appreciate what this kingdom has done – the achievements that have been enumerated here – and indeed there is a lot for those of us who do not have the privilege of being under cultural institutions; we learn to be united. A region like West Nile has only got the Alur Kingdom. For the Lugbara, like the Bakiga believe, we also believe in individual kingship. But we have also realised that that arrangement has somehow disadvantaged people like us. While the Baganda can stand up and ask for what belongs to them, the Lugbara cannot stand as a united force to demand for what is due to them. That is why you see a lot of infrastructural development in Buganda and not in West Nile even after 50 years of Independence. 

On the eve of the Kabaka’s 20th Anniversary, I was in Arua but I followed closely on NTV when the Prime Minister of Buganda was announcing the return of part of their belongings in a memorandum that was signed. And as the debate rages on, it appears as though it were a grant – like the President was giving back to the kingdom of Buganda. And yet we all know that all these assets that are being returned have been occupied by Government -(Member timed out.)

6.01
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Lukyamuzi for this motion and for reminding me of the time when the restoration debate was going on in this Chamber and initially in the caucus, leading finally to the restoration of kingships. 

I know kingship in Uganda and I know kingship in Buganda. And I know how it has come up repeatedly in the national politics. I would like to recall the confrontation between the colonial government and Mengo, leading to the exile of the Kabaka. I also recall the late Ben Kiwanuka and his advice on how Mengo should be clearly separated from the national politics and how he was received. I also recall when the late Milton Obote brought Buganda into the forefront of national politics, including getting the Kabaka to be the President of Uganda and how finally, the kingship was abolished in 1966. I also now recall the restoration. 

So when hon. Lukyamuzi brings this motion, I am reminded of all these; I am reminded that those who push the issue of Mengo into national politics, sometimes do not realise that they do so at the risk of the institution of kingship in Buganda. And that needs to be taken seriously because the forces of kingship and those of national identity do not always cohabit. I think it is not unusual that the confrontation can exist. When I see – (Interruption)

MR AYENA-ODONG: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Well, it is a point of order. Mr Speaker, what I know for a fact is that by the time the Buganda Kingdom was invited to be part of the post-independence government, Kabaka Yekka, which was a national political party, was already in existence. Therefore, is it in order for a very senior citizen of this country, a professor who has actually written books on constitutionalism, to allege – (Interjections) – he wrote nothing? Well, I withdraw that. (Laughter) But a scholar; somebody who, to the best of my recollection, has been a scholar, to allege that it was the late Apollo Milton Obote, who forced the Buganda Kingdom to come to the forefront of national politics. Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that matter is properly premised as a clarification, not a point of order. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you for the clarification. In fact, he has now reminded me of the alliance between UPC and Kabaka Yekka and the implications for the kingship. And in fact, that is what led to the Kabaka being the President of Uganda, which made it very contradictory that he could not be the king of Buganda and at the same time be the President of Uganda. And that confrontation was inevitable and it came to what it came to.

Mr Speaker, I am concluding on two points: One, is that we should be thankful to President Museveni for restoring kingship in Buganda -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will add you one minute.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I believe that there are very few people who would behave and act the way President Museveni has done - I doubt that “President Nandala-Mafabi” would have the patience of dealing with the Mengo establishment -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, is Prof. Kabwegyere, who studied nothing, in order to mention me in the issues of restoration of Kabaka as if in 1966, I was there to fight the Kabaka? Mr Speaker, as far as I know – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your point of order?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Is Prof. Kabwegyere in order to insinuate that I, in 1966, participated in removing the Kabaka when in fact by the time the Kabaka was removed, I was a few months to be born. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I seem to understand from hon. Kabwegyere’s statement is that he doubts if hon. Mafabi would do this if he were to be president. Of course, it is now clear that he does not desire to be president. So please, respect his privacy on these matters.

6.07
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion that was introduced by hon. Lukyamuzi, appreciating the 20 years of Kabaka Mutebi’s rule over his subjects in Buganda. And I wish to congratulate the Kabaka of Buganda His Majesty, Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II, on achieving the 20 years of rule and for his wisdom, love and care in the way he has handled his subjects in Buganda.

I also wish to thank the NRM Government for restoring traditional leaders in Uganda and for recognising the positive role that traditional leaders can play in the development of our country. This has been borne out in Buganda, if you look at the different projects that Buganda has been involved in and the development of the Buganda culture, you can see that the NRM faith in this institution is borne out. 

I, therefore, wish to thank the Kabaka and the Buganda Kingdom very much for the projects, they are implementing especially in Kiboga District, where I come from. Kiboga District is a place, which is currently inhabited by people from all over Uganda including from hon. Mwiru’s area and even from Bukiga and they are living happily. They are very happy with their Kabaka and love him. Therefore, they were very happy and participated in the 20th Anniversary of the Kabaka’s coronation.

I want to finalise by saying that the Kabaka of Buganda and the central government have been working together for the good of this country. I know that sometimes, the relationship is strained but because we have good leaders, they are able to work out their differences for the good of Buganda and Uganda and so that we can continue as a nation. I, therefore, wish the Kabaka of Buganda and the Nabagereka a long and fruitful life in which the Kabaka is going to superintend over his subjects in Buganda. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please we need to draw this to a close and this is how I am going to do it. I am going to allow five Members who will speak for two minutes each. We have exceeded the time we had agreed to let our Muslim colleagues leave.

6.11
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to support the motion, which has been moved by hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi, the man. I would like to thank hon. Lukyamuzi for this motion. The need to appreciate cultural leaders in our institutions and in our country cannot be over emphasised. Cultural leaders help in terms of mobilisation and actually, if the government did care regarding how to mobilise for government programmes, they would be using cultural leaders to sensitise the public.

There was a time during immunisation when Government would use the cultural institutions to mobilise, the Baganda would say: “Kabaka anaawulira atya nga tetwagemeza baana?” Meaning, how would the Kabaka feel upon learning that the Baganda had not taken their children for immunisation? What message does this send? 

As we thank the President for what has been said regarding what he has done, if he had also taken an extra step to pay Buganda the Shs 20 billion, maybe this would have catered for other development programmes.

Mr Speaker, a lot has been said including that as the Kabaka was celebrating 20 years on the throne, a MoU was signed. I implore Government that if this pledge is very realistic, we need to budget for it so that we come to Parliament and look at the financial implications. If we do not, it will remain a political statement because to give back what belongs to Buganda has financial implications. We need to go through the policy statements of the relevant ministry so that as Parliament, we pronounce ourselves such that it does not seem like a deal made for an individual. Short of that - (Member timed out.)

6.13
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I rise to support a motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate Sabasajja Kabaka Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II, Magulu nyondo, Musota, Chu chu, Empologoma enkambwe, Baffe, Ssabalongo, upon his 20th coronation anniversary in his great Kingdom of Buganda. Congratulations on behalf of the people of Kasese, on behalf of the people of Rwenzori region and on behalf of the Rwenzururu Kingdom!

I thank the great leader of Buganda Kingdom for the unity he has kept amongst his subjects. You will realise that when it comes to issues of Buganda, political parties or tribes will not deter the people of Buganda from coming together as one.

Mr Speaker, I am speaking as a member of this great kingdom; as a Musu of the Abomusu clan, the clan of the Nabagereka of the great Kingdom of Buganda.

We thank the king of Buganda for being so hospitable. All tribes live in Buganda. Other tribes represent the people of Buganda even in this Parliament. The Baganda have not segregated. That is the culture all of us should espouse in our areas. Whether Mufuruki or not, you are welcome in Buganda.

Buganda Kingdom hosts almost all of us Members of Parliament. We want to thank the Kabaka - (Member timed out.)

6.15
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Let me also congratulate the Kabaka of Buganda. I hail from a village called Kabubwa in Kibaale District, Nkoko where the Kabaka of Buganda used to stay when he was a child. I went to a primary school where the Kabaka of Buganda also went.

As Members of Parliament, we must always call a spade a spade. The Kabaka of Buganda was always assisted by a certain old man in my village called Kigongo who used to carry him on his back to the school. I am told the Kabaka was always somehow naughty and being a future Kabaka, he was hidden in that village of mine but that man still lives. I want to inform the Chairman of the Buganda Caucus that this man is languishing in absolute poverty and you need to help him. If you need me to bring him to you, I will bring this man to the Ssentebe of Buganda Caucus and to hon. Lukyamuzi. I will bring this man who carried the Kabaka on his back to the Kabubwa Primary School, where I also went when I was in primary school. The Kabaka is my OB.

I want to thank Government because Museveni assisted the installation of the kingship in this country - (Member timed out.)

6.17
MS NAKATO KYABANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to also congratulate my Kabaka for the 20 years of his leadership. Indeed, it has been a leadership full of achievements in development although we expect more, now that “Ebyaffe” have been returned.

I also want to thank H.E, the President for this achievement. The President has come out so many times to tell the public that during the restoration of traditional leaders, his colleagues who are now very good supporters of Buganda, resisted it but that he went on to grant it. I also want to inform this House that even when we were celebrating in Lubiri, on 3 August 2013, the Kabaka himself recognised the role that H.E, the President played in restoring the traditional leaders.

Let me now inform the House that I support the motion that was tabled by my colleague there that we recognise - as the third one because we already have one and two - H. E, the President, for the role he played in the restoration of traditional leaders. I beg to submit. Thank you.

6.19
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to first of all thank hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, the man, for tabling this motion. It was very timely. Thank you very much. 

I want to applaud the Kabaka for being an icon of unity in this region. But I also want to put on record the role of the Kabaka in the liberation struggle; I want that to be mentioned. Further, I thank the Kabaka for being a patient person. As you are aware, there have been a lot of demands from Buganda and the Kabaka to the central government but with the Kabaka remaining very patient. I want to applaud him for that.

There is a saying that behind a very successful man, there is always a strong woman – (Interjections) – is it besides? Okay, I want to applaud the work of the Nabagereka of Buganda, Naginda Sylvia, for all she has done for the kingdom – the Kisaakate project and all the other development programmes. As we congratulate the Kabaka, that should go on record.

Finally, I appreciate the subjects of the Kabaka for being very accommodative. They have allowed all people from other units to stay in Buganda. I want to thank them for that. But let me also applaud the mobilisation skills of the Kabaka in development and health programmes – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for your contributions. The time for us to conclude in adopting this motion has come. Intentions were indicated to amend the second paragraph on the second or third page. But there was another amendment from Bukooli that proposed to add a new paragraph on the resolution.

For ease of bringing this to a close, honourable members, factual issues have been raised, which are now being contested. It might do well for the mover of the motion to take up aspects that might bring contestations to the motion so that we can harmoniously adopt it.

Can I suggest, therefore, that in that paragraph, you take out the phrase “acting on orders of the then Prime Minister, Dr Apollo Milton Obote (RIP).” If you take that phrase out, that paragraph will remain uncontested. It will therefore read thus: “Aware that on the 24 May 1966, Government forces attacked Lubiri Palace on a mission to capture the then Kabaka of Buganda Maj. Gen. Sir Fredrick William Mutesa II…” that would take out the controversy. If that is agreeable, we then can move that way so that there is no controversy as to who gave which orders.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Yes, I would like to concede on that save that as a matter of constitutional law, there are facts that we also need to understand. For example, any overthrow of a living Constitution is a treasonable offence. The Mubaka of Kooki in the name of Kaggwa acted only after Dr Obote had overthrown the Constitution and passed that statement. That statement was less dangerous than him; he handled the gun to defend the Constitution, which was overthrown. But I concede.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we concede on this, we adopt it before – 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Speaker, even though I agree to your suggestion that we delete that phrase, the question why Government forces attacked the Lubiri will remain hanging. So for me – (Interjections) – yes, I am also talking about facts. If you want us to reveal facts we are going to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that it reads thus: “Aware that on 24 May 1966, Government Forces attacked Lubiri Palace”- because if you stop at the words “Lubiri Palace” that would be okay with me. Otherwise, the issue of saying “...on a mission to capture the then Kabaka of Buganda…” is contestable because the issue also at that time was that Government was responding to a situation where the ex-service men had gathered to depose the central government after the order given by the Kabaka that the then prime minister shifts the seat of the central government out of Buganda. 

So, I would be comfortable if it reads thus: “Aware that on 24 May 1966, government forces attacked Lubiri Palace” - those different factors that led to that attack can be discussed outside the resolution. But when you go on to say “on a mission to” when actually some historical facts are that that attack was in response – so, if you say “on a mission” I am going to refute that and say it was a response to ex-servicemen who had gathered to execute an order that a seat of the central government be shifted away from the Buganda land.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please let us not make this contentious. The import of this motion is to congratulate the Kabaka. That is it. So, let us not bring in facts that are going to water down the substance of this motion. The proposal now is that it should read thus: “Aware that on 24 May 1966, Government Forces attacked Lubiri Palace,” and that it stops there. Would that be okay, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi? Please let us not lose the purpose of the motion.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: For the good of all of us, it is okay. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, therefore, this paragraph is amended to read as follows: “Aware that on 24 May 1966, government forces attacked Lubiri Palace.” Then you go to the other parts. Okay, that was the first amendment. There was another amendment from the Member for Bukooli.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Speaker, the proposal is that paragraph three in resolution number three should read as follows: “That President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the NRM Government be applauded for restoring kingdoms and creating an enabling environment for the pursuance of the aspirations of Buganda Kingdom.” 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, we have a focus for this motion; why should we make diversions? That kind of amendment can come at another occasion. For example, we have a very important statement before us, the Memorandum of Understanding. Time is going to come when we will pass that motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Lukyamuzi, in your speech to the motion, you stated those facts also. So, do we keep this one out, hon. Members? Now, hon. Members, you have started on this point. You know the word “guidance” now disturbs me a lot because you are asking the Speaker to give an opinion and when he does, you accuse him of debating. So, when you say “guidance” I have to give my guidance which amounts to an opinion on a factual matter then it becomes difficult. You are involving me in the debate.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I think let us avoid meandering into scenarios. 

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, when hon. Betty Amongi brought a fact, we conceded and I think the fact that has been brought by hon. Baka Mugabi Stephen is actually more recent. When we talk about the restoration, even the king himself, when we were at the coronation said, “I thank His Excellency, the President for having restored the kingdoms in Uganda.” So, it is not contentious here; it is just a gesture of appreciation. I do not think it is even political. It is telling even the future leaders that cultural leaders should be respected. I think it is in order. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us first hear from the hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi. It is his motion. That is the amendment being proposed. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: You are taking me to the domain of legislative drafting - (Laughter) - over which I am hesitant to pronounce myself. I think what we need in this statement is to acknowledge the contribution of His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, in the restoration of the kingdom. What I have said I think is enough. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you state it again for the record? 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: We acknowledge the restoration of the Kingdom of Buganda by the government and His Excellency, the President. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does that not capture it? “We acknowledge the restoration of the kingdom by the government and the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni.” Is that not clear?

MR BAKA: Mr Speaker, there are two legs to this. The first one is the restoration, which I wish to thank hon. Lukyamuzi for accepting. The second one is that the 20 years of cooperation and peace must also be recognised. So, restoration yes, but the cooperation and enabling environment must also be recognised. It is the second leg.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure from Oyam North.

MR AYENA-ODONG: Oyam North, which borders your constituency incidentally. Mr Speaker, at the beginning, somebody offered a very instructive opinion on how we should proceed on this. The impact of this motion is for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate the Kabaka of the Kingdom of Buganda on successfully leading Buganda in the last 20 years of his enthronement. Now, whereas, I do appreciate that there was a background for the Kabaka to make these achievements, wouldn’t it be proper for his proposal to come in the preamble so that the final resolutions are reserved for the Kabaka but - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one is already there. It is already in the recitals on page 3 at the bottom. That recital is there.

MR AYENA-ODONG: In that case, in view of the fact that the government has already been recognised, Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to just find a way of reinforcing that recital instead of –(Interjections)- because you see you are making it unnecessarily political. We have so many occasions - (Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The mover of the motion has accepted that they should be framed that way. It carries the spirit. The seconder of the motion has agreed to it. So, why should we make it look as if we are fighting something else? Can I put the question to that amendment?

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The honourable colleague who wants to take the Floor is not properly dressed. Whereas he has a necktie and a jacket, he is not in consonance with the etiquette of dressing. Is he in order to even rise and face you when he is not acting in decorum? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not able to see the particular issue being raised on the dress code. (Laughter) But hon. Members, can we finish this matter? Can I put the question to this one? I put the question to the amendment proposed by the hon. Member for Bukooli North. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, what came out from our debate here today, many Members raised the return of the kingdom properties by the President and I think that one should be noted in our resolutions. That Parliament registers its appreciation to His Excellency, President Museveni and the government for agreeing to return the kingdom properties.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, while I would not be negative about that, the establishment still has to release the Memorandum of Understanding. We are speaking from hearsay. I propose that we reserve that for a later time and I will be willing to support such a proposal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can we leave it at this?

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, when the chairman of Buganda caucus was speaking, he talked of 9,000 square miles. When they talk about the 9,000 square miles, they are talking of Bungangaizi and Buyaga. There the Kabaka will have gone beyond his boundary. That is Bunyoro. We cannot accept this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not in the resolution.

MS NABBANJA: Bugangaizi and Buyaga are part of Bunyoro not Buganda. By the way, we also claim Buleemezi, Buweekula, Ssingo, and Buluuli. You know the history.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, thank you very much for adopting this motion.

MS NABUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to bring an amendment to add to number four to applaud the Nabagereka of Buganda for her effort in promoting different development projects in the kingdom and promoting culture among the young subjects.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The fourth to applaud the Nabagereka for the roles she has played in the terms raised by the Member for Luweero District. We agree to that. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This motion has been timely and I thank the hon. Member for insisting; even after the Order Paper had been issued without it, they were accommodated. He pleaded and said he was travelling and he needed this motion to be discussed. I am grateful that the Members have received and given it this acclamation.

MR BIREKERAAWO: The procedural point I am raising is that we have not adopted the entire motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I was saying we were now thanking the Members such that I put the question and we close this debate. I now put the question that the motion as adopted be approved by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Members. The hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi can be excused because he is going for the launch of his book.
 
Hon. Members, we are in a situation of uncertainty. I am unable to adjourn the House to tomorrow because it might be Eid-el-fitr. I am also unable to adjourn the House to Friday because tomorrow might not be the day. So, as I said at the beginning, there is committee work to be done. Today, we have received the response to the budget speech by the shadow minister for finance. We are ready to receive the report. We have also received many of the responses to the policy statements. The committees should expedite their work. They should, therefore, use this time to finalise the work so that by the 19th of this month, they have filed all the reports with the Clerk’s Office so that on the 20th we can start debate on those issues.

We want to create time so that we can have more debate on the committee reports and plug in most of our concerns. For now, I am suspending plenary to engage Members in their committees, which shall continue up to 19th of this month and we resume plenary on the 20th. Therefore, this House stands adjourned to Tuesday 20th August 2013.

(The House rose at 7.20 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 20 August 2013.)
