
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 3 August 2021

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

    1. Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, congratulations! I would like to welcome you to this House. You are not a stranger because you have been here before. Based on that, I am giving you the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to help you in your day-to-day activities. We wish you well in your new assignment. (Applause)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to today’s sitting. I will begin today’s communication on a congratulatory note.

On Friday, 30 July 2021, Uganda’s contingent to the Tokyo Olympics registered a momentous milestone with our members who were running, that is, Joshua Cheptegei and Jacob Kiplimo, winning silver and bronze, respectively, in the 10,000 metre finals. We would like to congratulate them and Uganda as a whole. (Applause)

This is the first time Uganda is winning two medals in the same athletics. We are proud of those people. We will make sure that as Government of Uganda, we continue supporting sports because our flag is flying high in Tokyo yet we are all not there, but a few individuals who are representing us.

We congratulate the Ugandan team and appreciate their efforts in athletics for gallantly flying our national flag.

I also recognise the effort of our other athletes. These include:

    1. Halimah Nakaayi
    2. Winnie Nanyondo
    3. Shida Leni, and
    4. Ronald Musagala. 

I urge them to use the same lesson that has been got from Tokyo to perform even better in the future. They tried their best. (Applause)

We continue to pray for our athletes to win the remaining track and field activities bestowed upon them by the country so that they may give Uganda the glory.

As a House, we have been loud and clear in recognising the importance of favourable public policies in nurturing sports and arts. As we await remarkable performance from the athletes, I implore Government to allocate more resources to sports and arts. The arts should be given immense mileage for the contribution towards promoting the image of the country. The National Budget Framework Paper that will be tabled in this House, before the end of this year, should clearly demonstrate more commitment in funding for sports and other arts. 

I would like to inform you that Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) has put up a tent just besides us here in the parking area. That tent has staff of URA who are supposed to educate you on your tax obligations. When you get time, please visit their tent and you will get more information in regards to your tax obligations. 

Honourable members, today’s sitting will consider a motion to record a vote of thanks to His Excellency the President for the clear and concise exposition of Government policy during his State-of-the-Nation Address on 4 June 2021 pursuant to rule 53(1) of the Rules of Procedure. The Leader of the Opposition will be accorded an opportunity to make a statement in reply to the State-of-the-Nation Address and then it will be followed by the motion thanking the President. 

I would like to thank you. We have matters of national importance and we will handle about five of them. Let us start with hon. Kabanda. 

2.21 
MR DAVID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

You all remember that Cabinet made a decision to rationalise the Public Service by abolishing, mainstreaming or merging a number of agencies with their parent ministries in order to streamline public administration and supervision, to avoid duplication of services and to reduce public agencies. Whereas some agencies were retained, a decision was made to abolish Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and have its current services executed by the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

Abolishing UNRA will have the following impact on the socio-economic transformation of the country: 

    1. Future projects: UNRA is in the process of operationalising expressways toll roads, which will be a catalyst for industrialisation and economic growth. They are expected to generate at least US$ 2 billion in toll revenue in the next 20 years and create 2,000 jobs for the first three toll roads. 

    2. Employment of the youth and women: UNRA has been running a programme of Shs 20 billion allocated to activities through labour-based contracts. They plan to enhance this programme in the next five years to increase the number of beneficiaries to 20,000 through youth reservation schemes under development projects.
 
    3. Adoption of the Parish Development Model: The Authority has adopted the Parish Development Model in the management and maintenance of roads as one of the key mechanisms of positively transitioning households in order to enhance their socio-economic transformation. The youth and women to be employed in the labour-based contract arrangement as well as through unskilled employment opportunities or new projects shall be identified and monitored through – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, summarise your matter of national importance.  

MR DAVID KABANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. They will be identified and monitored through the Parish Development Model. This will enable the youth and women to be engaged in the money-making economy. 

The transfer of UNRA’s workload to the Ministry of Works and Transport would amount to a reversal of the Ministry of Works and Transport reforms of the 1990s. In creating UNRA, the Ministry of Works and Transport sought to commercialise the roads subsector to operate in a business-like manner, with an accountability framework that promotes performance and adopts sound business practices and managerial accountability through effective use of systems and procedures. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that UNRA remains a semi-autonomous institution but has the current structure reviewed to optimise resources and reduce overhead costs. This should also include replacing the current UNRA board function with a three-person supervisory committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Works and Transport. 

Lastly, this will ensure improved political oversight over UNRA for purposes of further service delivery in the sector. 

Madam Speaker, I also request that you use your good office to engage the head of state on this matter so that UNRA can remain autonomous. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. David Kabanda. 

2.26
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli-Mukasa): Madam Speaker, I would like to pay gratitude to hon. Kabanda for presenting this petition. Indeed, the petition has been received by the Ministry of Public Service. It is being considered and the Minister of Works and Transport will get an opportunity to again elaborate on this petition very soon before the Cabinet subcommittee. 

However, I would like to allay the fears of the honourable petitioner that indeed the functions of UNRA are not going to be lost. All these good benefits that he has outlined in the petition are not going to be lost. 

Finally, before a decision or a move is taken to change or disband UNRA, the matter will again go back to Cabinet. At that stage, Cabinet in its wisdom will agree or disagree with that decision. 

One thing is clear, Madam Speaker, the functions of UNRA are not going to be lost; the benefits that UNRA has been bestowing to this country and all the obligations and contracts, which UNRA has undertaken, are not going to be lost. There is not going to be any loss to the country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, thank you for your response. However, one thing you need to bear in mind is that UNRA was put in place by an Act of Parliament, so it is not just a matter of dissolving it from nowhere. 

MR OSHABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the minister. We have heard this story of merging institutions of Government, which is welcome; maybe it is intended to reduce public expenditure. The clarification I seek is, are you intending to come back to Parliament - because some of these institutions, like Madam Speaker has pointed out, are created by Acts of Parliament. 

It is very absurd that Cabinet sits wherever they sit and they think that they are going to overrun the laws created by this House. When are you coming to Parliament before you even assure us that the good deeds of UNRA are not going to be lost? When are you coming to Parliament with amendments in the laws available governing those institutions? Thank you.

2.30
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Silwany, we are still on UNRA. You will come after that. Minister, can you respond to us? The Minister of Works and Transport is also here.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, can I raise my issue on UNRA before the minister responds?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us finish one thing at a go and then you come. Is it related?

MR SILWANY: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I remember I was one of the first members of Parliament that addressed the press and the country when the issue of merging agencies came up and when Cabinet had just started talking about it. A team was invited to Cabinet to make a small presentation in the initial stages. 

However, when you look at UNRA today, it did not just wake up one day and come into existence; UNRA is established by an Act of Parliament. Therefore, what would be right for the minister to do and the clarification that I would like to seek is, are we going to amend the law to do the merging?

Secondly, who is going to monitor? You know the speed with which UNRA has been implementing its activities. It is because there has been an agency that is being monitored by the ministry. What system are you going to use to monitor UNRA to quicken the road networks in Uganda? You know the bureaucracy in the ministries and Government; everything moves at snail speed. What are the checks that you are going to put there so that you monitor UNRA? 

I strongly agree that whereas you want to merge the agencies, some of these agencies should be left independent, especially the essential agencies that benefit Ugandans like UNRA.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order under rule 82.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who are you ordering?

MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, there is a Member here who was once warned to dress properly while in the House. He is back to the House the second time without a necktie. Is it in order for the Member to be in the House without a necktie?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Member?

MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: He is seated next to the honourable Member of Parliament dressed in red.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, if you know that you do not have a necktie, please – Members, it is an embarrassment for you to come to the House when you are not dressed in a parliamentary way. Kindly remember that you should be dressed in a parliamentary way. Yes, honourable minister.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable Minister of Public Service on the issue of mergers. The Ministry of Public Service has already written to some or most of the organisations and agencies that they have proposed for merging, stopping them from recruitment until the merger takes place.

We have so many workers who are retiring, we have so many gaps in staffing and we do not know when the merger will take place. We have not even looked at the laws to repeal or uphold and now you tell the agencies to stop recruiting. You are causing panic in the agencies. Can the minister speak to this and allow agencies, ministries and departments to continue with recruitment until the merger happens? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is whether he can tamper and disband or make a merger before bringing back to Parliament the laws that put these entities in place to have them repealed. UNRA has an Act and the Uganda Road Fund has an Act. Fortunately, we now have an Attorney-General whom I trust very well and I would like to get his opinion. 

For anything where you are merging these entities, there are people who are going to lose jobs. For example, in the Ministry of Works and Transport, the workers there are earning may be Shs 3 million or Shs 5 million per month. These commissioners are earning over Shs 50 million per month, others have got lead cars and they have escorts with them. They are kings in their entities. Now, if this law was passed by Parliament and it put in place the UNRA Act and the Uganda Road Fund Act, they must come back to Parliament for any repeal.

I would like to find out from hon. Muruli-Mukasa, who has just come back today as an ex-officio, to explain to us whether as the minister, he will merge these entities without bringing back the law to Parliament. At the end of the day, there will be matters of litigation against Parliament, Government and the Attorney-General.

The Attorney-General is there and he can give his opinion. I know hon. Muruli-Mukasa might say we are bringing matters out of excitement but we must talk about the law now and the legal brains are here to give you the best occurrence in what you are saying. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I hear from hon. Ecweru because I have seen a letter written by him –(Mr Amos Okot rose­_) – Just a minute, let hon. Ecweru speak and then you will come in. 

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank our honourable colleagues, the members of Parliament, for the concern they have in the sector of Works and Transport. 

The strength of our Government is founded on many things but two major achievements:

1. 	Securing the entire country, and
2. 	Opening up the country. 

Today, you can drive from here and be in Bundibugyo in the next five hours and this is one of our very big achievements. It is one of those milestones that help the NRM to fly its flag. It is true that Cabinet resolved to move in the direction of rationalisation for reasons that the Minister of Public Service will, at an appropriate time, come and clearly articulate to this august House. 

The decision that was taken in Cabinet was that the Ministry of Public Service, working with agencies, will study these agencies carefully. It was agreed that they should not touch those that generate revenue, and they also critically look at some of those agencies that are extremely significant and dismantling them may have far reaching consequences. 

Madam Speaker, we were allowed by the same Cabinet to send our written petitions to the Minister of Public Service. Thereafter, the Ministry of Public Service studies the agency, compares our petition with the studies they have undertaken before coming up with a comprehensive report that they would table before Cabinet for debate. On the basis of what we agree in Cabinet, the Minister of Public Service would then proceed to this august House to make a comprehensive presentation to elicit a debate and also ask us to amend the necessary laws to make their suggestions work. 

As for UNRA, as a ministry we would be very excited to have it come back because it gives us clout and we know the ramifications thereof. However, chances are that it would take us a bit of time trying to adjust to a new situation, yet we have a mandate of five years in which we need to be seen to have executed a number of programmes. 

We have forwarded a petition that is being studied. I would like to allay the fears of my honourable colleagues. I assure them that Government will go on with this systematically, although we also would like to bring this to your attention so that we can see how we proceed. Thank you. 

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This issue of merging agencies is not only being heard of in regard to UNRA or Ministry of Works and Transport. Recently, we got some information that the district service commissions are also being studied with a view to have their roles and responsibilities reversed back to the Public Service Commission. 

It would, therefore, also be right for the ministry to let Parliament know whether that is the way to go so that these decisions do not surprise people. We know that local governments were formed as a result of some Article in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

That is the information I would like to give the House. I thought this is important to help us not only restrict ourselves to the Ministry of Works and Transport but to also go broader and look at entire units regarding the merging of different agencies. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muruli, please take note. 

MR OPIO SAMUEL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to clearly tell this House whether this merger process has begun. I am saying this because while I was at one of the institutions last week, that is, Rural Electrification Agency, for some services, I was asked to go and address my issues to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. The reason was that the merging of institutions had begun. 

I would like to know from the honourable minister whether it is true that this merger process has started. We may be here trying to discuss when it will begin when actually, the “when” has already happened. Thank you. 

MR JOHN MUSILA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for what he has said. However, I would like to say that there is a lot of panic around the country, especially in our civil service rank and file, and other institutions. I come from the background of local governments. I was the Chairman LC V in my district. When the issue of having district service commissions merged into regional ones, it raised a lot of tension down there and I know that tension is still there. 

As a country, we need to speak with the notion that there are institutions we have grown up with and they should be retained. I am in tandem with hon. Silwany on this, especially where Acts of Parliament were made and it will then require us coming back to Parliament if we want to undo them. 

The truth also is that some of these agencies really need to be merged; for example, what would the difference be between Uganda Wildlife Authority and Uganda Wildlife Education Centre at Entebbe? Like hon. Ecweru said, we need to deeply study those ones – for example UNRA and the Uganda Road Fund. 

We have brought some of them up very well and got our young people who now have the experience. I can give you an example of a UNRA road from Mbale to Lwakhakha in my constituency connecting to Kenya. The Kenyan side, through some memorandum of understanding, has also already made their own road connecting to Lwakhakha. When the Kenyans come to Uganda, they admire our roads and that gives us pride. All this appreciation comes to us as a nation because of what our young people at UNRA are doing for Uganda. 

Therefore, we have got to be very careful as we study this. There should be a deliberate committee to study this and recommend before we can see what to do. I submit. 

MR SIMON PETER OPOLOT: Thank You, Madam Speaker. The issue of merging agencies should be taken as a very serious matter. There is information that the forces that want to weaken Government always come in the form of division. They will look into a powerful ministry, like that of works, notice that it is the power of togetherness that makes the Government stand, and they then will come with a trick of dividing it by creating an agency out of it. Therefore, when Government talks about merging agencies, I highly support it and I implore the House to support it. 

As a family, for example, if somebody wants to rule you properly, he will –(Interruption)

MR MOSES OKOT: Madam Speaker is hon. Opolot in order to rise on information but starts debating a matter of national importance, which has not been subjected to debate, and expects this House to kowtow in the same line? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of mergers is a very serious one. We have all agreed in this august House that it is a serious one. Maybe the minister, hon. Muruli, should come up with a paper in regard to that. 

Hon. Muruli, you need to advise the House on the issue the mergers. Much as we want to merge, it should not be for all the institutions. There are some institutions that are still very important, although there are also others where there is probably duplication of work. Therefore, you need to come up with a paper on this. Since this House is the one that made the Acts, it should still be this House to make sure that we have these institutions merged with their mother ministries. 

Minister for Bunyoro affairs, do you want to clarify? Okay.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, there is a roadmap which has been drawn up. Indeed, I would like to assure this august House that this issue of rationalisation – merging and scrapping some of the agencies as well as mainstreaming – will inevitably come back to Parliament. So, I would like to reaffirm what my colleague, hon. Ecweru said; that definitely, we shall come back here. 

Fortunately, one of the members of the Cabinet sub-committee is the Attorney-General – to give us advice, see how we proceed and look at the laws that have set up these agencies. I would like to give my honourable assurance to the august House that come rain, come hailstorms; we shall come back to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. (Mr Olanya rose_) The minister has finished. What point of order are you raising?

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister is not telling the House the truth. There is a circular that was given to other entities to make sure they scrutinise the number of staff in their offices and inform the mother ministries. This is an indication that the merger process has already started and the ministry has started the implementation.

Is the honourable minister in order to tell lies to the august House that they will come back here, yet they are going on with the process? It is true, Madam Speaker; the process is going on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, has the merger started?

MR DAVID KABANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister has promised to come back to this august House to give a statement on the process. However, the information I want to give is that even the Vote number for the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) has been removed. They are no longer getting money from Government.

So, when the minister says, “We are in the process and we shall come back here and give a statement” when power is not moving to our villages, we do not know what he is –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Kabanda for giving way. The information I want to give honourable members is that the honourable minister, who is giving us this information, has just been sworn in today. That, alone, raises eyebrows –(Interjection)– I am talking about the new Parliament, not the former Parliament. I do not know him of the other Parliament; I know him of this Parliament, Madam Speaker.

However, as hon. Ecweru stated – this is what I want to give – we want to know the time but you can see what is coming out now. We need to know the entities that are going to be merged. Which entities are those? We need to know them as Parliament and then you go through with the process.

There are entities with Godfathers here, which cannot be merged. We know these ones; we do not just hide facts. Hon. Muruli Mukasa is not ripe to give a straight answer now. You are a mugole today; you have just been making your maiden speech here. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muruli Mukasa, give us a document to that effect. Present a paper to this House. This House is the one that made laws, which created those institutions. So, you should be able to come back.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I shall come here with a comprehensive – (Interjections) – as soon as the honourable Speaker deems it fit so that we can really give an update –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How much time do you need?

MR MURULI MUKASA: I need a week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want you to work together with the Attorney-General such that you get to know the implication of the whole thing.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, we are already working with the Attorney-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. 

2.54
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. The matter is about sugarcane growers and sugarcane factories and my region, Busoga, is greatly affected.

Farmers grow sugarcane but when it comes to the time of selling, they supply on credit. What happens is that farmers wait for up to six months to be paid this money. In addition, farmers are denied permits. The permits are given to brokers or middlemen. These people, who do not grow sugarcane, are the ones who are given permits. They then extort money from farmers to enable them supply their own sugarcane.

Madam Speaker, on top of this, the sugarcane factories are engaged in illicit activities; they do not pay tax. They declare to Government different accounts, yet they collect money using other accounts. So, even on tax, Government is losing a great deal.

This has caused untold suffering. It has made our region, Busoga, worse with poverty because people are not being paid. The sugarcane factories have not been remitting taxes. They do not even pay the local taxes, like to the Kyabazinga. They do not divulge information to the Uganda Revenue Authority.

Madam Speaker, I, therefore, come here with prayers, that:

    1. Uganda Revenue Authority carries out a forensic audit on all the different accounts, including the secret accounts of these sugarcane factories because they have accounts that they do not declare;

    2. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the state minister in charge of economic monitoring and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives swing into action to revoke the licences of those sugar factories that will be found guilty of such crimes.

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Silwany. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the state minister in charge of economic monitoring, please, make a follow-up on what is happening with the sugar factories. 

Of course, that is reduced revenue to our country. They cannot mistreat the locals, yet they are not paying taxes too. 

2.57
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, I request – this is a matter that indeed falls under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. I request that you allow the trade minister to come up with a comprehensive statement in two weeks’ time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The three ministries will work together.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Of course, we are Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is okay. Hon. Tebandeke and, finally, hon. Afoyocan and then we go to the report. [Hon. Musila rose_] Please be brief. I have a list of Members who had asked to raise matters of national importance.

MR MUSILA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to seek clarification from hon. Silwany. Thank you for this chance. Hon. Silwany mentioned something to do with some of the factories in Busoga not paying tax. It becomes a very crucial issue and criminal in nature.

Could he clarify to us Members, and with evidence, that he possibly knows some of those factories which are evading taxes, which is criminal in this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what is going to be investigated. He is giving us information but
the responsible committees and ministries are going to investigate. Thank you.

2.59
MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NUP, Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a matter of national importance regarding the increased and constant floods and drought that have affected the people of Bbale Constituency.

Allow me to bring it to your attention that this natural calamity has come about as a result of prolonged drought seasons, which have affected a number of families in Bbale County. The same matter has been repeatedly reported to the Office of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, who are keeping aloof and turning a blind eye towards our requisition.

Madam Speaker, it will be dismaying to the people of Bbale if this Government gives the Prime Minister and the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness condolences to go and bury the people in Bbale that have died because of the floods, when they have failed to prevent them. A case in point -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Tell us your problem.

MR TEBANDEKE: We have just lost a sister -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tebandeke, state your prayer. Even the people in Bukedea are dying but we do not lament.
 
MR TEBANDEKE: Allow me to bring it to your notice that we have lost 4,000 families that have been affected -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What are your prayers?

MR TEBANDEKE: Allow me to put forward the following prayers – (Interruption)-

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order, which I always do not do. To stand on the Floor and say that 4,000 households, not even families, have been lost - Can the Member substantiate? Is it in order for the honourable member to come here and lie to Parliament and Ugandans that we have lost 4,000 households? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you substantiate, honourable member, if you have lost 4,000 people?

MR TEBANDEKE: Madam Speaker, it is not 4,000 people but 4,000 households and this is on the record. The names are here. Allow me to avail you a copy and a petition from the local authorities. 

Madam Speaker, we pray that the Office of the Prime Minister comes up and provides -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, I need a clear figure. You are better off saying that you have lost a number of people other than stating a number that we are not sure of. We need to verify that.

MR TEBANDEKE: Madam Speaker, it is 4,000 homes that have been displaced by the constant floods and here is the record.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can it be corrected that 4,000 people have been displaced but not dead.

MR TEBANDEKE: They are not dead. Madam Speaker, we pray that the Government provides these people with temporary shelters in the form of tents, clothes, blankets, beds, mattresses, mosquito nets among others. We also need relief items like food, soap, matchboxes among others.

Madam Speaker, in reference – (Interruption)-

MR MOSES OKOT: Thank you very much, honourable member, for accepting information. Madam Speaker, I happen to come from the other side of the lake that has affected Kayunga. My constituency is Kioga, which is a peninsula district between Lake Kyoga and Lake Kwania. The plight of the people of Kayunga is the same in all manner with the plight of the people in Kioga. In fact, I have data from the district statistician that states that in Kioga, 4,000 homesteads have been lost –(Interruption)-

MR ZIJJAN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The COVID-19 pandemic is still a major concern to us. The lifting of the lockdown does not imply that the prevalence of COVID-19 has reduced. The honourable member on the Floor has been addressing us with his nose outside his mask, which poses a great danger to this House.

I would wish that you guide sternly that Members take COVID-19 seriously and do not become lax. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members follow the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs).

MR MOSES OKOT: Madam Speaker, can I revert to the information I was giving. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is over.

MR MOSES OKOT: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, there is an issue of 4,000 displaced families. The record must be corrected; they are not dead but displaced - The minister will give you feedback and she will be in your constituency. I think that is what you want, not just lamenting. The minister is coming up. Just wait for the minister in your constituency.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Issues of floods, looming hunger and drought are affecting the entire country amidst the pandemic.

Madam Speaker, I would like to be on record that Kayunga District has been given first priority amongst all districts, which have been affected by the floods. We have so far sent four trucks of food and non-food items to Kayunga District.

Now, the Member who has been on the Floor came to my office and I told him that the ministry sends items to the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) for accountability purposes but not to the Member of Parliament. The Member says that there are 4,000 people but we have over 647,000 Ugandans who are affected by the floods.

On Sunday, I was with the Prime Minister in Buliisa and the situation was very pathetic. We do not have enough to cover the entire country. However, we are trying to do something with the little we have. I have a list of many requisitions. I do not know which one to prioritise and which one to leave out. However, we give priority to those affected by floods at the moment, especially those whose places have been submerged by the lakes. Fortunately, the Ministry of Water and Environment is coming up with a programme to evacuate the people from the lakes and the waterways.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Member to testify on the Floor whether Kayunga District has not received any items. Even the Woman Member of Parliament for Kayunga has been to my office. The Prime Minister and I have promised to go to Kayunga on our next trip.

The request by Kayunga District is bigger than this; they want boats but it is not in the budget. They want land, which belongs to the Government. The land they requested for is a big forest and we are not about to give out any forest land. Now, we would like to work out with the district, and I think that is what the Member of Parliament should be advocating for; looking for land and then we resettle the people instead of coming here to say “4,000 people have died”.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, please endeavour to get time, go to Kayunga and give us a report. We need to get a report from there – it is not a rebuttal.

Mr tebandeke: Madam Speaker, allow me to clarify this matter. The people am talking of that have been affected are here – 

The Deputy Speaker: I am saying that I have directed. The minister must go there with you and verify. 

Mr tebandeke: Madam Speaker, I have even tried to call the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) – 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, can you lay on the Table the report? 

Mr tebandeke: Allow me to lay this report on the Table for more clarification. 

The Deputy Speaker: What is the report about? 

Mr tebandeke: It consists of the 4,000 homesteads that have been affected and displaced. Even their contacts are here, including the reports from the relevant authorities; all the chairpersons in the 28 villages who have not received anything. 

The Deputy Speaker: Lay it on the Table. 

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, we all know that when a disaster  hits your area, the process is that the district disaster committee goes to the area, makes an assessment, compiles a report and that report is forwarded to the Prime Minister’s Office for due consideration. Reports from LC1 chairpersons have to be done or compiled by the district disaster committee. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, are we proceeding well for us to admit a report from a colleague that does not meet the standards of reports? When you get a report, we need to take action on it. 

I propose that with the guidance you gave, the minister goes, we get a report from the district disaster committee and that is the report Government will work on but not a document submitted by a Member – (Interruption) 

Mr ssewungu: Madam Speaker, with due respect, all members of Parliament here are representing their people. When they go out to their constituencies during the weekend or at any time, they get problems from those people. What members do and what the Member has done is that he has taken extra care about his people, got names of those particular people and you have allowed him to raise his matter of national importance.

When he comes here with additional evidence that he lays on the Table, is the honourable Chief Whip in order to say that this Member is not proceeding well?

We are supposed to go to our constituencies. When you give this information - hon. Ecweru is my witness; he likes it more than anybody because he was a Minister for Disaster Preparedness; if they are going to have their ministerial committee and the team from the ministry - this is additional information from a Member.

Therefore, is the honourable Chief Whip in order to close out members of Parliament from bringing their evidence to the Floor of Parliament, yet they are coming from their own constituencies to get relief and support to the effects their people are facing? Does he want to rule before you, the Speaker of Parliament? Is he usurping your powers? You have said, “Lay on the Table.” 

3.13
Ms Esther Afoyochan (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. After almost one and half years since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in Uganda, the country, through the Ministry of Health, has instituted a number of measures aimed at controlling the spread of the virus and its disastrous effects. These have included restricted movement of people and vehicles and public gatherings, closure of education institutions, restricted use of places of worship and vaccination among others. 

These measures have seriously affected the country in terms of the economy, social standing and moral standing, including closure of schools. 

The Ministry of Health has rightly guided that the most effective medium and long term solution to this pandemic is mass vaccination of at least 22 million Ugandans, including the slightly over 15 million school going children. 

From the available information at the COVID-19 response info-hub at the Ministry of Health, Uganda has administered at least 1,143,763 doses of COVID-19 vaccines so far. Assuming every person needs two doses that is enough to have vaccinated 1.3 per cent of the country’s population. 

With the reopening of schools, for example tagged to the vaccination of almost all school-going children and going by these statistics in almost a year of vaccination, we definitely need to rethink our strategy. Otherwise, our children may never go back to school. 

These are my prayers:

    1.  The Minister of Health presents to Parliament a comprehensive vaccination plan for the whole country detailing the timeframe, costs involved and likely sources of funds.

    2.  Aware that the country is faced with other competing priorities for funding other sectors in health and particularly vaccination, and in appreciation of many Ugandans of good will that have come up to support the fight against COVID-19, the members of Parliament seated right here; I pray that we collectively resolve to contribute at least Shs 2 million each towards the purchase of these vaccines to allow our children go back to school.

Those are my prayers to this House. I would like to add that we are stakeholders in this country – (Interruption) 

Mr ssemujju: Madam Speaker, you will allow me to raise this broadly. This morning, I went to the basement parking. I found one vehicle that had not been properly parked taking up space of more than 20 vehicles. 

I have also seen a Member of Parliament even when rules are very clear that when the Speaker is speaking, you take your seat – Now, another Member of Parliament, in a matter of national importance, wants Parliament to collectively resolve yet there is a whole chapter of moving motions and resolutions of Parliament.

I can understand the limitations of COVID-19 but this Parliament needs to carry out the orientation. There are things that we take for granted when they are not. There is no way you are going to ask Parliament, in a matter of national importance that, “I want Parliament to collectively resolve…” in the Parliament of Uganda! Probably, this happens in some other caucuses. 

The procedural issue I am raising, Madam Speaker – 
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did she say that she wants Parliament to resolve or is she requesting the Members? 

MR SSEMUJJU: The second prayer is for Parliament to collectively resolve. Parliament can only collectively resolve once a motion has been properly moved under our rules but not when someone stands up and says she has an issue.

(Text expunged)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we expunge that statement? 

(Text expunged)

MS AFOYOCHAN: Madam Speaker, I want to say that while as members of Parliament, we are all equal in our rights, it is important for us to rise up now and stand with our people. Honourable Members of Parliament, even if it were a garden, I am sure we would have bought fertilisers. Even God demands 10 per cent of tithe; why can’t we give our people Shs 2 million only out of our money, to ensure that our children go back to school?

MR ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am going to raise this procedural matter because it raises points of law. Section 44 of the Employment Act provides that salaries and payments to any employee, in this case, members of Parliament, can only be deducted under four conditions:

    1. When it is expressly stated in the law by way of taxation;
    2. When there is order from Court saying deduct; and
    3.  By consent.

Madam Speaker, the honourable member, who is a Commissioner of Parliament and who should be responsible for ensuring that members of Parliament are protected, rises up here unlawfully to move a motion that Members’ emoluments be deducted contrary to the employment Act. Is she proceeding well and would this House proceed right when such a Member can wake up from her dreams and come to this House to talk about personal liberties of members of Parliament in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I think hon. Afoyochan, as a mother, is just bringing in her request to Members.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, let us agree and look at the situation in the country –(Interruption) 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising – and procedure takes precedence - I hope hon. Tayebwa, having been here for at least one term knows it - is that in the last Parliament, the Speaker moved Parliament to resolve that each Member of Parliament surrenders a percentage of his/her allowances for purposes of building a Cancer Institute at St Francis Hospital, Nsambya. 

Later, that matter run into trouble with the law and from then, Parliament resolved that going forward, if there is a matter as good as the one hon. Afoyochan is proposing, there will be forms for Members of Parliament to individually sign to consent.

I am raising a procedural issue that whether a matter that has been decided before in this Parliament should be returned in another form yet the motive is the same. We have gone through this before and the resolution of this Parliament was that you cannot offend the law. If hon. Afoyochan wants everybody to contribute, let her generate forms and every Member of Parliament indicates they are giving that consent. People like Rtd Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi, who are very rich, can even contribute a billion shillings. (Laughter)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For today, you have given just one very educative thing that the lady should move with the paper. That is the only good advice you have given for today. Can you finish?

MS PACUTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate hon. Afoyochan, feeling concerned for Ugandans. However, allow me give this information to hon. Afoyochan and Members. The information is that Government has, on several occasions, ably explained that the challenge with vaccination is not about lack of funds. 

Madam Speaker, I am the Vice Chairperson, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Today, we had the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with many technocrats from the ministry. The issue is not lack of funds. The issue is the principle of supply versus demand. The supply for vaccines is limited but the funds are there to procure vaccines. Therefore, I would not buy the idea being fronted by my honourable sister that we each contribute Shs 2 million.

Madam Speaker, the Pakwach Local Government Task Force, in the last two weeks, requested communities of Pakwach to contribute for oxygen cylinders and we did. We do not have to come to Parliament and tomorrow, the media will say that Members of Parliament, who are earning so much, have refused to contribute Shs 2 million each. I would like to say that, that should be done individually; it should not be done on the fact that Government has failed to procure vaccines. The vaccines are just not readily available on the market. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, that topic has been closed. The Members who would like to contribute will contribute to the National Task Force just like we did in the Tenth Parliament and the rest will be left to the ministry.

STATEMENT ON THE COMPENSATION OF VICTIMS OF THE LORD’S RESISTANCE ARMY (LRA) INSURGENCY IN THE VARIOUS PARTS OF THE COUNTRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, under rule 52 of the Rules of Procedure, a debate on a ministerial statement should not exceed one hour. I will accordingly give this debate 20 minutes because we still have a lot on today’s Order Paper.

3.38
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden appearance here. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, on your election to that very tough seat. I have been here for a little bit and I see that you are doing a very good job. Thank you. I would also like to congratulate you, honourable colleagues, upon your election to this 11th Parliament. 

At the 11th Sitting of the First Meeting of this session, the honourable member for Adjumani District, Jesca Ababiku, requested for a statement providing an update on the compensation relating to the victims of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) insurgency in the Madi sub-region and other areas. I filed a written statement and I will repeat a summary of the same. 

There is a committee, headed by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, which is implementing the exercise of verifying livestock compensation. This is specifically dealing with livestock compensation; the other compensations have been going on for a long time. 

The verification exercise is taking place in the northern, eastern and West Nile sub-regions, including Acholi, Lango, Teso, Karamoja, West Nile, Sebei, Bukedi – Budaka, Busia and Tororo districts – and the Busoga area, dealing with Iganga and Luuka districts.

The exercise in Acholi and Lango sub-regions is in advanced stages, with the evaluation and assessment of livestock compensation already in advanced stages. We have got details of claimants and beneficiaries that have been collected and are on display in the respective districts that I have mentioned above. The claimants and beneficiaries per subregion, as we have them at this point, are about 16,946 from the Acholi subregion, 42,042 from the Lango subregion, and 33,664 from the Teso subregion. There are a total of about 92,652 claimants and beneficiaries. 

The display exercise has been going on since December 2020 and we are still continuing with the follow-ups to try and complete the biodata and the data cards. The data card exercise shall be conducted in conjunction with the district leaders, the district officials, utilising the district structures and participating elders. 

I welcome all Members of Parliament who can get the time to get interested in this exercise. This exercise has been going on for a long time and the more the leaders get involved, the faster we can put it behind us once and for all. 

The verification, validation and due diligence exercise has been cited as a priority area in line with the priority areas as stated by His Excellency the President for the budget of the financial year 2021/2022. It has been clearly stated in the second budget call circular on the finalisation of the detailed budget estimates. Clearly, this is high on our agenda and we hope that we can get through with this exercise as quickly as possible.

Right now, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has provided Shs 2.9 billion to conclude the exercise in the different sub-regions. The compensation exercise shall be concluded with amicable settlements of the suits that are already existing in the courts. There were a number of suits that had already been commenced by different people. The President directed that these matters be resolved amicably and this is part of that exercise. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has now indicated, in its correspondence of March 2021, that Shs 50 billion will be provided for compensation in this financial year and an additional Shs 100 billion will be availed in line with the directives of His Excellency the President. These are just estimates that we are using to determine where we stand. We do not have to use all of it if indeed the compensation does not get there, but at least that has been made available. 

Once this exercise in these regions that I have stated above has been completed, we shall then expand to Karamoja, West Nile, Sebei and Bukedi – that is the districts of Budaka, Busia and Tororo. We shall then continue towards the end of this financial year. 

In specific regard to the Madi sub-region, in January 2020, the High Court in Arua, presided over by Justice Oyuko Ojok, ordered the display of the lists of persons whose claims had been presented in Civil Suit No. 23/2017: Hon. Piro Santos v. the Attorney-General. The claimants were all from Adjumani District. The lists were displayed at the district headquarters and each of the respective subcounties. 

The case concluded without confirmation of the details of the claimants and beneficiaries. The trial judge ordered a verification to determine the genuine claims. This verification is still ongoing. The final assessment of all the claims shall be duly submitted to Cabinet and Parliament for due consideration. 

Madam Speaker, this is to apprise you on the status of the compensations in those regions. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, how long will the verification take?

MR KIRYOWA: Madam Speaker, we expect that we should be finishing the verification by the end of this quarter that we have just started and then we can bring it to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which month? The issue of compensation has been ongoing. That is what the President has used during his campaigns. Therefore, when we do not get feedback, we will be looked at as people who do not follow up their issues. 

MR KIRYOWA: Madam Speaker, I can undertake to provide a report after every two weeks. I can assure you that this is top on my agenda and I am on it every day. In a fortnight, I will give an update. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will be giving Parliament a report after every two weeks. 

3.46
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate my younger brother – now my senior by virtue of his position – and welcome him to the House. 

In this House, we have had issues to do with compensations payable by Government, especially to claimants who have not obtained court awards. I would like to interest the Attorney-General to critically examine compensations as a result of existing court cases or court awards and compensations that come from outside the known legal regime. 

I would implore the Attorney-General that in making compensations, kindly, consider individuals who have court awards as a priority. There is also a category of compensations that comes from the Executive that has no known legal regime. That has always been the area where public money is syphoned and stolen hands down. 

I will, therefore, interest the Attorney-General to look at the compensations that have been made in the last 10 years, outside the known court awards, and possibly come up with either a statutory instrument or something to regulate them. At the end of the day, you find that those outside compensations are actually allocated much more money than legitimate claims. 

We would also be interested, as the people of Kigezi region who were affected by the Rwanda Patriotic Front (RPF) war of 1990-1994, in one time being considered for compensation for the lost lives and property. Thank you.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification. While the LRA war took place in northern Uganda, in eastern Uganda we were greatly affected by the “Holy Spirit” Movement of Lakwena. This has not been talked about. 

Honourable Attorney-General, the people of Busoga, Teso – that entire area – are on our necks. We would like to know the status of the compensations for the people who were affected by the war of Lakwena, so that we take this compensation that you are going to do as a blanket action. You cannot only handle the other one and leave out the people affected by Lakwena, just like what the Shadow Attorney-General has said.

So, let us consider something that is a blanket action and is going to benefit everyone in Uganda. Otherwise, I thank the Attorney-General for such an elaborate statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, you need to take note of what hon. Niwagaba said. Some of these people run to court and end up getting more money than the real people who lost their property and people. At the end of the day, that is how the money is swindled. 

3.49
MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Attorney-General for the commitment he has made. I am very confident that indeed, the issues of compensation will this time be resolved. 

Madam Speaker, I have two issues. Firstly, it is my prayer that for once, we conclude the issue of compensation in Acholi sub-region. The people of Acholi have been waiting and these issues have been politicised and termed as a campaign tool. I am very hopeful that this time round, it will not delay.

The second point is on the issue of data collection. Madam Speaker, I request that before we move to do the compensation, Parliament should be provided with the list of the beneficiaries to avoid any further complaints that may arise from compensating ghost people. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, hon. Linda?

MS IRENE LINDA: I would like to inform the Attorney-General that it is not only the Northern Region that was affected by the rebels. Rwenzori sub-region was also affected by ADF rebels and a case in point is Kichwamba Technical College, where 80 students were burnt alive and 100 abducted. Up to today, they have never been compensated.

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is: can they also be included and they get compensated? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, I think you need to look at compensation in general.

3.51
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Attorney-General for having attempted to respond to a few concerns. However, the Attorney-General made a statement that other compensation has been going on.

Madam Speaker, we are not only asking for animal compensation. In Acholi sub-region, the community is asking for other compensation like the people who suffered during the LRA war.

I remember in 2010, the Office of the Presidential Advisors was directed to register all those who lost their properties during the LRA war - those whose arms and ears were cut off - in fact, those who suffered during the war. They were fully registered and the Government promised to compensate those people and it came up with the idea of only zeroing on animals.

Madam Speaker, I request that the Attorney-General looks at the record properly. It is unfortunate that the Attorney-General has just come into office and he does not know the history of compensation in this country. Attorney-General, sit with your team and follow it in an orderly way so that when you are handling compensation, everything is done in a holistic manner.

We beg this time that the issues of compensation be dealt with properly in the Acholi Sub-region, West Nile, Lango Sub-region and other parts of the country. Time and again, the Government has continued to promise to complete compensation –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I gave you 20 minutes and you are repeating the same thing. Instead of agreeing that the Attorney-General brings a holistic report on compensation, you are repeating the same thing about Teso.

MR KATENYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am here on a point of information. I want to inform the Attorney-General that Bugisu region has been segregated. It is actually in the middle of Bugisu, Teso and Sebei and we have suffered the most. 

It is very bad for me to come and commit suicide in Parliament because you have left my region out. We have suffered as a result of the Kony and the Karimojong war.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to commit suicide? (Laughter)

MR KATENYA: So, request, Madam Speaker, that the compensation should be extended to Bugisu so that we are catered for.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Compensation is going to be looked at holistically. 

MR KATENYA: I give information to my colleague to also add. (Laughter)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give to my colleague and the House is that during the Ninth Parliament, the people of Bugisu made a petition to this House so that they are among the beneficiaries of the compensation plan by this country.

They also made several trips - which I am aware of - to State House and met the President. The people of Bugisu met the Committee on Government Assurances and brought their petition, which was well captured by this House. If compensation is to be done - you cannot compensate Teso but compensate Sebei and Bukedi and leave out Teso, who suffered during that rustling. 

My prayer is that the learned Attorney-General goes back and comprehensively looks at which areas need to be compensated. If it is about funding, appropriation and supplementary, I think this House will be honoured to look at it and do due diligence. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have the Attorney-General on the microphone? Attorney-General, give the country a commitment on compensation in a holistic manner.

3.59
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened to all the comments and I am going to look at everything holistically.

The issue of compensation is much wider than one paper and there are very many claims that are coming up. We shall give Parliament a report on where we are going and in what direction we are going in a fortnight, so that you can know what we are thinking. 

Madam Speaker, it is important to note that all these claims come with cost. I implore members of Parliament that as we discuss the issue of compensation, we must understand that it has a cost implication. However, I am going to report in a fortnight.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, I also request that when you make a report, it should entail all the sub-regions. You should be able to call the Acholi team and discuss with them. If it is Lango, call them. If it is Bugisu, call them such that the whole area is represented.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE
REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY TASKFORCE ON THE NATIONAL COVID-19 RESPONSE

3.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, PARLIAMENTARY TASKFORCE ON THE NATIONAL COVID-19 RESPONSE (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the report of the Parliamentary Taskforce on the National COVID-19 Response as set up by the Rt Hon. Speaker under rule 8 of our Rules of Procedure.

Madam Speaker, the original copy signed by members, as required by our rules, is hereby laid on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  A copy of the report has been laid on the Table.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, all the annexures to the report plus documents considered and all materials are also laid on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please lay them on the Table. Thank you, Chairperson.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, this report is going to be presented by several of us because of the nature of the taskforce you instituted. You did institute a national team plus four regional teams, and all of them were independent. They made independent field visits and came up with reports. Later on, we did meet and harmonise, but we have decided that each of the regional team leaders should present a report, although they are all contained in one report.

Secondly, there is one issue, which we thought one of our colleagues will also present, and that is the issue of accountability.

The taskforce, as per the terms of reference, was required to –

    1. Inquire into and report on Government’s preparedness and response	to COVID-19.
    2. Provide assessment of the health impact of COVID-19 in the community and country at large.
    3. Assess the operation, administration and management of funds and other resources appropriated for them to manage the pandemic.
    4. Further assess the role of private sector healthcare providers in COVID-19 management.
    5. Carry out field visits to assess the state of the healthcare system in the regional referral hospitals - both selected general hospitals and the lower health facilities.
    6. Conduct sensitisation and awareness programmes on mass media to educate the population. 
    7. Prepare and submit a report to Parliament. 

The taskforce commenced operations on the 29th of June, reviewed documents and held meetings with the Ministry of Health, National Medical Stores, Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development, and Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development to scrutinise Government’s resurgence plan, budget and funds released to fund the resurgence plan.

The regional teams of the taskforce, additionally, conducted field activities in western, eastern, northern and central regions to assess the pandemic conditions on the ground, and make recommendations for adoption as part of the Government resurgence plan.

In my time as a Member of Parliament, which is not a very long one, Madam Speaker, I have never seen a comprehensive field study like this undertaken by the field teams. 

The regional teams, in accordance with the above mentioned terms of reference, found that there was little evidence on the ground to show that more than Shs 5 trillion had been spent to address deficiency in the health system to effectively manage the COVID-19 pandemic. In view of this, the taskforce took note of the Auditor-General’s report on the COVID-19 expenditures and recommended, as you will see later on, that the Auditor-General should carry out a forensic audit to establish value for money for the expenditures related to the pandemic since financial year 2019/2020.

The taskforce further found that there was an urgent need to prioritise vaccination for the 21.9 million Ugandans over the age of 18. The 4.3 million doses required for the mass vaccination should be sourced through the various vaccine acquisition modes enumerated by the Ministry of Health, namely donations, direct purchase, procurement through the COVAX facility, and possibly vaccines acquired through private companies.

Madam Speaker, I was getting a little bit uneasy at the beginning of this session with the debate that was going on. I thought that it was pre-empting my report.

In addition to the mass vaccination drive, the other interventions found necessary to manage the pandemic include the following: 

    1. Availing sufficient personal protective equipment for health workers.
    2. Stepping up availability and supply of medical oxygen.
    3. Procurement and installation of more Intensive Care Unit (ICU) beds
    4. Recruitment of more intensivists and other essential medical workers. 
    5. Waiving the 30 per cent tax on the risk allowance for health workers.
    6. Setting up an ambulance system.
    7. Setting up more isolation units.
    8. Accrediting more health facilities including health centres IV, private not-for-profit and private for-profit hospitals or facilities to test for and manage cases of COVID-19.
    9. Improving home based care for mild cases.
    10. Stepping up surveillance and contact tracing.
    11. Establishing a COVID–19 Fund, and
    12. Enhancing diagnostics at all levels by procuring and installing MRI and CT scans in all regional referral hospitals. 

That generally summarises the tasks, which we embarked on. We decided that we are going to proceed as follows:

At this point, I am going to yield the Floor to the hon. Dicksons Kateshumbwa to present one chapter on expenditures and accountability.

Thereafter, we shall yield the Floor to hon. Dr Emmanuel Otaala from the eastern region, the hon. Dr Joseph Ruyonga from the western region, the hon. Hope Nakazibwe from the central region and hon. Dr Charles Ayume from the northern region. 

Madam Speaker, as you realise, the people you appointed are composed of medical doctors, we had a veterinary doctor and another category, which we used to call “other doctors”. Somebody says those are witch doctors.

After my colleagues have presented, I will come back and present the cross-cutting recommendations. I beg to request that you allow us yield the Floor to hon. Dicksons Kateshumba. 

4.13
Mr Dicksons Kateshumbwa (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

Mr katuntu: Madam Speaker, the copies were uploaded at 11.15 a.m. and I am sure Members should have accessed them on their emails –(Interjections)– because that is the practice and the rule. Actually colleagues, the policy of Parliament is to be paper free. 

Mr aogon: Madam Speaker, we are well aware that colleagues, mostly the new ones, have not yet got their iPads. I feel that it becomes a disadvantage.
What we are trying to discuss is a very pertinent matter and I do not think anybody had the time to go and print a paper anywhere. How I wish we had copies that Members can be able to follow. I doubt it is possible for us to have this debate without the Members having this with them.

Mr olanya: Madam Speaker, in addition to my colleague’s idea, right now Members of Parliament have not been given their email addresses. The honourable member said it was uploaded to their emails. We do not have email addresses from Parliament –(Interjections)– the new Members of Parliament. You the old ones may have.

Let honourable members get their copies first so that we follow critically as this is a very important matter.

Ms afoyochan: Madam Speaker, as a new Member of Parliament, I would like to say that I have an email address from Parliament. We were given last time in this very tent. It starts with your name and it is @parliament of Uganda. If you are failing to open it, there is always help at this desk. Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Kateshumbwa, can you go ahead? Honourable members, we are going to listen to the report and we will debate it later. Can we listen to the report?

Mr Kateshumbwa: Madam Speaker, my presentation is on COVID-19 expenditures and accountability. The Government of Uganda has provided a total of Shs 4.034 trillion to finance COVID-19 related expenditure since the onset of COVID-19 in March 2020. Out of this, Shs 314 billion was provided in the Financial Year 2019/2020. Shs 2.7 trillion was provided for Financial Year 2020/2021 and Shs 932.5 billion has been provided for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

A total of Shs 1.139 trillion has been provided to finance interventions related to the provision of direct health services. Shs 116 billion has been directed towards social protection, specific interventions such as Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) and the fund to the vulnerable populations within cities and municipalities. Another Shs 2.66 trillion has been provided to support interventions that have been implemented under the economic stimulus package. 

By implementing the various economic stimulus packages, the Government of Uganda intended to minimise the negative impact of COVID-19 on the socio-economic welfare of the economy with focus on household economic welfare and firms to survive the crisis and maintenance of the financial stability to avoid the collapse of the economy. 

Interventions such as Uganda Development Bank (UDB) recapitalisation to support the SACCOs through the Uganda Micro-finance Support Centre, Emyooga and the youth funds and the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Program, and the provision of input and support the E-voucher systems were well intentioned to boost the private sector, protect economic resilience and provide some certainty for business. 

However, they were affected by lack of a transparent mechanism to ensure that the resources trickle down to the intended beneficiaries. Consequently, the committee found that many small and medium enterprises, women and youth have continued to suffer from the economic impacts of COVID-19 unabated.  

The first recommendation here from the committee is that the Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should submit to Parliament full accountability backed by an authentic list of beneficiaries of funds appropriated in respect to the recapitalisation of UDB totalling to Shs 558 billion and additional allocation to support SACCOs under the Uganda Micro-finance Support Centre totalling to Shs 77.72 billion meant to enable the small and medium enterprises access quick and affordable credit to turn around their businesses that were on the verge of collapsing. 

The committee further recommends that Government should provide to Parliament full accountability indicating the beneficiaries of the funds appropriated under the youth fund totalling to Shs 130 billion, Uganda Women Entrepreneurs Program under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development totalling to Shs 29.51 billion and Emyooga through the Micro-finance Support Centre under the Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development totalling to Shs 260 billion. 

The committee further recommends that future interventions such as the youth fund should be appropriated under the rightful ministries that ordinarily are mandated to perform such functions in order to avoid duplication and uncoordinated programs. 

The committee further recommends that Government should halt the provision of any form of stimulus until the Auditor-General conducts a forensic audit on all that have been appropriated for the COVID-19 response. 

The high cost of enforcement of COVID-19 containment measures 

The taskforce notes that whereas there is still a deficit in the required budgetary allocation towards the procurement of the much-needed vaccines to the tune of 365.9 billion, the Government is still spending huge sums of money on COVID-19 containment measures at the expense of vaccination. 

Since the onset of COVID-19 in the financial year 2019/2020, a total of Shs 142.23 billion has so far been spent on the enforcement of COVID-19 lockdown directives. 

In addition, during the financial year 2019/2020, Parliament appropriated a total of Shs 22.18 billion to support the establishment of 20 isolation centres in each district and to undertake surveillance, as means of slowing down on the disease’s transmission. However, the teams that visited upcountry established that in most of these districts, not a single isolation centre ever existed.  

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that Government should submit detailed accountability to Parliament for Shs 22.18 billion appropriated to facilitate the establishment of the 20 isolation centres in each district, indicating the location in each district where such facilities were established. 

The discrepancy in COVID-19 expenditure for the Financial Year 2019/2020 

Parliament of Uganda appropriated Shs 94.18 billion, under the supplementary budget schedule, to the Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Health, in its submission to the taskforce, indicated that by the end of the financial year 2019/2020, a total of Shs 92.431 billion had been spent, leaving a balance of Shs 1.75 billion unspent. The balance was reported to have been returned to the Consolidated Fund. 

The review of the actual expenditures submitted to the taskforce by the Ministry of Health revealed a total of Shs 99.069 billion as having been spent instead of the reported Shs 92.431 billion. 

The taskforce, therefore, noted that this amount is over and above the amount appropriated, by Shs 4.8 billion. The source of the additional funds totaling to Shs 4.8 billion remains unknown and it was not possible that the ministry would spend more money than what had been appropriated. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should explain the source of the additional expenditure amounting to Shs 4.8 billion. 

The discrepancy in the purchase and nationwide distribution of public masks

As a condition for lifting the lockdown in May 2020, Cabinet directed the Ministry of Health to provide non-medical and reusable facemasks worth Shs 34,109,085 to all persons above the age of six. In addition, as a prerequisite to the opening of the schools, Cabinet further directed that all learners should be provided with fabric masks. 

Therefore, this necessitated a procurement of an additional 2.5 million masks for the finalists in the candidate classes. Consequently, a total of 36.7 million masks, at a cost of Shs 2400 per mask, were procured and distributed to 135 districts and to all finalist learners in candidate classes across the country. 

At the cost of Shs 2,400 per fabric mask, the total cost for 36.7 million masks comes to Shs 88 billion. However, a review of accountability by the Government of Uganda, COVID-19 funding to the Ministry of Health for the period of March 2020 to June 2021 revealed that a total of Shs 90.99 billion was spent on the procurement of fabric masks for the communities totaling 35,323,287 and finalist learners totaling to 2,592,963. This brings the overall number of community masks to 37,916,250. 

Consequently, the analysis by the taskforce revealed a discrepancy in both the reported number of fabric masks procured and distributed by 1,214,202 and the amount of money spent on the procurement of fabric masks by Shs 2.9 billion.

The committee recommends that the honourable Minister of Health should explain the observed discrepancy arising from her report titled, “Update to Parliament taskforce on COVID-19 in Uganda” which was dated 7 July 2021 and the one titled, “Accountability for the Government of Uganda COVID-19 funding to the Ministry of Health, March 2020 to June 2021.” These two reports do not speak together. 

External financing to the Ministry of Health, COVID-19 response 

The Ministry of Health reported that a total of Shs 389.1 billion was received as external financing for the period of March 2019 to June 2021. Out of this, Shs 215.19 billion was from the Global Fund; Shs 56.24 billion was from the World Bank (The Uganda COVID-19 Response and Emergency Preparedness Project) and Shs 55.5 was from the World Bank’s Contingency Emergency Response Component; Shs 51.02 billion from the Islamic Development Bank; Shs 10.4 billion and 0.78 billion was from GAVI and the Uganda Sanitation Fund respectively. 

The Contingency Emergency Response Funds were spent on coordination, risk communication, ICT innovations, case management, mental health and psycho-social support, surveillance and laboratory operations as well as logistics, among others. 

On the other hand, the UCREPP funds were spent on staff salaries, training of medical health personnel and other office operations. The global funds were mainly spent on the purchase of test kits, surveillance, support supervision and the purchase of oxygen cylinders, among others. 

A review of the external financing accountabilities submitted by the Ministry of Health revealed that most of these items that were funded were similar in nature and purpose as those funded using the Government of Uganda budget. It was, therefore, not possible to establish whether there was no duplication and, therefore, multiple accountabilities. 

Madam Speaker, the taskforce, therefore, recommends that the Auditor-General should institute a forensic audit into all the COVID-19 expenditures to ascertain value for money. 

Donations towards COVID-19 response

The taskforce was informed that Government, through the national taskforce and district taskforces, received both cash and donations in kind. The donations in kind included vehicles, mattresses, beds and beddings, sanitisers, test kits, PPEs and food items. The taskforce commends all persons and organisations that made a contribution for their support at this critical time.

However, the taskforce noted that there were inadequacies when it came to accountability for donations received. Indeed, this is also reported in the Auditor-General’s report on the thematic audit report on the COVID-19 pandemic Government interventions, dated February 2021. This report provides findings of the Auditor-General in respect to the management of COVID-19 interventions for the Financial Year 2019/2020. At an appropriate time, the accountability committees of Parliament shall review it and make recommendations for the appropriate resolutions.

When the taskforce reviewed the submission of the Ministry of Health on accountability of COVID-19 Government of Uganda funding, it established that a total of Shs 29.6 billion was reported as having been collected as cash donations towards COVID-19 response. Out of this, Shs 23.9 billion was earmarked towards procurement of 282 pick-up trucks, Shs 3.3 billion was earmarked and spent towards the construction of a blood bank in Soroti while Shs 2.4 billion was earmarked and spent on the construction of border post health units at Vurra and Cyanika.

Madam Speaker, by the time of writing this report, a total of l2l vehicles had been imported into the country and were still awaiting clearance of the import taxes, totalling to Shs 9 billion, by Uganda Revenue Authority. 

The taskforce was informed that the Ministry of Health did not have a budget of Shs 9 billion to clear the import taxes and, as a result, the vehicles are still parked in the bonded warehouses, awaiting clearance. It has also been established that these vehicles started arriving as early as June 202l and, as a result, the demurrage costs keep accumulating, plus other clearance fees.

Whereas the Ministry of Health had written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for a tax waiver, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had insisted that the tax obligation had to be met by the Ministry of Health. This process was causing undue delays as the vehicles could not be availed to be deployed in the field as required.

The taskforce, therefore, noted that there was poor planning and disjointed coordination between the two ministries on the procurement of these vehicles. The taskforce noted that it is ill-conceivable for Government to imagine that funds donated by the well-wishers would be used to clear Government tax obligations. It is a disappointment towards public generosity.

Why wouldn’t the Government provide counterpart funding to clear the taxes or provide an undertaking to clear the taxes with URA so that these vehicles are urgently deployed to facilitate the much-constrained logistical activities?

The taskforce, therefore, recommends that Government should urgently resolve this impasse by either availing the funds to the Ministry of Health to clear the taxes or settle for a tax waiver altogether with the view of having the vehicles cleared and deployed to serve the deserving population, without any further delay. 

The decision should also be taken for the remaining 161 vehicles that the Ministry of Health indicated were en route.

The taskforce also recommends that in such cases of emergency, such vehicles should have been pre-cleared before arrival so that they could be deployed quickly to avoid unnecessary costs. Further still, such vehicles could have been warehoused in-situ within Government facilities as they await clearance to avoid unnecessary demurrage costs. 

Madam Speaker, what seems to have happened is that all procurements undertaken during the COVID-19 response were of emergency nature and, therefore, may have skipped the procurement processes. In the circumstances, the committee recommends a forensic audit to be conducted within two months.

Part seven is about the budget for COVID-19 resurgence plan, July 2021 to June 2022. The total budget estimated to deliver the COVID-19 resurgence plan from July 202l to June 2022 amounts to Shs 1.7 trillion. Out of this, Shs 445.9 billion is earmarked for the procurement of the much-needed vaccines, while Shs 808.4 billion, which translates to 45 per cent of the budget, will go into logistics.

The taskforce was informed that within the first quarter of the Financial Year 2021/2022, a total of Shs 206.3 billion has been earmarked. Specifically, we established that these funds will be used to cater for the oxygen requirements, surveillance, allowances, case management and management of ambulances, among others. 

In addition, Shs 255.4 billion has been reported as committed. The breakdown of that is Shs 80 billion to the National Medical Stores, Shs 46.2 billion from the World Bank UCREPP Project and Shs l29 billion from the Global Fund. This brings the total amount available towards the budget for COVID-19 resurgence plan to Shs 46l.7 billion, which leaves a funding gap of Shs 1.3 trillion. 

When the taskforce met with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the minister indicated that there were resources from the World Bank, totalling to Shs 480.8 billion, and this money was already in the Ministry of Health budget for the Financial Year 202l/2022. 

In addition, an allocation of Shs 80 billion was approved under NMS for the Financial Year 202l/2022. These resources, together with the supplementary budget of Shs 206.3 billion approved by Cabinet, show that the total budget available to the Ministry of Health is Shs 767.14 billion.

Therefore, going by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s account, the deficit in financing the budget for the COVID-19 resurgence plan is Shs 996.6 billion, contrary to what is indicated by the honourable Minister of Health, of Shs 1.3 trillion. It is, therefore, not clear which of the two figures is the true deficit in the financing of the budget for the COVID-19 resurgence plan. 

We noted that with this apparent discrepancy between the funding gaps indicated by the two ministries, it is difficult to ascertain the exact deficit in the budget for the COVID-19 resurgence plan for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

The committee recommends that the Government should undertake realistic and harmonised planning with the view of ascertaining the optimal level of financing required for the COVID-19 resurgence plan, taking into account the critical interventions that should be implemented to contain the transmission of COVID-19. 

I beg to submit on that component and I take this opportunity to invite hon. Dr Emmanuel Otaala to take on and present the findings from the eastern region. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kateshumbwa. 

4.39
DR EMMANUEL OTIAM (NRM, West Budama South, Tororo): Thank you my colleague, hon. Kateshumbwa, for presenting that bit of the report. Madam Speaker, I will be presenting on behalf of the Eastern region team. 

Suffice to say that the eastern team was constituted by myself, Dr Emmanuel Otala Otiam, Dr Patrick Mutono, hon. John Baptist Nambeshe, hon. Milton Muwuma, Dr Timothy Batwa Lusala, hon. Pamela Kamugo, hon. Margaret Makoha, hon. Karim Masaba and hon. Jonathan Ebwalu. 

Overall, the chairperson has already articulated the methodology. We reviewed a number of documents and met with ministry officials. I will therefore move right away to cover the scope of our assignment in the eastern region. 

The team mapped the eastern region into sub-regions and sampled districts and health facilities to be visited with a deliberate prioritisation of regional referral hospitals, and the highest referral facility for every district visited. 

The team covered all the sub-regions namely Busoga, Bukedi, Bugisu, Sebei and Teso sub-regions. The districts were further prioritised based on their status as border districts and on that regard, we focused on Tororo, Busia and Namayingo, Island districts and/or those with fishing communities; these included Namayingo, Busia, Buyende, Kaliro, Mayige and Jinja; highland districts with difficult terrain – Sironko, Bududa, Kapchorwa and Kween. 

Accordingly, the team covered the districts of Jinja, Iganga, Bugiri, Namayingo, Tororo, Busia, Butaleja, Budaka, Pallisa, Butebo, Mbale, Soroti, Serere, Katakwi, Bukedea, Kibuku, Bududa, Bugweri and Kaliro.

The team identified three border entry points of Malaba in Tororo, Busia Customs and Lwakhakha in Namisindwa. However, due to time constraints, only Malaba border entry point was prioritised based on its strategic location and the volume of traffic, which includes an average of 600 trucks and over 2,000 persons transiting through it every day.

The team visited all regional referral hospitals, all general hospitals, selected health centres IV, and two health centres III. Further, two private-not-for-profit health facilities were also visited as I will indicate below. 

The regional referral hospitals that we visited included: Jinja, Mbale and Soroti. The general hospitals or district hospitals that we visited included: Iganga, Bugiri, Tororo, Masafu, Busolwe, Pallisa, Katakwi, Kapchorwa and Bududa.

The health centres IV that the team visited included Buyinja, Budaka, Butebo, Namatala, Budadiri, Serere, Kibuku, Bukedea, Busesa and Bumanya Health Centre IV. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, I will mention that one only once and for the future, I will just be saying that one. (Laughter) 

The health centres III that we visited included: Kandege Health Centre III in Dholwe Island and Iyolwa Health Centre III. While Dholwe Island Health centre III facility serves over 160,000 people from the nine islands that make up Bukooli Islands County, Iyolwa Health centre III serves a population of about I80,000. The uniqueness of these two health centres III is that they are in constituencies without health centres IV as per the Government policy.

The team did not visit private-for-profit facilities but we visited private-not-for-profit facilities and these included Kanginima Health Centre IV in Butebo and Budini Health Centre III in Kaliro District.

The team held meetings with the District Task Forces of Jinja, Iganga, Bugiri, Tororo, Namayingo, Busia, Butaleja, Budaka, Pallisa, Butebo, Mbale, Sironko, Soroti, Katakwi, Bukedea, Kibuku, Bududa, Kapchorwa and Kaliro and received status reports on COVID-19 management.

We also held radio talk shows. These are the radio stations, where we held radio talk shows: Jogoo FM in Busia, East FM in Tororo, BIG FM in Mbale, Veritas FM in Soroti and NBS Radio in Jinja.

Madam Speaker, I now move to our findings. 

On the Government preparedness and response to COVID-19, we focused on coordination, planning, financing and monitoring. We looked at the work of the district COVID-19 task forces. 

The team observed that to ensure coordination, planning, financing and monitoring of the Government preparedness and response, all districts and cities visited had well constituted and functional COVID-19 task forces, chaired by the Resident District Commissioners (RDCS) or Resident City Commissioners (RCCs) as applicable. 

The teams comprised RDCs/RCCs, District/City Chairpersons/Lord Mayors, Chief Administrative Officers, District Health Officers, District Community Development Officers, District Probation and Welfare Officers, District COVID-19 Surveillance Focal Person, District Police Commanders, District Internal Security Officers, civil society organisations and the media. 

The district task forces worked jointly, following guidelines issued by the Ministry of Local Government, to ensure functionality of all their structures such as Subcounty Task Forces (SCTFs) and Village COVID-19 Task Forces (VCTFs), in response to the pandemic. 

They continued to conduct planning meetings, share information; provide reports and feedback on risk communication and contact tracing, and surveillance across all structures. 

My team, therefore, recommends that all district taskforces should ensure that lower level taskforces are fully operational and facilitated.

Madam Speaker, in regard to COVID-19 relief support to the vulnerable, my team found that the well-intentioned policy by Government to cushion the vulnerable households in cities and municipalities had taken off, with a total of Shs 41 billion of the Shs 53 billion earmarked for COVID-19 relief support. Shs 41 billion had already transferred to the people most affected by the lockdown. 

The district taskforces successfully identified people most affected by the lockdown in various categories; recommended for relief within their jurisdiction and submitted the list of beneficiaries for consideration.

However, the support fell short of covering a significant portion of eligible beneficiaries due to a mismatch in their NIN and phone contact data, provided during registration. This anomaly had resulted into the rejection of names of thousands of vulnerable persons that met the criterion for relief support.

Thus, the City Task Forces of Jinja, Mbale and Soroti and District Task Forces of Tororo, Kapchorwa and Busia respectively reported many cases of the targeted beneficiaries missing out on the package. For example, in Tororo, 7,822 households were registered, but only 3,785 were found eligible; leaving out a total of 4,037, while in Kapchorwa, a total of 2,894 out of the 3,412 registered households; received the Shs 100,000 cash transfer, leaving out a combined 518 households.

Further, the eligibility criteria for relief support across cities and municipalities visited was not based on the current UBOS data but the old one. The approach used left out vulnerable residents within former municipal jurisdictions of municipalities, which are now cities and town councils, which are now municipalities but now fall within the new boundaries of those jurisdictions. 

For example, Jinja City, which was formerly a municipality with 19,700 households, was elevated to city status by including the surrounding town councils of Bugembe, Budondo and Mafubira to the two original divisions of Jinja East and West, which now has a total of 67,000 households. 

However, the number of households earmarked for support were 7,400, representing a mere 38 per cent of the 19,700 vulnerable households under the old municipal arrangement, instead of catering for 25,000 households that represent 38 per cent of the current 67,000 households, under the city status. 

Madam Speaker, the team noted that whereas the presidential directive on relief was to first determine the number of vulnerable households through registration, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development set a ceiling of 38 per cent across cities and municipalities, moreover based on the old UBOS data. 

In some municipalities, the number of boda bodas registered were almost equivalent to the total number of those eligible to receive relief. In the case of Tororo, it has 3,222 boda bodas out of the eligible number that was allocated to them of 3,785.

The team observed that setting of the ceiling by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development was a departure from the presidential directive and resulted into inaccurate computation, thereby denying tens of thousands of households covered by the policy from accessing what was due them. 

Furthermore, the team observed that most of the vulnerable poor, especially those who did not have phones or those who are not registered for any economic activity, were not considered at all for the relief package. 

It was strong feedback from the community during radio talk shows that Government, which does not have a comprehensive social safety net for the vulnerable poor, save for the SAGE programme of older persons above 80 years, had not considered to provide social protection for the vulnerable, who are not engaged in any economic activity, amidst the lockdown.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the Government should revisit its policy to ensure that the most vulnerable and majority beneficiaries in COVID-19 relief interventions and not only the most affected by the pandemic are included.

On risk communication and community engagement and infondemics management; the team observed that the district task forces have designated risk communicators who worked jointly with the resident District Commissioners, to ensure that communities are sensitised on prevention, control and management of COVID 19 by discouraging risky behaviour that lead to the spread of the virus.

During the first wave, the district task forces organised radio talk shows and distributed IEC materials on the disease to avert its spread. However, it was noted that in the second wave, the regularity of risk communication and community engagement has been low due to lack of funds. 

Some of the riskiest behaviour noted in the Eastern region, include exhuming of bodies buried scientifically, in an attempt to ascertain the true identity of the deceased before reburying, in accordance with the respective traditional practices of particular cultures. This was a major issue of concern in Bududa District. 

Moreover, it was also reported that certain communities in Bududa District were deliberately resisting advice of not attending burials, ostensibly on cultural grounds. This was a possible super spreader of the disease. No wonder, the DHO estimated that the number of COVID-19 cases under home-based care were approximately 1000, in Bududa alone. Nowhere else, Madam Speaker, did the taskforce note a continuing rise in positivity rate of COVID-19, except in Bududa.

In Bududa, we found the positivity rate was 45 per cent at the time of our visit, compared to an average of about 15 per cent, in other districts we visited.

The team was further informed of the effect of unverified information on the COVID-19 response, especially on treatment and vaccination. Following the death of the District Chief Administrative Officer of Kapchorwa, 18 days after his vaccination, most of the health workers became hesitant to vaccinate. As a result, Kapchorwa District ranked lowest in the vaccination statistics of health workers, among all the districts visited. In Kapchorwa, the uptake of the vaccine was only 38 per cent compared to an average of 70 per cent in other districts, among health workers.

In Butaleja, every case of COVID 19 death was attributed to possible witchcraft. (Laughter) Not only did this perception help to prevent people from seeking care in health facilities, but also went a long way in hampering the COVID 19 response in the district.

During community engagement, many people asked about the authenticity and verifiability of the information they have been getting from social media, in relation to the COVID 19 disease. Some of the common ones included:

    1. That the vaccine would reconfigure their DNA; 
    2. That those who take the vaccine would die after two years; 
    3. That the masks, especially those from China were impregnated with the virus; 
    4. That the virus was manufactured by the whites to wipe out the black race, and how could they claim to be finding a solution to the disease. All these allegations require a deeper response to the pandemic.

However, the taskforce noted that the Ministry of ICT, which was adequately facilitated to provide accurate information to the citizens of this country about the pandemic, had not done much in this regard.

Further, there was not much presence of the Ministry of ICT in its programmes for the ordinary Ugandans at the grassroots in the eastern region. 

The team, therefore, recommends that – 

    1. The Government should urgently reinforce the district COVID-19 taskforce of Bududa and Butaleja in risk communication in order to counter harmful cultural practices and beliefs, promoting the spread of COVID-19.

    2. All the district taskforces across the eastern region should ensure that they broadcast regular radio or television programmes to strengthen the risk communication and behaviour change components of the COVID-19 response.

    3.  The Ministry of ICT should come up with regular programmes to counter misinformation regarding COVID-19 on all communication platforms.

Madam Speaker, I now move to surveillance, epidemiological investigations, contact tracing and adjustment of public health and social measures.

In regard to facilitation of surveillance activities, the teams observed that due to limited funding, critical functions of the district taskforces such as surveillance, contact tracing and home-based care activities operated below optimal. Whereas a total budget allocation of Shs 284.4 million had been provided to Bukedea District response to COVID-19 wave two, for example, the district taskforce had earmarked only Shs 29.6m –(Interruption)-
 
MR KATUNTU: I am sorry to interrupt my member. Madam Speaker, I note that this report is 173 pages. If we do read word by word, we might be here for the next four hours. Is it okay if he can just read the observations and the findings? Since we are not going to have the debate today, Members would be able to access the already uploaded reports and then they can read in detail. 

If that is okay with colleagues - With 173 pages, we will leave here at around 9.00p.m or 10.00 p.m. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Doctor, please read your findings and recommendations. Members will go and look at the report for the next debate.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR OTIAM: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that guidance and I thank my colleague for the intervention. 

In regard to facilitation for surveillance activities, we found that there was inadequate facilitation. Money was being put mainly in administrative arrangements, as I was elaborating in the case of Bukedea where Shs 284.4 million went towards paying allowances while only Shs 29.6 million went towards fuel for supervision and surveillance.

The team recommends as follows:

    1. The Ministry of Local Government should revisit the guidelines on utilisation of funds extended to local governments, to prioritise and ensure that sufficient resources are committed to critical functions of surveillance and contact tracing across districts in the subsequent allocations and releases towards COVID-19 response.

    2. All district taskforces should forthwith adequately facilitate surveillance focal persons and ensure that their allowances are promptly paid.

Madam Speaker, on the state of COVID-19 screening and sample collection areas, we found that most of the sample collection areas are either torn tents, which are totally in tatters and worn out, or they do not have any equipment like chairs or any other equipment for screening. Most of them were not from the Government of Uganda but from UNICEF and UNHCR.

Therefore, my team recommended that – 

    1. The Government should set up reasonable structures that are fully furnished for COVID-19 screening and testing within three months of the adoption of this report.

    2. The Ministry of Health should ensure that all COVID-19 screening and sample collection centres are readily manned all the time as a matter of urgency.

Regarding the policy on testing, the team was notified that as a result of the sudden surge of COVID-19 cases during the second wave, most testing centres could only afford to pick samples from persons presented with signs and symptoms. We noted that this was a departure from the previous policy of mandatory testing for all suspected cases including their contacts.

We, therefore, recommend that the Government should consider reviewing the current policy on testing to one which estimates the positivity rate with accuracy including the asymptomatic cases for avoidance of doubt. In particular, the Government should prioritise mass testing especially in areas where the positivity rate is still high and above 15 per cent in order to curtail the possibility of sliding into a third wave.

Regarding enforcement of standard operating procedures by the security agencies, the taskforce found that there was limited facilitation for enforcement personnel. The security was overstretched in districts such as Bududa, Namisindwa, Tororo and Busia. The situation was worse in Bududa, which had 28 subcounties and just very few numbers, which we did not want to mention for purposes of protecting our security.

In regard to enforcement of standard operating procedures, the team received feedback about enforcement of SOPs by security agencies across all districts visited. They noted pockets of resistance from the population against attempts by security agencies to enforce the SOPs. This was the case in Butaleja where a 15-year-old girl was fatally shot by a stray bullet while the police attempted to enforce curfew measures.

Again in Bududa and Mbale, the police expressed their vulnerability to attack by angry boda boda riders attempting to get back to their work. The same incident was also noted in Kibuku.

Regarding excessive use of force by law enforcement officers, the communities on the other hand complained that the police used excessive force and brutality while enforcing the SOPs. Several call-ins claimed that in Mwelo Parish in Tororo District, for example, police attacked them in their homes to enforce curfew measures, thereby violating their family privacy.

In Busia, a nurse coming from duty was severely wounded by a police officer enforcing curfew. The officer was apprehended and remanded to Masafu Prison.

Regarding indiscriminate enforcement of restrictions, the team noted that health workers across the region were often stopped and prevented from attending to night duty in spite of holding travel permits or even their work IDs issued by the medical officers.

The team further observed that the indiscriminate enforcement of lockdown restrictions affected pregnant women, nursing mothers and other in-patients that are often left unattended to throughout the night due to absence of health workers on duty during the night.

Regarding inadequate PPEs for law enforcement personnel, we noted that mostly the police and other enforcement agencies were not properly facilitated
with personal protective equipment.

In view of all those observations I have just stated, the team recommends as follows:

    1. The Ministry of Internal Affairs should adequately facilitate law enforcement personnel charged with the duty of enforcing Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for CIVID-19;

    2. The respective District COVID-19 Task forces should provide regular sensitisation to the communities in regard to the role of police and other law enforcement offices to create a harmonious relationship necessary for promoting compliance to the SOPs.

    3. Respective District COVID-19 Task Forces should ensure that Ministry of Health workers who were not cleared to travel during curfew time are enabled to freely access their places of deployment;

    4.  In the long run, Government should provide accommodation to all critical medical staff at their places of work;

    5. Finally, the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Internal Affairs should with immediate effect ensure that all frontline workers, namely; health workers and the security personnel are provided with adequate PPE while on duty.

I now move on to the point of entry, international travel and transport and mass gatherings.

The team visited Malaba, which is the second largest entry point into the country, after Entebbe International Airport and clears about 2,000 persons transiting through. 

The team observed that the COVID-19 Task force at that border point is not testing everybody as was done during the first wave. Rather, they rely on test results from Kenya because there, tests are free. However, in Uganda every entrant without negative test results is required to pay Shs 150,000. As a result –(Interruption)

DR aceng: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members, for giving way. As the Minister of Health, I have a report, which I have been following. As guided, the presenter currently having the Floor should highlight the observations, findings and recommendations. However, I am perturbed that what he is currently reading is nowhere within the report that was given to the Ministry of Health.

I need to be guided whether I am having the right report he is reading through or he is making some of the findings as a by-the-way rather than from the report. Otherwise, it is very difficult for us to follow accordingly. Half way, we have lost track. I need that guidance.  

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Otaala, can you help the minister? I am surprised you have the report yet you had said you did not have it.
  
Dr otIAM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the guidance that you gave, I am just trying to highlight. Perhaps, that is why the minister is not –

The Deputy Speaker: Just tell her the page you are at.

Dr otIAM: I am at page 47. I will just continue to summarise, in the interest of time. 

As I was saying, at Malaba Border point, the staff manning the COVID-19 management there test only about 50 of the about 2,000 people transiting through that border daily. This is as a result of the fact that Uganda is charging for COVID-19 testing while in Kenya it is free. 

Secondly, Uganda relies on the negative test results coming from Kenya. Therefore, my team recommends as follows:

    1. The Ministry of Health should revert to the original testing protocol at all border entries without relying on foreign results whose authenticity cannot be ascertained;

    2. The Ministry of Internal Affairs should increase the presence of both police and immigration personnel to man the highly porous border points especially on Lake Victoria;

    3. The Ministry of Health should provide special COVID-19 interventions to Bukooli Islands in Namayingo District as hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay areas in order to address the rising COVID-19 infections; and

    4. Government should encourage local cross-border community collaborations, in addition to other engagements by the Central Government, to address the problem of unchecked cross-border movements that accelerate the importation of the virus.

I now move to laboratories and diagnostics. I will focus on the availability, adequacy and reliability of the test kits.

Most of the health facilities we visited rely on RDTs for testing. In Kapchorwa for example, out of 88 people tested using an RDT, 33 turned positive when they used PCR. This casts doubt on the sensitivity and specificity of some of these RDTs. 

We also thought that this could be a human error. If such a thing can happen especially to our people who travel across borders, it would then cast doubt on our testing abilities.

The team, therefore, observed that a combination of inaccuracies and unverified errors by the test results occasioned by poor sensitivity of the test kits or human error, and the current practice of lack of mass testing, could have far-reaching consequences on the spread of the disease.

We therefore, recommended as follows:

    1. The Ministry of Health should scale up testing by cascading COVID-19 tests at lower health facilities in order to cover at least all contacts of patients;

    2. The Ministry of Health should carry out random sampling and testing of the community in order to ascertain, with a reasonable degree of accuracy, the national COVID-19 positivity rates; 

    3. The Ministry of Health should undertake mass testing in selected high volume areas as well as areas where the positivity rate is high and strengthen contact tracing, isolation of the sick and repeated target testing prior to easing the lockdown.

I move to infection prevention, control and protection of the health workforce.

We found that whereas the Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) are the main guard against infections, often times, health workers attended to COVID-19 patients without adequate protection. Thus, they are increasingly exposed to contracting the virus especially when handling the known positive cases as well as when dealing with the general patients some of whom are asymptomatic.

We further noted that at Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, National Medical Stores (NMS) had supplied only 70 units –(Interjections)- I beg your pardon.

At Bukedea Health Centre IV, the National Medical Stores had supplied only one packet of masks of 50 pieces on 31 May 2021 via delivery note with journey No. 210520-057. According to the estimates of the health workers, such a delivery note would only last them three days. Unfortunately, this delivery came at the peak of the COVID-19 second wave. 

Furthermore, in Soroti, we found that NMS had supplied only 70 units of a blood thinner, which is necessary for use in patients in critical ICU areas. The team observed that the delivery note with journey No. 210506-042 would only serve seven patients, yet the facility had seen 69 patients. 

We further noted that the adoption of the home-based care strategy and inclusion of village health teams among frontline workers required Government to provide more personal protective equipment. This was to protect not only the village health teams but also the contacts of patients who were under home-based care. 

The team was further notified that health facilities order for drugs and essential health supplies but their orders are not honoured by NMS. 

The team was further informed that NMS has not yet adopted the electronic logistics information management system for procurement of emergency health supplies and has continued to prefer the push system. 

We found out that under the electronic logistics information management system, the facility is able to see the balance on hand as well as the quantity ordered versus what is being issued by NMS. It also allows the other partners like the Ministry of Health officials to know what facilities are ordering and to coordinate the whole process. 

The team found out that NMS was not supplying adequate amounts of personal protective equipment. Normally, they make only one cycle in two months and what they are supplying was inadequate. 

We also noted that as a result of providing inadequate personal protective equipment, health workers, who are our frontline workers, were getting infected in the line of duty. That was the case in Bugiri where the positivity rate was 10 per cent and the number of health workers that had been infected in the line of duty was six. In Serere, we found that all the four midwives were infected. In Bukedea, the positivity rate was 12 per cent and we found that 49 health workers were infected. In Kapchorwa, the positivity rate was 37.8 and 28 health workers infected so far. 

In Jinja, the positivity rate was 14 and five health workers had been infected. In Butaleja, it was 32 and one of them had died. In Pallisa, the positivity rate was 46 and 28 health workers had been infected. In Iganga, the positivity rate was 17 and 18 health workers had been infected. In Tororo, the positivity rate was 16 and 97 health workers had been infected. This was as a result of inadequate PPEs. 

We recommend as follows – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your chairperson wants to say something. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to request my colleague to just read the heading, the sub-topic and the recommendations. You have gone back to the details and we really do not have that time. 

DR OTIAM: Thank you, senior colleague, for that further guidance. We recommended as follows. 

The Ministry of Health –(Interruption)

MR OSHABE: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the role of teamwork but I have also seen the chairperson “crying” to his member to do certain things that he can ably do to save this House’s time. Are we proceeding well when the chairperson can ably deal with what he thinks is needed for this House so that we can move? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we had regional chairpersons and Dr Otaala was the chairperson for eastern region. I see that he is about to finish making his presentation. Doctor, can you finish?  

DR OTIAM: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that guidance. Our recommendations on that sub-topic are as follows: 

    1. The Ministry of Health should strengthen the pool system of procurement of essential medicines and health supplies by health facilities. 

    2. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide adequate resources to the National Medical Stores to facilitate procurement of adequate quantities of PPEs, essential medicines and other health supplies in accordance with the needs of the facilities. 

    3. The National Medical Store should urgently adopt the electronic logistics information management system within the next two months. 

On adherence to standard operating procedures, we recommend as follows: 

    1. The Government should encourage people to wear face masks and observe SOPs.

    2. The Government should scale up regular sensitisation programmes on prevention and management of COVID-19 and increase the distribution of IEC materials. 

Regarding case management, clinical operations and therapeutics with the focus on intensive care units and high dependency units for severe cases of COVID-19, we found that in the eastern region, only Jinja Regional Referral Hospital has ICUs. Mbale and Soroti have high dependency units only.

Madam Speaker, we also found that most of them lacked oxygen and were struggling with maintaining poorly functional oxygen plants in their facilities.  

We recommend as follows: 

    1. In the short term, the Ministry of Health should procure liquid oxygen for use in COVID-19 treatment units. 
    2. The Ministry of Health should fully functionalise all intensive care units at regional referral hospitals. 

    3. The Ministry of Health should procure adequate oxygen cylinders for all general hospitals and health centres IV. 

    4. The Ministry of Health should revisit the policy of limiting ICUs to regional referral hospitals and have them functionalised at general hospitals, since most of them were already operating as such. The same should apply to health centres IV that had already initiated COVID-19 treatment units in their facilities. 

    5. The Ministry of Health should recruit, train and deploy qualified personnel to man oxygen-generating plants at regional referral hospitals.

    6. In the medium and long term, delivery of oxygen to patients in health facilities should be by piping. 

Regarding human resources for COVID-19 management, overall we found that there was inadequate staffing, especially at the ICUs and high dependency units. They did not have intensivists, the required doctors, etcetera. In Jinja, for example - the only regional referral hospital in the east with an ICU - there were only three nurse intensivists out of the required 10; the nurses were over stretched. 

The committee recommends as follows: 

    1. Within the next three months, the Ministry of Health, in liaison with the Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Local Government, should expedite the hiring of adequately trained personnel to man the COVID-19 treatment units and testing centres as a matter of urgency. In particular, the ministry could explore the possibility of hiring specialist health workers from wherever they can be got. 

    2. The ministry should revisit the staffing structures for all health facilities across the country to address the glaring staffing gaps in the facilities.

Payment of risk allowances to frontline staff 

Madam Speaker, we found that the frontline workers had not been paid since the first wave, and that there was discrimination in who is to be paid. Only those in COVID-19 treatment units, were being paid, yet all health workers across the board were getting into contact with patients, some of whom are asymptomatic.

The team recommends as follows:

    i) All arrears in allowances for health workers who have been saving lives in the frontline should be paid off within the next two months; 

    ii) The Government should adopt a single spine structure for payment of risk
allowances to address discontent among health workers;

    iii) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should exempt taxing health worker’s risk allowances. That was another very big issue of taxing allowances of these health workers, who sacrifice their lives;

    iv) The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should immediately compensate immediate families of health workers, who have died in line of duty;

    v) The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should process compensation for health workers, who have been infected in line of duty, within the next three months;  and not focusing only on those who got infected by virtue of working in ICUs but all health workers who have been infected. 

Regarding general hospitals, we found that general hospitals were already treating COVID-19 patients. Therefore, we recommended that all general hospitals should be gazetted as COVID-19 treatment units instead of only focusing on regional referral hospitals. 

We also found that there are certain regions, where general hospitals had taken on treating COVID-19 patients because every time, they refer COVID-19 patients to the regional referral hospitals, the patients are bounced because of lack of bed capacity. In particular, in Bukedi Sub-region, we found that this sub-region, which has a population of 2.2 million people, does not have a regional referral hospital, and yet this region was the third highest in the number of COVID-19 patients. As a result, they had lost so many COVID-19 patients.

We, therefore, recommend that:

    i) The Government should urgently establish COVID-19 treatment centres at Kapchorwa, Pallisa and Tororo general hospitals, as a matter of urgency to decongest Mbale and Soroti regional referral hospitals to save the sub-region from many deaths;

    ii) The Ministry of Health should fast-track the presidential pledge to elevate Tororo and Pallisa general hospitals to regional referral status;

    iii) That Kapchorwa General Hospital be elevated to regional referral status because of its unique geographical status and difficult terrain to save most of our people from unnecessary deaths.

Home-based care

Madam Speaker, the team noted that the introduction of home- based-care strategy, to treat mild and moderate COVID-19 patients from the community due to high levels of transmission – however, despite a robust health structure from the top to the grassroots, to date, there are no mechanisms of facilitating or following up patients, who are on home based care. Most of the time, these patients are tested and told to go back home without being given any drugs.

The team, therefore, recommends as follows:

    i) That the Ministry of Health should provide adequate supplies of PPEs to the village health teams and patient attendants while not negating on the responsibility of individuals and families to uphold their health;

    ii)  The Government should provide the necessary supplies to monitor and manage patients under home based care, including providing medicines and at least, one oximeter per village health team to monitor the oxygen circulation of patients under home based care;

    iii) The Ministry of Health should within one year, come up with an integrated home based care policy for all applicable diseases;

    iv) The district task forces should strengthen the surveillance, monitoring, reporting and following up COVID-19 cases under home-based care.

Availability of drugs for treatment of COVID-19

We found that these drugs were – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Otaala, you have five minutes to finish.

DR OTIAM: We recommended that the Ministry of Health provided COVID-19 drugs to all patients under homebased care.

Regarding the state of COVID-19 management at general hospitals, Madam Speaker, we are recommending that:

    i) Treatment and management of COVID-19 patients be cascaded to general hospitals, health centres III and IV, which had already started on the treatment of COVID-19 out of necessity;

    ii) The Government should in the medium term expand the ward capacity of Iganga General Hospital to accommodate the large volume of patients that the hospital now admits;

    iii) In the long run, we recommend that the Government should upgrade Iganga General Hospital to a Regional Referral Hospital to serve the wide catchment area that relies on the facility for specialised treatment and care.

Regarding operations, support and logistic supply, we noted that the regional ambulance system that the Minister of Health talked about had not been properly facilitated.

Whereas, a few ambulances had been delivered, they were not put under the hands of the regional referral hospitals. They were dropped in several places without informing the regional referral hospitals. We, therefore, recommend that:

i) 	The Ministry of Health should urgently put in place a proper coordination and management mechanism and prioritises resources to fully functionalise the regional ambulance system;

ii) 	The Ministry of Health should provide all classes and categories of ambulances for all levels of care, right from Health Centre III to the national referral facilities, including specialised port ambulances for the island areas;

iii) 	The Ministry of Health should provide a framework to regulate and standardise ambulances that are being owned all over by different categories of people. In the long run, the ministry should explore the easiest way of acquiring air ambulances for the country and at least, one category of ambulance for each of the regional referral hospitals.

Concerning vaccination, we noted that the major demand by the people is that there should be mass vaccination in order for the country to get hard immunity. 

We, therefore, recommended that:
1. 	The Government should provide sufficient doses of vaccines to address the growing public demand, and to achieve herd immunity of the population.

2. 	The Government should provide six months road map programme of how this is going to be achieved.

On the assessment of the health and other impacts of COVID-19, we found that there was massive effect on other health services, particularly, mental health services had been closed in most hospitals and those mental health wards were now being used for treating COVID-19 patients. 

We, therefore, recommend that:

    i) The Ministry of Health should urgently reinstate mental health services at regional referral hospitals to ensure provision of mental health services at that level;

ii) 	The Ministry of Health should provide resources for construction and equipping of COVID-19 treatment units at regional referral hospitals; general hospitals and Health Centres IVs that are already treating COVID-19 patients.

Other impacts included use of concoctions like Covidex and many others. We recommend that:

(1) 	The Government should ensure that indigenous researchers follow both the WHO protocols for introducing drugs into the population and the Traditional and Complementary Medicine Act, 2019.

(2) 	The Government should come up with a clear policy to support indigenous research in herbal medicines and facilitate the patterning of local medicines.

On social economic impact, Madam Speaker, most of the people had been affected, especially in the countryside and we are recommending as follows:

    i) That the Government should again reign in on financial institutions that are harassing our citizens to further reschedule the loan repayment in view of the ongoing COVID-19 situation;

    ii) That the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should scale up their interventions of empowering youths with skills and viable sources of livelihood to prevent them from falling into risky behaviour, including transactional sex in identified hotspots such as Bukedea. There are teams of people organised there – team no size, team no sleep, team no whatever; so many of them. These need to be targeted;

    iii) The Ministry of Local Government should provide and ring-fence additional resources commensurate with the current needs of the district community development, probation and welfare officers in order to reinforce community mobilisation and supportive services, to support those with psychosocial conditions;

    iv) The Minister of Health should explore the implementation of targeted lockdowns in hotspots, based on surveillance information, in order to minimize the social-economic effects of generalised lockdown of the whole country.

Regarding the utilisation of the resources appropriated to COVID-19, my honourable colleague, hon. Kateshumbwa, has already alluded to this at length, so I will not discuss this further.

Regarding the assessment of the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not repeat what has already been said. Your time is up.

DR OTIAM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just to summarise, we found that private not-for-profit health facilities had complimented the efforts of Government in the management of COVID-19 and we recommend the following:

    1. That Government should support rural private not-for-profit facilities in the fight against COVID-19 with PPE, oxygen and other consumables to have a multi-stakeholder engagement in the fight against the pandemic;

    2. That in the short to medium term, the Government should second health workers to private not-for-profit facilities.

Madam Speaker, with that very lengthy submission, I beg to submit that we further recommend that all health centres that we visited should serve as the highest health facilities in districts that do not have district hospitals. They should be urgently upgraded to general hospitals, as per the Government policy to have general hospitals in districts. This move will address the challenges of the increased demand and pressure on the health facilities by the growing population.

Finally, we recommend further that Parliament should adequately fund teams in order to interface with the public through radio programmes. This would have better results if it occurs for a longer time. My team and I did not have adequate facilitation to buy enough airtime. Government should, therefore, ensure that small media establishments upcountry be facilitated as well. This facilitation should be extended beyond Kampala. With those remarks, Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

DR OTIAM: May I take this opportunity to invite my colleague, Dr Ruyonga Joseph, to come and present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The parts which have not been read should be captured on the Hansard.

MR ABDU KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought I would guide my colleagues who are coming to present. Now that we have heard from the east, I think let us go to the north first. 

Colleagues, as you can see, the House might be suffering from diminishing marginal returns. So, we need to be precise and to the point. Dr Ayume, if you can do it in the next 10 to 15 minutes, that would be most appropriate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Also, whatever you leave out will be captured in the Hansard. Members are going to read this report and debate it.

5.41
DR CHARLES AYUME (NRM, Koboko Municipality, Koboko): Thank you very much, my chairperson. I am here to present the northern report on COVID-19. The members of the committee were myself, Dr Charles Ayume, Dr Samuel Opio, hon. George Bhoka, hon. Lillian Aber, hon. Charles Onen, hon. Jonathan Odur, hon. Ojara Mapenduzi, hon. Faith Nakut and hon. Emmanuel Ogiertho, assisted by hon. Ochero.

The methodology, honourable colleagues, is the same. We visited the four sub regions - Karamoja, Acholi, West Nile and Lango. In Karamoja, we visited Moroto Regional Referral Hospital and the general hospitals of Abim and Kaabong. We visited the health centres IV in Nabilatuk, Amudat, Tokora, Karenga and Kotido. The private not-for-profit facility we visited is Matany Hospital in Napak District. 

In Acholi, we visited Gulu Regional Referral Hospital and Kitgum General Hospital. The health centres IV that we visited are Padibe and Pajule. The PNFP we visited is St Mary’s Hospital Lacor. We also paid a visit to Elegu border post.

In West Nile, we visited the regional referral hospitals in Arua and Yumbe. We also visited the general hospitals of Adjumani, Moyo, Koboko and Nebbi. The health centres IV we visited were Maracha HC IV, Oli, Obongi and Pakwach. The PNFP hospital visited is Nyapea Hospital in Zombo District. 

In Lango subregion, we visited Apac Hospital, Lira Regional Referral Hospital, the health centres IV of Dokolo District, Aboke, Alebtong and Aduku. We also visited Aber PNFP Hospital.

Findings, Observations and Recommendations

Madam Speaker, the parameters we collected were drawn from the 10 pillars of the WHO, from which the Ministry of Health also draws its monitoring pillars. These include coordination; financing and monitoring; risk communication and community engagement; surveillance and contact tracing; points of care and transportation; laboratory and diagnostics; infection and prevention control; case management; maintenance of essential services; and vaccination. 

Under objective No. 1 – prevention - we looked at vaccination. Vaccination in the entire northern region had occurred and they had started receiving vaccines from March 2021. Their uptake was initially poor, but with the onset of the second wave, there was a surge in demand for vaccines. On average, each district received between 3,000 to 5,000 dozes. 

Interestingly, the uptake among health workers in districts and hospitals vary. We saw that in Lacor Hospital, it was at 94 per cent, yet in Gulu Referral Hospital, which is about three kilometres down the road, it was 55 per cent. 

The team also noted that of the four staff who were admitted in Gulu Regional Referral and passed on, there was no history of them having been vaccinated. 

Recommendation

There should be mass vaccination as guided by Ministry of Health. All health workers should be vaccinated fully and there should be continuous mass media sensitisation on the merits of vaccination.

Availability of Personal Protective Equipment 

There was evidence that National Medical Stores was delivering PPE. However, the quantities varied across health facilities and there was need to strengthen the reporting mechanism, to ensure that facilities receive quantities that they use.

The PPE have been spelt out - gumboots, facemasks (the N95s), coveralls, and face shields. 

The team recommended that the Ministry of Health should purchase more N95 and KN95 facemasks to avoid the issue of double masking, which has been advised by the Director General of Health Services. 

Enforcement of SOPs and the Presidential Directives

The taskforce observed that most districts were following the presidential directives as this was shown in the positivity rates, apart from Arua City where they had a positivity rate of 37 per cent. It is no wonder that the discos were still going on in Arua City, despite the lockdown. There was a lot of human and vehicle traffic in the city. So, we wondered what the driver of this 37 per cent was but it was clear that there were issues to do with failure to adhere to the SOPs.

Availability of sanitisers and hand washing facilities

This was a common observation in all the facilities, banks and hospitals we visited. So, there was good adherence to that. There was evidence that Ministry of Health was supplying that, as part of the COVID-19 emergency kit.

Surveillance 

As mentioned earlier, surveillance is a crucial component in the fight against pandemics and epidemics. One of the ways is constitution of district task forces and that is the system that provides overall oversight in a district. 

We found all these functional and fully constituted in the districts. They were multi-sectoral and include politicians and security. In districts where there were universities, there were also people from the academia and people from the health facility. Where there were traditional leaders, they were also brought on board.

However, their biggest challenge was logistics in the form of transport and fuel. However, the Chief Administrative Officers acknowledged that they had received the IPAs for taskforce operations. We encouraged them to inclement their activities stipulated in the guidelines and ensure that there is proper financial accountability. 

Diagnostics

We looked at laboratory and imaging services. Test kits for COVID-19 were available in all the districts we visited in Northern Uganda and this improved surveillance. All regional referral hospitals, general hospitals and health centre IVs were able to conduct RDT tests for COVID-19 suspected cases.

Ministry of Health had delivered PCR machines to all regional referral hospitals for PCR testing. In Koboko, however, rapid diagnostic testing did not cascade to health centre IIIs and this has a very huge concern. We should ensure that it goes down up to health Centre IIIs to help in surveillance.

We observed that all general hospitals had gene expert machines. Laboratory scientists recommended and guided that gene expert machines can be repurposed to also do PCR testing, if software is upgraded, if cartridges are bought and if the lab technician are subjected to a two-day training.

So, Madam Speaker, we can cascade PCR testing further down to general hospitals and health centre IVs because we have the machines already in place. In Adjumani Hospital, this was already put to good use.

Positivity rates by sub-region

Karamoja sub-region

Amudat	21 per cent
Napak	12 per cent
Moroto	10 per cent
Nakapiripirit 	9 per cent
Nabilatuk	9.1 per cent	
Karenga	5 per cent
Kotido	6.6 per cent
Abim	9.5 per cent
Kaabong	4.8 per cent

Amudat has an open border with Kenya and probably this may explain the high positivity rates. 

Acholi sub-region

Kitgum		13 per cent
Nwoya		14 per cent
Gulu		8.4 per cent

West Nile sub-region

Arua		37 per cent
Zombo		3 per cent
Pakwach	22 per cent
Maracha	4.7 per cent
Nebbi		7.9 per cent
Adjumani	8.2 per cent
Madi Okollo	6 per cent

Lango sub-region

Otuke		13 per cent
Alebtong	9 per cent
Oyam		8 per cent
Lira		13 per cent
Dokolo		13 per cent
Amolatar	13.5 per cent
Kwania		9.6 per cent
Apac		10.2 per cent
Kole		8.8 per cent

Just as a reminder, the national average positivity rate is nine per cent.

X-ray services

Madam Speaker, we all know that imaging plays a vital role in monitoring the progress of improvement of COVID-19 patients, but can also help in identifying pathology in asymptomatic patients.

We noticed that this vital service was available in 80 per cent of the hospitals visited –

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I was looking at hon. Ayume’s Rado watch and he has a very good one. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. X-ray services were functional in all the facilities visited, apart from Abim, where it was due to a wiring malfunction and it was absent in Koboko. 

Transport for surveillance was a very big issue in all the districts and it was a very big cry. However, we gave them he reassurance that Ministry of Health had procured a few units, as had been mentioned by my predecessor.

Points of entry were still a challenge. Most of the districts in Northern Uganda are borderline districts. One of them, like Lamwo, has 150 kilometres of porous border. Yumbe has 70 kilometres of porous border, so these present a challenge when it comes to enforcement.

Case management

Madam Speaker, we lack the requisite human resource, in terms of numbers and specialists, especially for ICU. There is good will by Ministry of Health. We can already see space being remodelled for ICUs –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, where in the east there was an aspect of human resource, you do not need to repeat the other areas.

DR AYUME: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to say that the only ICU –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please summarise.

DR AYUME: The only ICU that is functioning in the whole of Northern region is found in Lacor Hospital. It is fully functional and they were able to receive additional ICU equipment from Ministry of Health.

I also forgot to mention that the only CT scan machine that we have in the whole of Northern Uganda is found in Aber PNF Hospital in Oyam District. 

Honourable members –(Interruption)

MR SEKABIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to suggest that we change the way we are proceeding. I do not think we are proceeding right, since the report has not yet reached us. I suggest that we discuss the reports for the various regions when we can discuss them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Denis Sekabira, have you been in the House since we started? (Laughter) Can you summarise, Dr Ayume?

DR AYUME: Last but not least, on the contribution by PNFP’s, it is imperative that Government increases the PHC non-grant wage allocation to PNFP’s because they are doing a very big service to the Ugandan community.

On the impact of COVID-19 pandemic, my colleague had spoken about it. It has had a big socio-economic impact but also in the case of teenage pregnancies and under-age marriages, like we had seen in the Karamoja sub-region.

Infrastructure
There has been goodwill by Government to improve higher infrastructure but the problem we are now seeing is in health centre IVs and IIIs.

Finally, there is an issue to do with arrears of non-paid utility bills. We saw that in Nebbi, where they have an outstanding bill with National Water and Sewerage Corporation of Shs 700 million. So, we have to really come in and sort this issue out. That is for electricity and water.

Thank you very much, honourable colleagues. I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Dr Ayume. Honourable members, if something has been captured, even if it is not in your area such as water, human resource or lack of PPEs, it is captured. We are going to capture the entire report in the Hansard.

(Report of the Parliamentary Taskforce on the National Covid-19 Response  attached to the Bound Volume of August, 2021)


Do not repeat anything, even if you were to come and mention one line, that you are the one who was in the western region and the findings that were in the east are the same as that in the west, that is enough.

5.56
DR JOSEPH RUYONGA (NRM, Hoima West Division, Hoima City): Madam Speaker, the members for the western region were:

    1. Dr Joseph Ruyonga
    2. Hon. Francis Mwijukye from Buhweju
    3. Hon. Florence Asiimwe from Masindi
    4. Hon. Josephine B. Bebona from Bundibugyo
    5. Hon. Denis Kamara from Kabale Municipality
    6. Hon. Asinansi Nyakato from Hoima City
    7. Hon. Elisa Rutahigwa from Rukungiri
    8. Hon. Dan Atwijukire from Kazo County; and 
    9. Hon. Dickson Kateshumbwa from Sheema but that one was also with the central region.

The methodology is the same and I will go straight to observations and recommendations and not repeat myself.

For the district/city COVID-19 taskforces, the observation was that the taskforces should be boosted with enhanced financial and logistical facilitation in order to operationalise them fully.

In some districts like Buhweju and Sheema, there was some friction between the RDCs and the political leaders. Therefore, the recommendation was that the local government and political leadership should work in cohesion to ensure that the district taskforces are efficiently coordinated.

Regarding COVID-19 support to the vulnerable, the recommendations are more or less the same. We recommend that the Government should release its policy to ensure that the most vulnerable are the beneficiaries in the COVID-19 relief interventions.

The Government should ensure that workers employed under the exercise are remunerated on time as delayed payments portray the Government in bad light.

The Government must integrate data of Ugandans from the different Government agencies for better budgeting and implementation of Government programmes. 

The Government should engage lower local councils for identification of vulnerable individuals within their communities.

For risk communication and community engagements - 

The Government should urgently produce ICT materials on COVID-19 in local languages within the regions. The Ministry of ICT should be fully facilitated to develop radio on-spot messages, activities and programmes to counter misinformation and demystify the fears associated with COVID-19 interventions.

All district taskforces should be adequately funded to conduct the radio programmes more regularly in the different languages to strengthen communication and behaviour in the communities.

When it comes to facilitation of surveillance activities, there was a lack of enough fuel and transport for surveillance officers. Therefore, we recommended that the district taskforce should provide adequate financial and logistical support to surveillance functions for allowances for staff and operations.

On the infrastructure of COVID-19 management, in every constituency which we went to, they converted the already existing structures into COVID-19 treatment centres; for example, in the mental health units in regional hospitals like in Hoima and Kabale.

The recommendation was that the Government should set up reasonable structures that are fully furnished for COVID-19 screening and testing. 

The Ministry of Health should ensure that all COVID-19 screening and sample collection centres are fully manned all the time.

On the cost of testing, the recommendation was that the Government should consider reviewing the current policy on testing by emphasising and encouraging more PCR and G-index per testing as these estimate the positivity rate with accuracy, including the asymptomatic cases, for avoidance of doubt.

The Government should ensure that the COVID-19 laboratories are fully equipped with staff, necessary equipment and reagents to carry out these tests.

On increasing incidences of brutality by police, the taskforce recommends that the security leadership at the districts, composed of the RDCs and DISOs, should rein in on enforcement officers to ensure that they exercise their role with restraint.

Regarding indiscriminate enforcement of restrictions, local arrangements should be reached in consultation between security and medical officers as travel permits are processed to enable frontline workers move to their places of deployment. The security and the enforcement officers should conduct their duty with professionalism.

In the long run, the Government should provide accommodation to all critical medical staff at their places of work.

With limited capacity to enforce restrictions by the security teams, the security and enforcement personnel should be reinforced in numbers to attain effectiveness. There should also be increased financial and logistical facilitation to motivate them to carry out their mandate.

The security and enforcement teams should be categorised under the most vulnerable and be availed with the necessary PPE to avoid exposure to COVID-19.

On points of entry, this was in Bundibugyo, the Ministry of Health-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Summarise.

DR RUYONGA: Are they the same as those of my colleagues? I can go to the conclusion because the others are the same. 

In conclusion, the worst of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 posed a challenge unlike any other faced before to the health system in Uganda. The Government is applauded for the efforts taken in providing necessary measures for COVID-19 management. However, it is prudent that the Government ensures that necessary infrastructure, medicines, equipment and personnel to manage the health systems are in place to ensure efficient and effective interventions.

The taskforce further underscores the importance of prioritising mass vaccination to all the eligible 22 million Ugandans in the long run as the most sustainable measures, as opposed to the short term and unsustainable measures presently under implementation. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Dr Ruyonga.
 
6.03
MS HOPE NAKAZIBWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): I am presenting the report for the central region. The central region, like any other team, was composed of doctors and other honourable members, who included the following: 

    1. Dr Michael Bukenya 
    2. Dr Lulume Bayiga 
    3. Hon. Hope Grania Nakazibwe 
    4. Hon. Pauline Mirembe 
    5. Hon. Fortunate Rose Nantongo 
    6. Hon. Michael Kakembo 
    7. Hon. David Kabanda
    8. Hon. Charles Tebandeke
    9. Hon. Joseph Ssewungu  
    10. Dr Abed Bwanika.

The methodology is the same. I would like to mention the districts that we chose to visit as part of the central region; they include Kampala, Entebbe, Mubende, Mityana, Masaka, Kyotera, Lyantonde, Kalungu, Buikwe and Kayunga.

The team reviewed hospital management reports like any other team - the district taskforce port authorities at Mutukula and UCAA, hospital and health centre management teams, private not-for-profit service providers including Kibuli, Mengo and Rubaga hospitals.

We visited selected hospitals and health facilities, amongst which we have regional referral hospitals including Kiruddu, Mubende, Masaka, Kayunga, and Mulago National Referral Hospital. 

The taskforce also visited Mandela National Stadium as well as Mityana, Kalisizo, Entebbe Grade B, China–Uganda Friendship, Lyantonde, Kawolo and Mityana hospitals. We also visited three health centres IV: Kakuuto, Bbaale and Kalungu. 

The data was collected through a number of methods, including interviews and observations as well as questionnaires. 

Findings, observations and recommendations 

In response to Terms of Reference (ToR) number one, which was inquiring into and reporting on Government preparedness and response to COVID-19, a number of recommendations and observations have been cited. I am going to be specific. 

In Mulago, Kiruddu and Entebbe Grade B, the hospitals had functional X-rays and CT scan machines. These were lacking in Masaka, Kayunga, Mubende and Naguru regional referral hospitals.

About efforts on vaccinations of health workers and security personnel, police commandants on the various district taskforces indicated that most of the officers had received the first jab but it was hard to ascertain reception of the second. The health workers’ response to vaccination, especially in Masaka, was found to be below expected levels. 

I am not going to read the recommendations because they seem to be the same but for specificity, I am going to read out the findings.  

It was reported that the district taskforces had not yet received financial support in the second wave, unlike in the first wave. Cohesion, especially on some of the taskforces, was a little difficult. A case in point is in Buikwe and Kayunga. 

Enforcement of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and adherence to curfew led to police brutality in some of the regions among which is Lugazi, Kigaya and Nkombwe police posts. 

Sensitisation of the public about COVID-19 
 
Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) were seen to be the most common people sensitising people about COVID-19, yet we have specialists in this area. This recommendation seems to be different from the others: Government should review the policy on communication to allow space for subject specialists, which will enhance reception of the message given to the public. 

Case management

COVID-19 treatment centres – High Dependency Units (HDUs) and Intensive Care Units (ICUs)

Owing to the directive of the Ministry of Health to establish CTUs at regional and national referral hospitals, some general wards have been turned into HDUs and ICUs. This is affecting other health services provided at these health facilities. 

Other than Mulago, most of the regional referral hospitals did not have in place fully functional ICUs. 

Construction of a 400-bed maternal and child complex was taking place at Masaka Regional Referral Hospital. 

Lower health facilities were being stretched due to the fact that many of the patients suffering from other ailments feared to visit the regional referral hospitals. So, the lower health facilities need to be equipped in order to facilitate their support towards the other ailments that the community is suffering from. 

About ambulances at hospitals, standard hospital ambulances in the hospitals were a big problem. They were lacking and those that were available would face rampant mechanical breakdowns and lack of fuel to support the movement of patients. 

About oxygen situation in the health facilities, most regional referral hospitals, including Mulago National Referral Hospital, had oxygen plants. However, these faced a problem of low electricity supplies, which would lead to insufficient production of the oxygen that is required to support the COVID-19 patients. This has led to a high and overwhelming demand. 

The recommendation is that we should have a direct connection to the electricity sources as directed by the President in his previous speech. 

Home-based care delivery system 

Government adopted the home-based care for patients that were positive for COVID-19, with mild symptoms. However, the team established that whenever a patient was confirmed to be positive, there were no mechanisms for transporting the patient back home. Therefore, they would move on boda bodas, which would pose a big burden and threat to the community. 

The recommendation is that Government should avail the money for building adequate isolation centres to accommodate patients who are found to be positive and also improve the transportation means. 

TOR No. 2: To provide assessment of the health impact of COVID-19 in the community and country at large 

COVID-19 tests, positivity rate and mortality rates

Data from the health facilities visited revealed that out of the 41,659 tests conducted in these facilities, 20 per cent of them were positive. The deaths reported were up to 11 per cent. This is slightly a big loss.

From the selected hospitals, a total of 339 health workers were reported to have contracted COVID-19 as shown in the report that you already have, honourable members. The recommendation is that the Ministry of Health should urgently examine its accreditation policy with a view of expanding it to include the facilities to undertake effective monitoring and supervision. 

The ministry should urgently review and assess the challenges faced with the current emergency ambulance system that was instituted to facilitate patients’ referrals in order to curb the high death rates. 

Delivery of other health services

Some general hospitals such as Entebbe Grade B that was turned into a CTU stopped, with immediate effect, to offer other health services. In Masaka, there was no functioning general hospital in place to render health services because the other one was also majorly attending to COVID-19 patients. This is an indicator of the reduced utilisation of health services. 

The recommendations are: 

    i) Government must strengthen the healthcare systems and emphasis should be skewed towards building capacities of lower health facilities. 

    ii) Ministry of health should strengthen policy on COVID-19 management at hospitals to enhance the triage of COVID-19 victims in order to cater for the issue of stigma and fear of visiting the health facilities that treat COVID-19.

    iii) The Ministry of Health should also integrate management of COVID-19 into routine healthcare services. 

    iv) Government should intensify the COVID-19 and other health service awareness campaigns in order to demystify some of the myths. 

Impact of COVID-19 on the community and the economy

    i) The continued lockdown had crippled the capacity of the residents to meet their financial obligations with the financial institutions that they had agreed with.

    ii) A reduction in Ugandan’s income due to job and livelihood losses has shown a reduced flow of remittances.

    iii) Loss of market and demand for domestic products.

    iv) A reduction in revenue collection by Government is projected to effect service delivery – to mention but a few. 

Some of the recommendations are – I am going to read one: 

    i. Government must institute a clear response strategy needed to ensure adequate attention and protection for the vulnerable sections of the population and measures must be applied immediately. 

In assessing operation, administration and management of funds and other resources appropriated –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Summarise.

ms hope nakazibwe: I think I will not go into appropriated funds because hon. Kateshumbwa talked about that.

Late Payment of Risk Allowances 

The risk allowances allotted to health workers were Shs 80,000. However, it was identified that the Government continued to tax this little money. This little allowance was paid to a number of people via mobile money, which they seem not to be happy with. Some of the health workers complained that they were not yet paid. 

Efforts to intensify community engagement interventions to curb the outbreak were frustrated by inadequate transportation. As such, contact tracing, which is critical to controlling the spread of COVID-19, was jeopardised. 

COVID-19 Management in Private Not-For-Profit Facilities 

They are doing a great job. However, some of the PNFPs were not accredited to treat COVID-19 but they volunteered to do the same. They do not have the adequate health personnel to manage COVID-19, so they request that we have the Government seconding some of the health workers. That is the recommendation. They also lack adequate PPEs, HDUs and diagnostic equipment. 

Our recommendation is that the Government intervenes in providing some of these that they need, because the people they work on are Ugandans and they serve at a relatively low cost compared to the other private facilities.  

Outstanding power bills and insufficient water supply was alluded to by some other honourable member.

Staffing and Accommodation 

Most regional referral hospitals were understaffed, especially the ICUs, yet demand for medical services is immediately required and high. Even those that have been assigned to the various hospitals were hardly available to some of these facilities. So, the Government needs to provide inspections. 

Conduct Sensitisation and Awareness 

There were consistent complaints of police brutality and discontent regarding the criteria used in identification of the beneficiaries of the Shs 100,000 for the vulnerable. Also, the distance to vaccination centres was a challenge to some of the people during the times of restriction. 

Recommendation
 
The Government should earmark adequate resources for mass sensitisation to the lowest community levels throughout the country. Sensitisation should be geared to changing the mind-set of all Ugandans about vaccination and control of the spread of COVID-19. 

Matters Incidental 

Management and Containment of COVID-19 at Entebbe Airport and Mutukula 

The COVID-19 index case entered Uganda through the airport; consequently, border posts like the airport have remained the major source of entry of COVID-19. It was realised that some categories of people from the categorised countries were coming in without being tested; for example, those from category 2 countries who come in when vaccinated were exempted from testing.  

Honourable members recommended that we should have each and every one coming into Uganda through the airport tested to ascertain their COVID-19 status. 

Accreditation of Health Facilities to Treat COVID-19 

The surging numbers of COVID-19 cases in the second wave overwhelmed the CTUs and those that were accredited by Ministry of Health. Consequently, many health centres were forced to receive and admit COVID-19 patients without adequate facilities. 

In view of the surging numbers of COVID-19 patients, the Government should submit general hospitals with attendant resources. 

The weakness in the distribution of the COVID-19 relief fund by the Office of the Prime Minister was talked about by hon. Kateshumbwa in the finance report. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to say that whereas there has been some Government effort and achievement in Uganda’s COVID-19 management, our findings reveal that the Government has rather been ad hoc in its response. The current community transmissions can be attributed to this ad hoc response. The Government health facility preparedness to handle the pandemic is a little lacking. 

We would like to appreciate the members and the team that sacrificed to do all this work. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and Members. That is our report

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Grania, for the recap. Chairman, do you have anything to say? 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I realise that colleagues are tired and I might need another 20 to 30 minutes. Since the report is not going to be debated today, can I start with the day you will give us and then I can do the recap so that it helps the Members when they are fresh? This is because it is more or less a summary of the recommendations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we will debate this report on Thursday. Tomorrow, we will receive the response to the State-of-the-Nation Address from the Leader of the Opposition and a motion thanking the President for the State-of-the-Nation Address. 

Members, I would also like to bring to your notice that as much as we approved funds for Emyooga in this House in the Tenth Parliament, this money was disbursed to different districts, constituencies and the monies were received. Unfortunately, the monies have not been put to proper use. 

Since they have not been put to proper use, we have decided that we will give the Members of Parliament a short recess of one week. During that short recess, effective from 5 August 2021 to 17 August 2021, we expect all the Members of Parliament to go back to their constituencies and find out what exactly happened to the Emyooga funds. Did the money reach the districts? We must take Parliament to the constituencies for the people to appreciate what we are doing. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should give each district a breakdown of how much money was disbursed to that district. (Applause) When you go to the constituency or to the district, you need to find out how much money was disbursed to that district and the criteria of disbursing these monies to the beneficiaries. Are there real beneficiaries or you have ghost beneficiaries? Are there businesses that these beneficiaries have or not? 

Once you get that accountability – because you will want votes tomorrow and you want something good for your people, you will not betray them. Therefore, I am sending you from 5 to 17 August to the constituencies and we will expect sub-regional reports on what your findings are. You will be acting under Article 90 of the Constitution by doing your oversight role. 

Remember, when you are in that constituency, you have all the powers. You can get any document that you need for you to be able to find out whether what is being done is right. We have just approved the parish model and we cannot implement it before we know what Emyooga has done. (Applause) That will be continuous waste of money and then you will say the Government is not doing anything for the people. Let us help the Government to help the people down there. 

Before I adjourn, the House, on 13 July 2021 I announced the designation of hon. Caroline Kamusiime, the Woman Representative of Rukiga District, to the Pan African Parliament by the Government Chief Whip. This was to replace hon. Anifa Kawooya, who was appointed a minister. The designation of hon. Caroline Kamusiime is subject to approval by this House pursuant to Rule 13, Appendix (d) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

I now put the question that hon. Caroline Kamusiime be approved as a representative of the Pan African Parliament, in the Parliament of Uganda.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you for your patience. The ad hoc committee, you have done a very great job –(Applause) Whatever findings they got are findings about our people down there. It is not political and I want us to embrace that report. 

Thank you very much for staying all this long. I now adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.27 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 August 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
