Thursday, 6 August 2015

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Uganda signed the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction on 13 April 1993. It was also ratified on 30 November 2001. The Chemical Weapons Convention is an international instrument that regulates the development, production, stockpiling, transfer and use of chemical weapons. Under article 7 of the convention, each state party is required, in accordance with its constitutional process, to adopt necessary measures to implement its obligations under the convention.

You may wish to note that the Toxic Chemical Prohibition and Control Bill, 2015 was introduced to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development in line with the above obligation. In an effort to understand the convention and the Bill, Parliament requested the Organisation for Prohibition of Chemical Weapons’ (OPCW) technical secretariat from the Hague, Netherlands, under the Influential Visitors Programme that is aimed at sensitising policy and decision makers on the Chemical Weapons Convention and its domestication international legislation, to sensitise its members and staff.

The purpose of this communication, therefore, is to request all of you, honourable members, to attend the sensitisation workshop scheduled to take place on Thursday, 13 August 2015. The meeting will take place from 8.30 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. at Parliament Conference Hall. Therefore, honourable members, please let us be there and receive this information that will enable us process this particular Bill, which is of international significance. Thank you.

Honourable members, on the Order paper there is a slight correction that will be made by the clerk on item (3) (1) when that moment comes. Thank you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I rise on a point of procedure. About three or four weeks ago, I rose here on a matter of national importance regarding the deaths and murders of prominent Muslim clerics and leaders in this country and the failure of Government to come up with a comprehensive report, as promised. The minister committed, before this Parliament, that three weeks would be enough for them to come up with a comprehensive report on this issue. Good enough, today we have the Minister of Internal Affairs in attendance. I hope he has the report. However, to make matters worse, while that report continues to be pending, we now have the New Vision and other dailies coming up with stories of more Muslims escaping murder. 

For your information, Mr Speaker, the category of people they are now looking for has expanded to include the Imam of this Parliament. He is now on the hit list. The Government has responded by providing him with security 24/7, which is a commendable action. However, we can no longer afford to ignore this because the list of people they want to hit keeps on expanding. The Imam is very lucky to know that he is on the hit list. Therefore, the failure of Government to come up with this report, while the murderers are at ease, seems to make matters worse.

There is general concern in the Muslim community and they demand no less than a comprehensive report on what Government is doing as it had promised. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a procedural point, honourable member for Kawempe. Honourable minister, it is true that this matter was before the House and this commitment was made to the House. Now that you are here, you may want to explain why you are not on the Order Paper.

2.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, first of all, a Minister of Internal Affairs is always present in this House. To impute that today I am present or that a minister is present is not correct. One of us is always around to respond to questions.

Secondly, it is true that this matter concerning the murder of Muslim clerics around the country was raised in the House. What the Minister of Internal Affairs has done is to prepare a comprehensive report, which he has first submitted to Cabinet and thereafter, it will come to Parliament. We may have delayed, for which I want to apologise, but we are seized of the matter and a comprehensive report is coming to this House, following concurrence of the Cabinet.

The Prime Minister is here and he can confirm that this item is on the agenda of Cabinet. Therefore, we have not ignored the request of Parliament that this report is required here. We are working on it and we want to come with a comprehensive report. Mr Speaker and honourable members, in the course of the next week, this report will be before this House. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the meantime, can you assure us that necessary steps have been taken to guarantee this individual’s security?

MR BABA: Yes. Just like he has said, the Imam of Parliament has been given extra security and I am sure he is going to confirm this. For all the others who are threatened, including all other Ugandans, their security is assured and nothing is being left to chance. 

Of course, security cannot be everywhere. Murders will not stop in this country or elsewhere around the world. However, I want to give the assurance that Government is seized of the matter and wants to make sure that every Ugandan is safe. We are trying to get to the bottom of these matters. This is the assurance I want to give.

2.17
MR LATIF ABDU SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. As we are still waiting for a conclusive report, I believe that we need more than that. When you look at how these murders have been going on within a space of less than two years, a number of Muslim clerics have been killed in the same manner. Whenever there is that kind of killing, the Government comes out and assures Ugandans that they are going to give protection. After two or three months, another person gets killed. Yesterday, a cleric in Mbale survived narrowly; he was almost killed, as a report is being prepared. 

Mr Speaker, I requested for your permission to go for Umrah and I returned two weeks ago. Upon my return, I found that the commandant in charge of Parliamentary Police had requested the officer in charge of VIP protection to give me protection. This is because as the Imam of Parliament, there were some people who were trailing me, according to security intelligence. When I came back, they told me that I had no option because they had information that as the Imam, I was being targeted. I was given two bodyguards.

Mr Speaker, I believe that we do not have enough personnel that can be given to everybody who is under threat. What the Government should really look into is to have a holistic approach. Why do we have these hit lists? There are lists that are known and many people on those lists have been executed. Why do we have these situations? This is not the first time that we are having divisions in the Muslim community. I grew up with the Kibuli and Old Kampala factions. Why is it that this time we have this scenario?

Mr Speaker, I believe that the Government has not done enough in looking at the cause of these threats. The sheikh who was killed recently, Sheikh Kirya, had bodyguards but because of some gaps in between, he was killed. As we wait for that report to be presented, what assurance do we have? I have been given bodyguards but there are others without bodyguards and yet some lists are not known. 

Mr Speaker, as I wind up, if I am killed I would not expect any official from Government to come for my funeral service to deliver an eulogy and say they are going to do everything possible when they are yet to come out with something convincing to reassure the people on the cause of all these killings. As we speak, we live under fear. Prince Kassim Nakibinge’s home is now like a barracks. We have never seen a situation where religious leaders are being guarded. Why now, Mr Speaker? We are very worried.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have anything additional on that?

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, if we knew the cause of these murders, we would have rounded up these people. If we knew those who are behind these killings, we would have dealt with them. The fact that security got hints that you are being followed is the reason you have been given protection. We are under an obligation to give protection to those we suspect are being threatened. Give us a chance to investigate this thing thoroughly. We do not know the source of these murders but we are investigating.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Honourable minister, thank you very much for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker.

From what the minister is saying, are we right to conclude that Government has failed to protect Ugandans? You swore by the Constitution to protect the lives and property of Ugandans. Many Ugandans are being killed and Government keeps on saying, “This is the last one, we are going to do something.” When you do not do anything, more are killed. 

The Imam, who is our colleague, is saying that they are living in fear. These killings were initially among Muslims but now, some political leaders are also living in fear that these killings may extend to them. How can Government assure us that we are safe and that they are doing their constitutional obligation to protect the lives of Ugandans?

Maybe it would have been necessary for us to sit down and try to understand the political problem that may be causing these deaths. You have arrested some people and maybe they have told you something. I do not think they are killing over money or sex. They must be killing for some reason, which can be resolved through dialogue. Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to give some clarification on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not yet the comprehensive report that the minister is supposed to bring. Yes, people are dying and that is why we asked for the interim measures in place while we wait for the comprehensive report that is supposed to be brought by the minister. If we start debating it now, we are completely off track. 

Honourable members, the guidance I am going to give is that the minister said - I am the one who raised the question that in the interim, can we be assured that certain things are in place to guarantee the security of the people, and the minister has said so. Can we wait for the statement, and I hope you are going to give a clear date on when it will come? Is it before Cabinet? Has Cabinet taken a decision on it? When is it coming to Parliament?

MR BABA: It was supposed to appear before Cabinet yesterday but because we were required to come here early, we adjourned the Cabinet meeting by 12.00 p.m. to rush here. Therefore, it is before Cabinet. I cannot say when, but it is until Cabinet clears it because it is the intention of the minister that Cabinet gives him a blessing before he comes to bring this report to Parliament. Maybe in the course of next week, that should be possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wednesday after the Cabinet meeting, honourable minister, you will stand on that microphone -

MR BABA: Thursday after the Cabinet meeting, we will try but I am not saying it is definite. Cabinet sits every Wednesday; we will bring the report on Thursday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thursday, next week. Let us wait for this statement and then we will have a debate on it. 

2.26
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I am raising a matter of national concern. On 8 April this year, I raised a similar matter of national importance about 27 Ugandans who are languishing in jail in the state of Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Up to now, those people I am speaking for have not received a fair trial. They live under very bad conditions and they are fed with very bad food. They are tortured and one of them has since died. 

Mr Speaker, after being entrusted with power four years ago, the Government of Uganda should assure us that it is ready to protect the lives of Ugandans. It is on the strength of international law that Uganda went to South Sudan to protect Ugandans who were in danger. Under the International Bill of Rights, the Ugandans I am speaking for are not supposed to be tortured. With reference to the doctrine of state responsibility in international law, the Ugandan Government can even pursue those people in protection of their lives. They have international power in law to chase those people so that they ensure that they are safe. 

I hope the ministers of internal affairs and foreign affairs know this. If they do not know this, they would have let us down because Uganda is a member of the United Nations. Under those conditions, the Government of Uganda, after assuring us through the Prime Minister that something would be done, never did anything. Those people are dying, they lack security and they do not have a fair trial. They are languishing in jail and are dying at random. 

I would like an assurance from the Government of Uganda that those people will be protected. One of them called Nabulya is a resident of Rubaga South, which I represent in this House. Mr Speaker, I demand a response of meaning in regard to what I am talking about. Otherwise, Government should resign if they have no responsibility to protect people’s lives. 

2.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Okello Oryem): Mr Speaker, I am hearing this for the first time. However, I will get the details from my brother, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, and I will report to this House within the next seven days. 

Mr Speaker, we have a challenge with Ugandans who travel abroad to different countries. When they reach their destinations, they do not wish to acknowledge or register their presence with our high commissions, embassies or even the consulates. We only get to know about Ugandans when they are in trouble - jail, arrests or when they are having some difficulties in the countries they are in. 

It is, as a matter of first instance, that we have to first verify whether the particular individual is a Ugandan or not before the Ugandan mission intervenes. We do not just react to any cases that arise when somebody claims to be a Ugandan leaving abroad, unless that person had initially, on arrival, registered with the Uganda High Commission, the embassy or consulate. My advice - (Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we are departing for abroad, we usually fill departure forms. In those forms, we fill our mission for going abroad and how many days we are supposed to spend there. I thought this was for the purpose of tracking down the Ugandan community moving abroad so that you can know, through our high commissions abroad, the kind of people who are going to such countries. They can then be tracked down. 

Don’t you think it is negligence of the highest order on the part of Ministry of Foreign Affairs not to know where Ugandans have gone and their missions? Government only waits for remittances from those people and reports on those remittances instead of knowing exactly what they are doing.  

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi raised this issue about four months ago in April. I expected the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to have taken up this issue with our mission in Abu Dhabi. 

Secondly, when I was in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs all missions used to submit monthly reports to the ministry. I have raised the issue of performance of our missions on this Floor a number of times. It seems that the minister is hearing about this matter for the first time and he is promising to bring a report to the House within seven days. Are you really hearing about this matter for the first time? Do you still get reports on your desk of what is happening from missions abroad? 

People are sitting in prison and even dying. I expected the mission in Abu Dhabi to have written a report, which should have reached your desk. You have three ministers in your ministry. If you are not able to write reports, you should assign an officer in the ministry to sit in the chambers so that they follow up on issues that concern your ministry and report on them. This would enable you to take up the issues. Ugandans are being tortured and are dying in prison and you have no idea. 

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the honourable Minister of Foreign Affairs who has insinuated that he is going to come here with a report. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the issue that is on the Floor now has been on the Floor of this House for some time. The Committee of Equal Opportunities made a report, which compelled the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to come here with a very comprehensive report. Some time back, the Minister of State for Gender, hon. Rukutana, made a statement here that he had travelled to more than six countries and that he was following up the matter. We gave him a timeframe to come with a comprehensive report. 

When I got information that he was not following up the issue of the women, hon. Mwiru came in. The honourable minister of state said that he was going to come to this House with a comprehensive report. I was made to understand that he was trotting all over the globe but he did not follow up the matter. 

This is a similar issue. We recommended, in one of the reports, that the Minister of Foreign Affairs together with the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development bring a comprehensive data report stating how many Ugandans are in prisons abroad, how many are in formal employment and how many are abroad in total. When hon. Sam Kuteesa was the Minister of Foreign Affairs, he was very active and there was some response. The clarification I would like to seek is: is the Minister of Foreign Affairs aware that this House has asked for a comprehensive report on how many Ugandans are in prisons abroad more than once? 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue before this House is becoming more complicated. Many cases have been reported in this House of Ugandans abroad who are in trouble in countries like South Sudan, China, among others. From the submission of the minister, he is hearing about the issue raised by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi for the first time. However, there are many other cases, which are still pending and Ugandans out there are still waiting for responses.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, now that the minister is in the House, that he hears all the reports on all the cases and not only isolated cases, so that he comes with a comprehensive report to this House that will answer all these pending cases and put to rest the fears of Ugandans and give them some assurance? Probably, in the report, he could give us the procedure on how Ugandans are being helped or how they can be helped. This should be well spelt out in the report, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish you had listened to the minister to hear what he was going to say and then we could have interacted with him on the gaps. I think the minister said that in seven days, he will be coming back with a comprehensive statement on this subject. 

However, he was also giving information that when we go abroad, most of us do not even notify the mission. Now I am now hearing that departure declaration forms issued in Entebbe should be the basis of knowledge of arrivals for foreign missions in China and in the US. Please! Let the honourable minister finish.

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect, I will bring this report within one week - seven days from now. However, I have been in this business for 14 years. I started flying when I was two years old and I have filled these departure forms for 52 years. Never, in my wildest dreams - Even when I was two years old, I knew that departure forms were for internal consumption or for immigration purposes for the country and not for foreign affairs.

Therefore, when a Member of Parliament, who has travelled largely, tries to educate me on this matter, I am surprised. The forms that you fill in the departure lounge in Entebbe airport are for the internal consumption and for immigration purposes in Uganda, period. They are not in any way or manner for purposes of foreign affairs. 

Colleagues, the standard procedure is that whenever a citizen reaches his or her destination, he or she should register with the missions abroad. This is done by all countries and that is why foreign countries find it easy to evacuate their citizens in times of problems because they know their contacts, their addresses and where they are. In the case of Ugandans who choose deliberately to avoid their missions abroad because they claim that the Government of Uganda is pursuing them, this is the problem.

Mr Speaker, I will bring my report in seven days to respond to all these matters. I thank you very much.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I rise on the point of order. Ugandans go abroad for various reasons. Whatever the case or their situation, the Government of Uganda is responsible for its own citizens. Mr Speaker, you are aware that because of our history, we have Ugandans abroad who are not there because they want it that way. There are some who are trying to come back home. It is therefore the duty of the Government, through our ministry, to fish out and protect Ugandans out there. 

Is the honourable minister in order to allude that Ugandans outside there deliberately shy away from going to the embassy, well aware that they are there for various reasons? Could that be the reason why the Government is alluding to the protection of its citizens instead of making a deliberate effort to know its citizens abroad? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am the Deputy Speaker of Parliament and Member of Parliament for Omoro County. The hon. Anywar is the Woman Member of Parliament for Kitgum District and also shadow Minister for Environment. The hon. Oryem Okello is the Minister in charge of International Affairs. I am not aware of anybody else who is better qualified to state these facts on the record of Parliament than him. (Applause) Please, wind up.

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Mr Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling as usual. I will, in seven days, bring a response to this House on the matters raised by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. I thank you very much.

2.44
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Mr Speaker, my question goes to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

Given reports of Ugandans employed in the Middle East countries, particularly Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Qatar being abused physically, sexually and verbally, among others, by their employers – (Interjections)- It is similar but different. It is always good to listen, hon. Anywar.

One, will the honourable minister please lay before Parliament, within a week’s time, the employment agreement signed by the Government of Uganda and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which clearly spells out that they need to recruit well qualified Ugandan graduates as housemaids, drivers and English teachers at a cost of Shs 700,000?

Two, will the honourable minister also inform Parliament about the monetary mechanism in place to ensure that our citizens are safe and that their rights are not violated by their employers and the recruitment agencies? These are the questions that I would like to put forward to the honourable minister. Thank you.

2.46
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, the Member for Kole. The Member for Kole has made a demand that a copy of the agreement signed should be laid here on the Floor of Parliament next week. He has also asked about a mechanism of monitoring that ensures that Ugandans employed in those countries are well looked after and that their rights are not abused. Mr Speaker, I shall comply next week. Thank you.    

2.46
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

There are people who have served this country very diligently and dedicatedly for many years. When they reach retirement age, they would like to retire honourably. Government should come and pat them on their backs for the wonderful job done, whether for 25 years or 30 years in the service of the nation.

Mr Speaker, there are people who served in Mbale Municipality for a number of years and they expected to get a pension and gratuity but Mbale Municipal Council was unable to pay them this money. What they did, like many others, was to go to court. The court decided and ruled in their favour that they must be paid their gratuity and pension. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released this money but it somehow disappeared. We therefore demand that these people, who served this nation diligently, be paid their pension immediately.

Mr Speaker, if this money is sent through the local government it might be used. We demand that these people be paid their pensions and gratuity, which was ruled in their favour, through the Ministry of Public Service. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, would you like to say something regarding this issue of public service and pensions?

2.48
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Government operates a pension scheme and you have got to serve a certain number of years before you qualify for it. I think this is known and appreciated by all. Unless you serve a specified number of years, you do not qualify for pension. 

There have been some problems in the past and these problems are being resolved. One of the solutions is to decentralise the payment of salaries and pensions to the districts. It is hoped in that way, it will be possible to pay people on time and pay the right people. This is because when something is centralised, all sorts of people take advantage of the lack of precision in knowing who is who and who is entitled to what. This is being worked upon very actively. The decentralisation has already been effected both for pension and gratuity. We therefore think that, that is the way to go. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, the issue is that some people who had qualified for pensions were not paid their pensions. They went to court and court awarded them. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released the money and the money somehow disappeared. When is the Ministry of Public Service going to guarantee that the money that had disappeared should be retrieved and paid to these people? That was the issue.

MR KAJURA: Mr Speaker, I am not so sure that that money was released – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can we now take it that you are going to find out whether this money was released or not? These deserving people should be paid. Maybe a copy of the court order should be forwarded to the minister so that they can look at it and see how to follow up this matter. Can we conclude on this matter?

2.50
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, it is now coming to two weeks and the referral hospital in Jinja has no blood. All the people who needed blood in that region were buying it from Al-Shafa. I thought that this situation had improved until yesterday when I had to buy blood for the seventh person. I realised then that the Government needs to take this matter very seriously.

2. 51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, the point has been noted. I will communicate to the Ministry of Health to make sure that we get blood where we have it in excess to serve the people of Jinja. 

MR ASUPASA: Mr Speaker, I have heard hon. Mwiru saying that blood is being bought. I thought that blood in this country should not be bought, even from a private clinic, because all of us donate blood freely. I have not heard of a place where people go to sell blood. Could you clarify that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you able to clarify on these matters?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the reason why the Government Chief Whip keeps time is to make sure that she notes all the information that has been raised and that she does not have answers to. I therefore undertake to find out from the Ministry of Health. I will make sure the ministry responds to both points – the buying of blood and also the scarcity of blood in Jinja.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have a delegation from Nkokonjeru Town Council in Buikwe District represented by hon. Bayigga Lulume Michael and hon. Mpiima Dorothy. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of King Faisal Muslim Primary School and Quran Memorisation Centre represented by hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai and hon. Nakayenze Connie of Mbale District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Factory Primary School in Kakira, Jinja represented by hon. Daudi Migereko and hon. Agnes Nabirye. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are all very welcome. (Applause)

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo): Mr Speaker, in accordance with section 82, paragraph (3) of the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010, I beg to lay on the Table the statutory instrument, the Kampala Capital City (Establishment of Village Urban Councils in Makindye Division) Regulations, 2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, there was a correction on what was being laid and I communicated that earlier. It is forwarded to the appropriate committee. If this is for information, it will be acted upon accordingly but if it requires some action by Parliament, the committee will advise Parliament on how to do it. 

2.55
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013, volume II, central government (entities with  qualified opinion - volume III). I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

2.56
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the	report of the Public Accounts Committee on the value for money audit report on water for production facilities under the Ministry of Water and Environment. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

2.57
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the	report of the Public Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June, 2013 volume II central government (entities with qualified opinions volume II: health institutions with qualified opinions). I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

2.58
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Public Accounts Committee report on the Auditor-General’s findings on the Ministry of Education and Sports for the financial year ended 30 June, 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Congratulations, chairman and the Committee on Public Accounts because these are four reports in all. (Applause) That is the way business should be done. We should all be doing this. Thank you.

Honourable members, we will find time to debate these reports and take decisions on the recommendations from the committee.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO WITHDRAW THE CHILDREN’S (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

2.59
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker and colleagues, in accordance with rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure of our Parliament, I beg to seek leave of the Rt Hon. Speaker and the honourable House to withdraw the Children’s (Amendment) Bill, 2015 in favour of the Children’s (Amendment) No.2 Bill, 2015, which was presented by a private member, hon. Atiku. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Atiku, the Government Chief Whip, members of Kitgum, Rubaga North, Buikwe, Padyere, Kibuku, Mitooma, Yumbe, Mbale, Kasese and all the Members standing. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, you will recall that Government presented the Children’s (Amendment) Bill, 2015 to Parliament. At the same time, hon. Atiku presented a Bill on the same subject in Parliament. This was indeed a unique situation, which necessitated concerted consultations and deliberations to pave a way forward. 

A lot of deliberation and consultations have taken place to harmonise the two Bills. During the consultations, it emerged that the private member’s Bill had a hybrid or good provisions to sufficiently augment the current law. We believe that if the private member’s Bill is passed, it will indeed cure the loopholes, which Government intended to solve in filling the gaps that are in the current law.

On these grounds, I would like to submit that in the interest of the children of this country and in the spirit of moving forward in unison, Government finds it fit indeed to withdraw its Bill and that the private member’s Bill should proceed so that Parliament goes forward to debate and enact the amendment to the Children’s Act. Mr Speaker, you will agree that a lot of time has been spent on this important law and it is my conviction that there should be no more delays in the enactment of an appropriate law for the children of this country. Government commits itself to implementing the law once it is approved. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I propose the question for your debate. The motion is seeking leave of the House to withdraw the Children’s (Amendment) Bill, 2015. I now propose this motion for your debate. However, honourable members, in the interest of facilitating the process of finalisation of this Bill, this matter has come to the House a few times now, including yesterday, and I do not therefore expect any debate. I am going to put the question. 

I now put the question to the motion seeking leave of the House to withdraw the Children’s (Amendment) Bill, 2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill presented by the minister is accordingly withdrawn. The committee can proceed with the Bill from the private member and then proceed to bring it back to Parliament and we finalise on it.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGs) MOVED UNDER RULE 47 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Oyam South. Are you also the Chairperson of UWOPA?

3.03
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by congratulating the women and the people of Uganda for the landmark ruling of the Supreme Court today. (Applause) The Supreme Court has ruled that bride price refund is unconstitutional and illegal. However, payment of bride price is still permitted as optional. Congratulations to the people of Uganda, most especially to the men who have been produced by women and have wives. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure for a resolution of Parliament on the proposed Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) due to be adopted in September, 2015 in New York at the UN. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by members of Arua, Kole, Butambala, Apac, Kitgum, Mitooma, Workers, Buikwe District, PWD Eastern, Member for Busiro South. Would you like to speak your motion?

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Sustainable Development Goals are one of the development architecture of the UN, which are replacing, together with the Post-2015 Development Agenda, the Millennium Development Goals.

Mr Speaker, this development architecture is anchored on the key principle of addressing socio-economic disparities and inequality. It underpins the principle that continuing progress around the world still eludes many people and that if we have to address development goals post MDGs, we must put, at the centre of development, key socio-economic parameters that will realise human rights of all, eradicate poverty, eliminate inequality and be people-centred. 

Mr Speaker, the Sustainable Development Goals clearly underpin the role of parliamentarians. Parliamentarians have a moral obligation to address policies, both social and economic, that leverage the gap between the rich and the poor and that ensure an integrated approach for poverty eradication and sustainable development. 

It is important that as we make laws and policies, we strive for a balanced and equitable distribution of resources. We must ensure inclusive development and treatment of natural resources, eco-systems and environment as a shared asset of everybody. As parliamentarians, we must put investment geared towards health, education, skills development and nutrition at the centre. Parliamentarians must hold Government accountable to social policies and goals through budgets and laws that defend public interest and pursue the common goal of everybody that we represent.

Mr Speaker, therefore, this motion is anchored on ensuring that this Parliament adopts the principle of the key roles of parliamentarians in implementation of the new development architecture; that Parliament reaffirms its vision for people-centred sustainable development; and ensures that in our work and commitment as parliamentarians, we must realise that if development is to be pro-people we must play our role through legislation, policies and budget allocation to key social sectors that address inequalities. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, would like to put the text of the motion on record?

MS BETTY AMONGI: For the record, Mr Speaker, the motion reads as follows: 

“WHEREAS the 132nd Inter-Parliamentary Union Assembly convened at Hanoi, Vietnam under the theme, ‘The Sustainable Development Goals: Turning Words into Action’ from 28 March to 1 April 2015 culminating in the Hanoi Declaration (see Annex A)…” Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table Annex A.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS BETTY AMONGI: “…reviewed the emerging Sustainable Development Goals and considered Parliament’s role in attaining them; 

AND WHEREAS the Speaker of Parliament, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, while addressing the 132nd General Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in Hanoi, Vietnam challenged parliamentarians to embrace and take interest in the Sustainable Development Goals, which constitute a universal agenda applying to both developed and developing countries and build on the expiring Millennium Development Goals whose discussion, design and final output did not involve parliamentary participation;

AWARE that poverty eradication is the greatest global challenge facing the world today and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, SDGs will address the persistent issues and new challenges facing the people and the world through an approach that fully integrates the social, economic and environmental dimensions of sustainable development;

FURTHER AWARE that Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) will assist in focusing the broad international sustainable development agenda at a practical level by guiding national action on poverty and sustainable development for the next 15 years since they serve as a tool for countries to measure their progress as well as further cooperation between them;

NOTING that the UN General Assembly’s Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals forwarded a proposal for the SDGs to the Assembly, containing 17 goals with 169 targets covering a broad range of sustainable development issues like eradication of poverty and hunger, improving health and education, making cities more sustainable, combating climate change, and protecting oceans and forests (see Annex B)…”  

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table Annex B of the General Assembly Working Group proceedings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS BETTY AMONGI: “…APPRECIATING that the post-2015 development agenda and its SDGs will afford a unique opportunity to meet global challenges using universal integrated approach that will apply to all countries and link poverty eradication to sustainable development, which will require strong political will, leadership and national ownership to be realised;

FURTHER APPRECIATING that poverty eradication and sustainable development are a shared commitment for all parliamentarians, who should strive for balanced and more equitable distribution of resources;

RECOGNISING that Parliament has a critical role to play in ensuring that the new SDGs are promoted by developing targets, norms, benchmarks and indicators to be used to assess the performance of Government;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament of Uganda duly convened and sitting today and having debated the proposed SDGs that:

a) 	Parliament reaffirms its vision of a people-centred sustainable development based on realisation of all human rights to eradicate poverty in all its forms and eliminate inequalities and thus empower all peoples to attain their full human potential.

b) 	Parliament commends the proposal for revising the goals to 17 as compared to 8 previously, to include, among other goals, on healthy lives and wellbeing, gender equality and women’s empowerment, reduction of inequalities within and between countries as well as on governance.

c) 	Parliament commits to strengthening national ownership of the proposed SDGs by voicing the people’s concerns in the political process without discrimination and irrespective of social status or political affiliation.

d) Parliament urges Government to conduct negotiations, keeping in mind the real needs and expectations of citizens and addressing the linkages between sustainable development, democratic governance and human rights.

e) 	Parliament urges Government that upon adoption of SDGs in September 2015, it should come up with a development plan, policies and laws that reflect the SDGs developed in an inclusive and participatory manner through public hearings with civil society and in line with the international human rights framework. 

f) Parliament demands that Government reports annually to Parliament on the status and implementation of development plan in relation to SDGs.”

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament on the Sustainable Development Goals moved under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure. Debate starts now with the seconder of the motion speaking first.

3.15
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second this motion. However –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you from Isingiro South? Okay, in the absence of hon. Alex Byarugaba Bakunda, the formal seconder of the motion now will be the honourable member for Arua District.

MS BAKO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I rise to second this motion but I will restrict my submission to the domestic issues here in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, if we did a simple survey here and asked how many Members of Parliament in this House appreciated the Millennium Development Goals that we are about to replace with the Sustainable Development Goals, you will realise that probably half of us cannot even remember the first five. As a country, there was ideally - I think for the last 10 years, I have never heard of any report submitted to Parliament about the extent to which we, as a country, performed on the MDGs. 

The world has now developed another set of infrastructure for development called the Sustainable Development Goals. The question at hand is: if we achieved nothing within the Millennium Development Goals, how prepared are we to move on to the Sustainable Development Goals? In other words, what are we sustaining in the first place? Therefore, it is right and prudent that it is a call on duty on the Legislature to put its feet right to realise that we can only eradicate poverty through the budgets that we pass here. 

The question, therefore, is: do we commit our budget to poverty eradication problems? For example, Mr Speaker, if we look at the expenditure on the Presidency, State House, arms and security itinerary vis-à-vis the amount of resources we allocate to agriculture, education and health, you would wonder whether we would therefore be sustaining what we never achieved in the first place. The responsibility is right here; it is now to conscientise Parliament, to ask if we are truly representatives in our allocative responsibility; are we placing resources where they are supposed to be in order to reduce poverty? 

The other question that comes to that segment is one of the issues that has been highlighted here, which is to narrow the income gap, the difference between the rich and poor, the earning differences, educational disparities. What is happening in Uganda is that when you look at income, poverty, structure of life and how society has been segmented along income lines, you realise that we are not sustaining and developing anything. 

We, therefore, would need to recollect ourselves and ask: what kind of allocation infrastructure do we need to target those who are at the lowest income base and bring them up? What kind of employment are we giving our youth to ensure that the investments that are put through education generate a happiness index? The other parts of the world are talking about happiness index; now, Uganda has not even thought about how our human development indexes are reflecting what the prosperity will be like. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, this is a call on duty on this and the next House. If we are talking about poverty reduction, it means that budgets that we pass here must be able to work for the ordinary people and if they are not working, then we would not have done our part and we would not have been fair to this commitment and undertaking today. 

The issue of gender equality and women empowerment; globally now, those who know and those who sit in Government are realising that if you want a trustworthy government, you have to invest in the leadership and employment of women. That is why you find a woman like Kagina moving from Uganda Revenue Authority to UNRA. Why? It is only women who can sort out this social poverty called corruption. There are people who are very wealthy materially but they are socially poor. Tell me how you can walk with your head up when in the first place you are looked at as someone who has eaten several layers of the Pakwach-Nebbi Road; as someone who has integrity when you have Katosi totally eaten. 

Apart from having this materialism, you also have social poverty and it is upon us to address that beginning with us as leaders in this House. Therefore, the question at hand is: do we still want to have more men in the infrastructure and architecture of Government or we need more women, if we are to sort this out? (Laughter) 

The issue of gender equality is very prudent and probably, that is why countries that have advanced have women at the forefront, for example Germany alone; Angela Merkel has been able to sustain that country to the extent that it has not even suffered the regrets the world is facing. The collapse in the European Union has never been faced by Germany. Why? This is because there is a woman at the helm. As Greece is suffering, the woman-led country is excelling. (Members rose_) - I think on these matters, I have considerable level of information.

Mr Speaker, when we talk about natural resource use and environmental protection, it is nothing that we should really be –(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my honourable sister for giving me way. I would like to inform my sister that we have studied the history of development of the entire universe. We have studied the development of America and from my own information - and I hope you are aware – America, since its independence has been led by men. 
	
When you come to China, the country that is controlling the whole world, it has never been led by a woman but it is developing at a very supersonic pace. I would like to inform you that when we talk about Singapore and the Tigers, all of them, those who have been at the highest level, have always been men developing all these nations. This is just for your information; that we as men are not sitting but doing a lot in developing this country. (Laughter)

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You can appreciate the level of economics in my brother because what he does not understand is that behind those economies are powerful women either working in the market or garden and in those factories. (Laughter) Therefore, you can appreciate that he, coming from a transport sector, also knows that most of the travellers on the Felista coaches are women and he is aware. (Laughter)

This is not to underrate what men do but it is really to tell you the extent to which the fundamentals of development across the world now are driven by women and there is no contempt and doubt. Unless you are localised with the kind of information you have and that having no authorship is subject to another debate.

Finally, Mr Speaker, on matters of health, I have just been looking at disturbing pictures here - the extent to which hospital equipment are being discarded and rejected. In the 21st Century, doctors are examining patients on verandas but you have the luxury to go for meetings and eat sausages, sit here and fail to have quorum and we call ourselves Parliament. This is injustice. 

When you ask the Executive what is the allocation for hospital equipment here, I am sure even the Prime Ministers will never tell me. In the first place, how do you even procure what is not standard? What happened? What kind of country do we live in? What kind of leaders do we have that you have the privilege, if I may be sarcastic enough, to procure what is not going to be used and the people that you claim you are fighting for are being examined on the ground? It is unacceptable. 

Health in itself is not only that equipment; what about the human infrastructure, do we have it? We have just failed on the maternal mortality goal and we are never able to reach there and to reduce maternal mortality but here we would like to sustain it. Among those were delivery beds; where are the mothers delivering now? Therefore, as we speak to this motion, if we domesticated this motion, are we prepared to sustain what we never achieved? I think this requires a lot of time.

Before my honourable colleague interrupted me, I was talking about natural resources and environment. The rate at which we have depleted our forest cover is unprecedented but how many trees have we planted as legislators?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you may exhaust the time for debating this motion seconding it.

MS BAKO: Can I conclude then? Mr Speaker, finally, I would like to call not only on Government but individuals that we should establish greenbelts on our own compound and everywhere. Otherwise, the rate at which we are consuming our trees does not correlate with the rate at which we are planting them.

Therefore, I call on you, Members, to speak to this motion from your hearts but domesticating it to our own issues. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I have already proposed this motion for debate and I will start with Bunyole East. We will take three minutes each.

3.28
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Sustainable Development Goals are the international cooperation agenda for development that is coming as a replacement to the Millennium Development Goals.

I know there has been an attempt by this Parliament, one, to create a forum on Millennium Development Goals to ensure that that development agenda is captured within the nature we do our work. It has not been excellent but there has been an attempt. Right now, it is important that this Parliament is debating and adopting this motion at a time when Uganda is heading the UN General Assembly. The entire working group and developing this agenda into its fruition has come at a time when hon. Sam Kutesa is the presiding officer at the UN General Assembly. This gives us, as a House, a rare opportunity to join the international fraternity in ensuring that we are participating in the global concerns and how best we must participate in this agenda.

Mr Speaker, if you look at the nomenclature, the other ones were referred to as Millennium Development Goals and currently we are talking about Sustainable Development Goals. It just indicates that there are some development goals that may be unsustainable. So to us, as a Parliament, given the people’s mandate and the mandate to allocate resources, what is it that we are going to do to ensure that the international agenda is domesticated so that the actions that we take, the resources that we allocate and the guidance that the country takes reflect exactly what the international agenda is? That is the most important thing that is desired of Parliament.

If you looked at the number of the Sustainable Development Goals – if one cares to look at them – one of them is “to end poverty in all its forms”. There has been an attempt. When you look at the statistics and you look at the countryside, honestly, there is politics that we may talk about that people are poorer, but when you go to the population and you see what is happening, you will see that progressively, people are getting better. They have not reached to the best but there is an attempt. 

When you look at the infrastructure that Government is proposing and is building, it is intended to do exactly this. But as Parliament, we should not release the pedal; we must step on the pedal to push Government to ensure that the resources that come by – When the beds are imported, that is a good commitment on the part of Government to ensure that the mothers deliver well but when someone poor is bringing bad beds, that should not be – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, wind up in a minute.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, thank you. Therefore, I call upon my colleagues that we must realise what our limitations have been as a nation, what our ignorance has been as Parliament, and what we need to do now that the new development agenda is coming in to ensure that every resource that is allocated is intended to achieve exactly this. Mr Speaker, I support the motion. Thank you.

3.32
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second this timely motion. This kind of development agenda will never come to fruition unless, at the country level, the executives of those countries take these matters very seriously. One of the most interesting theses I have ever read was one by somebody who wrote about scaling down of governments, whether it translates into scaling up of people’s participation. When we are talking about a people-centred development agenda, we are talking about people’s participation in the identification of the issues that affect them and maybe, getting the possible solutions that they can push up to the government to act.

Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, our people have not been participating in identifying their issues and ensuring that their issues heed the national agenda for solutions to be made to them. That is why we continue to see people suffering from jiggers and many other tropical diseases, which have been neglected in the face of the high degree of development that we have been hearing about and the statistics that have been quoted about how development is going on.

The listening ear should be from Government – not necessarily from Parliament; because we make a mistake, Mr Speaker, to call Parliament policy makers and yet the policy maker should be the government which has been elected. And it is on the basis of those governments that solutions should be got to answer the questions of the people at the grassroots for which this development agenda is meant.

We are talking about women; we are talking about alleviating maternal deaths; we are talking about children and I think the MDGs have formed part of that discourse, for which this Parliament was part in Uganda – in which the MDGs assisted us to push that agenda.

In respect of the Sustainable Development Goals, I would like to implore the sitting governments – not only Uganda – to look at the issues that affect the people at the country-level, before we even think about those issues as articulated by fora such as IPU and whichever forum is in Geneva and elsewhere. It should be us, in Uganda, to find the issues, articulate them – (Member timed out.)

3.35
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to thank hon. Betty Amongi for bringing it to Parliament. Indeed, as a colleague has said, it is timely. The purpose: “To adopt the principles of the key roles of parliamentarians.” To me, it means that when we are making these laws – when we are legislating, the laws should be pro-people and should advance the agenda of the Sustainable Development Goals for the good of our people.

Mr Speaker, the fact that we are here debating this motion means that we are creating awareness – both among Members of Parliament and the nation that may be watching - thereby bringing about that element of awareness that we all know about the existence of these Sustainable Development Goals. And also, not only will we put laws in place but also put practical steps to implement those laws; holding Government accountable to ensure that there is subsidiary legislation; there are regulations and guidelines that will be followed in implementing the laws that advance this agenda; to ensure that, indeed, the budget promotes equitable distribution of resources. 

To-date, we have, for example schools where there are no facilities for the girl child. So, we need to ensure that the distribution of resources is equitable and it goes to offer equitable services at the grass root.

Mr Speaker, indeed, the motion says that it will serve as a tool and afford a unique opportunity to meet global challenges; to ensure that all of us as we are planning, we have in mind and in focus the global agenda and that we ensure that we follow it to set targets and indicators to make sure that Government follows these indicators. (Member timed out.)

3.38
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would also like to support this motion as it is indeed timely.

As Ugandans, we have to now look at sustainable development. One of the reasons we have not been moving in terms of development has been corruption. Otherwise, if this country was corruption-free, by now we would have been a middle income country. Therefore, as a country, if we want to achieve these principles, government must fight corruption and know that it is corruption letting us down in terms of development. For example, if you take infrastructure and the giving of contracts to the business people, you will see people doing very shoddy work. A road that is supposed to last for 10 years can only last two years before you see potholes. This is one of the ways that does not sustain development.

Therefore, for us to sustain development, we must do a very good job and better work so that we do not continue to spend money on work that has already been done. It is the responsibility of Government and all Ugandans to see that we are corruption free.

Another challenge that is facing the world is the issue of climate change. As Ugandans, we also have to take it into consideration that climate change vis-à-vis agriculture is a very important thing that is now affecting us. As Government, we must begin to look at that direction because I am aware that 70 per cent of Ugandan’s livelihood depends on agriculture. 

For us to begin to improve in terms of poverty so that by the end of 2030, Uganda is somewhat poverty free, we must look at issues of controlling the effect of climate change, which is affecting a bigger number of Ugandans. We have to begin to look at issues of tree planting, water production because there is no way we are now going to encourage our people to participate – (Member timed out.)

3.42
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover for this very important motion. I join my colleagues in seconding the motion and appreciating this new initiative to forge development around the globe.

First and foremost, we recognise that we have moved to 17 from eight goals for development and these 17 are an assignment for all the countries that are going to append their signatures to ensure that they achieve the 17 goals.

I would like to concentrate on goal No. 4 that is being highlighted here as one of the Sustainable Development Goals to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all.

For Uganda to claim its position on the global development arena, we must work tooth and nail to see that goal No. 4 is high on the agenda. Much as it appears as goal No.4, it is important that we bring it as No. 1 for the obvious reason that education lays the foundation for all these other goals that have been highlighted here. An educated person holistically will solve issues to do with poverty, handle issues to do with hunger, live a healthy life, ensure that as he or she is doing development, they take care of issues to do with climate change and recognise the importance of trees. 

To me, as Shadow Minister for Youth, this is the area for us to focus on because previously, in the Millennium Development Goals, we concentrated on quantity in regards to education but when you give somebody half an education, you are actually endangering that person the more. When you look at the dropout rate in UPE schools, when you look at the current quality of USE schools, when you look at the current lot of graduates from – (Member timed out_)

3.45
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion that Sustainable Development Goals are replacing Millennium Development Goals. I had an opportunity to attend a conference in Washington in May when these Sustainable Development Goals were being launched; they actually first came up with 36 Sustainable Development Goals before scaling down to 17. When the Sustainable Development Goals were being presented at the conference, Uganda was one of the countries in the world that was highlighted as having achieved, to a certain extent, some of the Millennium Development Goals and was on the right road to development and in respect to the Sustainable Development Goals.

At the conference, they talked about education; Uganda had performed very well in terms of quantity but they also asked us to look at the quality of education to ensure that in the education we are extending to our people should now emphasise skills rather than theory.

Mr Speaker, just to mention that Uganda was scaling down on the rate of the poverty gap; that the poor people were now becoming fewer in Uganda than in other African countries. It is our role as Members of Parliament, as we allocate resources, to ensure that the resources we allocate to various sectors in the economy go to areas that can sustain development. For example, in infrastructure, if we can open up as many as possible to ensure that goods and services reach the market and services are extended to our people will go a long way in extending and uplifting – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, hon. Mawanda. I hope you are serious. (Laughter) Giving praise about its education is scandalous especially where Uganda has to-date failed to fulfil its contribution in sustaining Universal Primary Education (UPE). What are you talking about?

MR MAWANDA: Thank you for that information, hon. Lukyamuzi. I do not know to what extent Uganda has failed in fulfilling its obligation in extending UPE; what I was quoting was actually what was exactly quoted by the World Bank experts looking at the performance of various countries in the world and Uganda was one of the countries that were highlighted as having performed very well in UPE. (Member timed out.)

3.49
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really struggle to come here by 2 p.m. so that I catch your eye early enough. I thank you for this opportunity.

I support the motion. I hoped we would have an opportunity to interact with our own, His Excellency Sam Kutesa for some in-house business on how we can move ahead with this agenda so that Parliament of Uganda is well informed.

I am of the view that Sustainable Development Goals should be centred on protection of environment. This will go a long way to make it sustainable and I would think that using women as change agents will equally be well implemented. This is because a protected environment guarantees the natural resources for productivity, economic growth as well as political stability. This is why we are here.

Mother earth, if it is well sustained, gives a balance in the economic, social and environmental stability, which we all desire. This cannot be underestimated because when you look at the challenges facing Sustainable Development Goals as far as the environment is concerned - if you look at the women, they are the ones who bear the burden. If you looked at health, food insecurity, water sources and her health as well as the household; all these burdens are all on women. If women are made change agents, it is the interest of the woman to ensure that this burden is lessened and therefore, it will be well implemented.

As Parliament, it is our duty to make a priority how we can mitigate environmental change by giving a budget allocation that prioritises it. Once the climate change effect has been arrested, we will have gone a long way to say that implementation of one aspect of the Sustainable Development Goals will be guaranteed. My plea to this august House is that we should look at the environmental aspect to be - (Member timed out.)

3.55
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues who spoke before me in supporting this motion. 

As Sustainable Development Goals replace Millennium Development Goals, my hope, and indeed the hope of many, is that the Sustainable Development Goals are anchored onto the broader achievements of the Millennium Development Goals. Learning from the challenges that were encountered during the implementation of Millennium Development Goals and using lessons learnt to design the current Sustainable Development Goals; if this is factored in, then we are all out to achieve even development and the focus should be the involvement all the stakeholders.

This motion, therefore, comes in handy to involve Members of Parliament in the global development agenda. The catch-word here is the word “sustainable” meaning that the focus has changed. We are now focused on looking at development that can stand the test of time, development that is for the present and the future and development that can lead to a visible change, a change that can be translated into the welfare of society with measurable indicators.

Mr Speaker, we would like sustainable development that can ordinarily lead to improved housing of our people and can ordinarily lead to increment in life expectancy. We want to see a reduction in maternal mortality; we want to see nutrition improved in our community and a reduction in incidences of malaria, among others.

We would like to see development positively impacting the lives of the ordinary people; only then can we say development has been sustainable. It is my wish and indeed, the aspirations of other people that this time round, we look forward to development that will positively impact the lives of our people. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.55
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Uganda is a member of the UN and all laws passed at the UN must be implemented by Uganda. We go to international conferences and sign agreements that we are going to carry out the obligations that we have committed ourselves to but when we come back, these agreements are not implemented. I am looking at health. In the health sector, Uganda signed the Abuja Declaration where we are required to put 15 per cent of our budget to the health sector. Today, as I speak, it is only 7.4 per cent. 

On education, we were talking loudly about UPE but at the first registration of this programme, we had seven million children who were registered. By the time they sat PLE, they were only 1.5 million. Now, how have we succeeded? We committed ourselves to feeding children in schools and this was not done. On poverty, we agreed that we were going to eradicate poverty; poverty is there.

Regarding food security, our friends from Sweden built silos for us but these silos were sold and I feel very sad because I found so many trucks in Mbale ferrying the rice, beans and maize. How about tomorrow when we get famine in this country? Where are we going to get food for our people? Poverty is so rampant in our villages. Our people are suffering and moreover, we have committed ourselves to fighting poverty at international level.

We talk about democracy yet we are criticised everywhere we go. We must have respect for human rights of our people. The way we treat our people here is one of the things. Therefore, when we talk of Sustainable Development Goals that follows Millennium Development Goals, we must be seen to be carrying out these activities but not only to come and talk and we do not do it.

Poverty is rampant. In the health sector, 17 women die every day. What have we done about it? Whenever we go to the international community, we say we are looking after women. This is not true. These are some of the things we must address, honourable colleagues, to sustain development goals that are happening in this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Mt Zion Nursery and Primary School from Pader represented by Hon. Odonga Otto and hon. Lowila Oketayot. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

3.59
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you for this opportunity and to thank hon. Betty Amongi for moving this motion, which I support.

On the goal of ending poverty in all its forms, as a country we have been able to substantially bring down the level of poverty to less than 20 per cent as it stands now. However, in some areas, poverty levels are still unacceptably high like in Northern Uganda where it stands at about 40 per cent. Therefore, it is very important for Government to try and find out what has not been done right in some of these areas and for what has been done right so that we also bring down the poverty rate in some of these areas where it is still unacceptably high.

On the issue of ending hunger and achieving food security, this really ties up with the issue of climate change. This is so because much as our people may work hard, there are certain like weather and climate which are beyond their control. For the last two to three years, in my area, people have suffered because when you try to plant crops early in the year, they are destroyed by drought and when you plant later in the year they are destroyed by floods. This is making people suffer and as I talk now, people in my district, do not have enough to eat and because of this, we call upon Government to find crops that can mature within a short period of time so that people do not suffer hunger. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me read this list so that you do not stand if you are listed. I will start with hon. Kabwegyere, hon. Asamo, Kabale District, Bulamogi County, Bubulo West, Nakaseke North, Sheema. We will proceed like that in that order and then we will take more.

4.01
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Betty Amongi for her presentation of this motion.

Are we talking about sustainability after identifying what it means? Do we know what creates success? Do we know how to build success, let alone to protect it? Mr Speaker, we are talking about global trends and goals but what are our individual goals, which make the details of the global goals? As Members of Parliament, have we identified what success means in our respective areas, indeed in our villages, let alone our own homes? We cannot talk of sustainability when we do not know how to build success itself.

I am saying that the challenge we have in this country and continent is to sustain success. There are many things, which we have succeeded in doing in this country but they pass by us without notice and therefore, we cannot build on them. This is because nothing starts with quality. Anybody who knows that you start quality with quality, I can be informed and educated. We always start with quantity and we process quantity into quality. Therefore, if we are talking about developing this country, what quantity are we –(Interjections)– Please, you will interfere with my argument. (Laughter) How do you –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not permissible. Honourable minister, proceed.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I may be failing to communicate on this one but that is not a problem. (Interjections) You are making me fail to sustain my argument - (Laughter) - which is part of the problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, sustain your argument.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Therefore, Mr Speaker, quantities identified is one stage, quantities processed is the state that we must look at even more because we see around many things but when they become consumables, it is because they have been processed.

If you pick education, people are saying we do not have good education in Uganda but we have started from quantity; we are now, moving to quality. If you do not start you cannot know that you have quantity.  It is when you evaluate what you have done, that you know you have improved. (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, countries without resources have developed because they have premised development on the quality of the human resource.  My good honourable minister is a professor who actually professes knowledge. 

Is he therefore in order to suggest that matters of education should be premised on quantity, yet we know that in the process of human development, the formative years are crucial and therefore define and demand quality at inception? As a professor and a senior minister in Government, is he in order to suggest that Ugandans should premise education on quantity rather than quality?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am now being asked to ascertain when you determine quality. I think you determine quality from a quantity and that is the point the minister was making. (Applause)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Without being unfair to our colleague, if we sustained listening we might improve our quantity into quality. You cannot learn unless you sustainably listen to a message. You cannot improve unless you are exposed properly in anything. You must be exposed so that you can improve. I think if I had been given a chance to logically come to my conclusion in three minutes, which is too short and is going to be more difficult when the House has expanded - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: PWD Eastern.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Give me one second to say at least one word.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay; one word.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: This is precisely the challenge we have that we are not even prepared to learn. (Laughter)

4.08
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion on the Sustainable Development Goals. 

As we talk about the Sustainable Development Goals, you will agree with me that this Government has put a lot of money to poverty eradication right from Entandikwa, YES Project, etcetera but there is a challenge. The money has been put in but where has it gone? We need to look at the issues of monitoring and evaluation of these projects. We cannot even track some of them. When we talk about poverty alleviation, when programmes like NAADS and NUSAF are around and people are not getting richer, then there is a problem.

We need to bridge the gap between the most vulnerable and other categories by trying to come with an implementation of regulations to open Articles 32 and 35 of the Constitution so that we can talk about sustainable development. If this is done, the gap will be bridged and we can then begin talking about sustainable development. 

Mr Speaker, how I wish as we debate this, our Vision 2040 was already in line with Sustainable Development Goals. This should have taken us a long way. We have Vision 2040. We are now going to talk about the Sustainable Development Goals and somehow they should have been aligned together. As we move on, we might need to amend some of the operation areas and be sure that we shall get in.

Mr Speaker, the mindset of Ugandans needs to be changed. As parliamentarians, we might need to tell people what they do not want to hear. When you talk about environment; it is the people who are cutting down the trees but we do not tell them the truth about it. Sometimes, we are part and parcel of these communities. Therefore, the mind-set of Ugandans has to change as we talk about Sustainable Development Goals. 

We should not give the people to be on the receiving end. There is the popular saying that, “Government should help us.” Sometimes, I ask myself, who is Government? Is it a man or a woman? There is need for Ugandans to change their mind-set as we move to the 17 areas of implementing the Sustainable Development Goals. 

I would not like to leave the Floor before talking about how people with disabilities should be brought on board in all the planning areas. We are always left out. Sometimes, it is always apologies, which are always late. (Member timed out.)

4.12
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to support the motion on Sustainable Development Goals. However, I would like to focus on goals four and five regarding reducing of child mortality and improving maternal mortality.

Given the current status where we lose almost a full minibus of women everyday giving birth, I become a bit sceptical about achieving these sustainable goals. I am still a “doubting Thomas” that we shall really arrive at that destination we are looking in our current status.

It is unfortunate that in this country the chances of making it alive when you go into labour are 50:50. Whereas in our countries you will hear that, for instance, per 1,000 women giving birth, they lose one. Even when that one is lost, it is hell on the health worker who was working on this woman. They ask her what led to the death of this mother.

It is unfortunate that in Uganda, when you get pregnant you even begin preparing a will much earlier because you know you will either make it or not. Our mothers do not have the assurance of making it alive once they are pregnant. It is, therefore, becoming a scaring condition that is making many even fear having more than a child once they have seen what happens in the labour suite.

As a country, if we are to sustain - (Member timed out.)

4.14
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the mover of the motion. To start from where the seconder ended, I would like to say that not many Ugandans, and even in this Parliament, are abreast with how Uganda has performed in as far as the Millennium Development Goals are concerned.

It is important that as we support this motion, we amend the prayers to include that Government should submit to this Parliament the performance on each of the eight Millennium Development Goals so that we can reflect and see how far we have moved. We should know what we have achieved and where we have failed. We should ask where we should put a lot of emphasis. We cannot just take on the Sustainable Development Goals without clearly reflecting on the Millennium Development Goals and being able to guide ourselves accordingly. 

Sustainable Development Goal No. 4 is about equitable and quality education. Colleagues have spoken about it and I would like to join them in as far as the quality of education is concerned. Somebody may say we have been focussing on quantity but we have the whole generation, which has been lost in quantity. When will they catch up with quality? I have moved to schools in my constituencies and have spoken to children. I have seen children in P.4 and P.5 who cannot write their names. (Applause) I must say that the issue of quality of education must be taken very seriously.

Mr Speaker, on Sustainable Development Goal No. 1, which is to end poverty in all its forms everywhere, I would like to argue that this one is a defective goal. Nobody should sit somewhere and dream that we shall end poverty in all its forms everywhere. It is unbiblical. It is ungodly and it cannot happen. In Mark 14:7, Jesus says that you will always have the poor with you. Therefore, nobody can say that we shall end poverty in all its forms everywhere. We can only talk about alleviating poverty. We can attempt that but you cannot say that you will end poverty in all the corners of this world. It is not possible – (Interruption)

MR OKELLO: I thank you, my brother, for giving way. The information I am giving you is to the effect that Jesus talked about poverty in the context of spiritual poverty. (Laughter)

MR LUBOGO: Actually, your information is not proper and it is wrongly placed. (Laughter)

4.17
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this chance. I would like to support the motion and congratulate hon. Betty Amongi for bringing it up. Unfortunately, she has disappeared – (Interruption)
 
MS AMONGI: I am here.

MS MUTONYI: Oh, I am sorry. I would like to address myself to the fifth goal which is to achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls. I would like to thank our Government for the affirmative action, which has brought in so many female Members of Parliament although there are some people who are agitating that those who have a long experience here should go so that other women can come in. My fellow women, the constituency is not that easy because the mind-set of the men, except those who are here, is that that is a man’s seat. When you get there, they will remind you that you are a woman and you should leave. I think we need to change the mind-set of our men to know that there must be equality. That is a seat for either of the sexes. 

Mr Speaker, in the villages, although our Government has done its best with the UPE and USE, which are condemned by some members, our problem is the enforcement of the laws we have made as Members of Parliament. All of us come from villages –(Interjection)– but even in the city here, there are many children roaming around on the streets just like they are in the villages. So, who can make these children go to school? Because most of our parents are primitive and ignorant, when it is the season for planting, they will tell the children to go to the garden and when it is time for harvesting, they will tell the children to go for harvesting. 

When it comes to the girls, and that is my problem, these children are thrown out of school because there isn’t enough money to buy them books; it is the girls to suffer. And thereafter, they are sent out to go for marriage so that the parents can get cows. Surely, where is the gender equality? The government is doing its best and Parliament is making laws, but who is enforcing these laws? Men, including some parents themselves, are raping the girl children! Who is enforcing these laws? What do we do to sustain this? That is my question. 

When it comes to the teachers in the villages, they send out children because they do not have uniforms and at the same time, they are the ones making the girls pregnant. How do we enforce laws so that these culprits can be brought to book? When it comes to the third goal, which talks about health - (Member timed out_)

4.22
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Betty Amongi for bringing up this important motion which I fully support. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the NRM Government for the strides we made in achieving the MDGs, especially the one on education. Today, if you go to most of the markets and urban centres, you would find that the majority of the youth speak English and this is an indication that they can read and write. That is a very good achievement.
 
However, that notwithstanding, Mr Speaker, the education is having negative returns due to the unemployment of the educated youth and this negates all the achievements of all the Millennium Development Goals. The Millennium Development Goals, both social and economic, are affected. We therefore need to focus on education for job creation and skills development. Our current education system creates people for white-collar jobs and leaves out the important sector of the blue-collar jobs, which are important ingredients in industrial development.

Mr Speaker, our mind-set on education as parents also need to change. Somebody will sell off the bigger piece of Kibanja to send his son to university, but he will not do so to send his son to a technical institute because they are biased that education is for only white-collar jobs. We need to focus on education for job creation and creating employable outputs. This is the only way for sustainable development.

My second submission is on the environmental protection. Uganda being an agricultural country, as we claim and agriculture employs the majority of our people, many of our people cannot get out of the poverty bracket because of the hazards of the climate. These climate changes are caused because of environmental degradation. If we want to sustain development for the majority of our people who are involved in agriculture, we need to seriously focus on environmental protection.

Mr Speaker, I read a research paper where it is said that if today’s temperatures went up by five per cent, all the coffee trees in Uganda would get burnt. And if it went up by another five per cent, all the banana plants would get burnt. That means we have economic problems and also food security issues. 

I, therefore, Mr Speaker, submit that - (Member timed out_)

4.26
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion brought by hon. Betty Amongi. This is something we have been missing as Parliament because we should have participated before even coming up with these 17 SDGs. As Parliament, we have been missing out on making a contribution especially to such an important agendum that will affect the national development.

My concern, however, is that as we get into the 17 development goals while targeting 2030, we already have the Vision 2040. How are we going, as a country, to ensure these SDGs fit within our already set agenda? Therefore, Government needs to come up to ensure we realign the Sustainable Development Goals so that we achieve rather than the previous ones which we never attained.

Mr Speaker, I would have also loved Government to come up with a report on the Floor of Parliament to tell us where we have performed in the previous MDGs and where we are going. These Sustainable Development Goals are so huge and broad. We might find that even some of the achievements that we have attained can go low. That is why we need to galvanise our efforts and see where we can move as a country. 

I am more concerned about unemployment of our youth in this country because when we talk about ending poverty and looking at the situation in the country like Uganda where we have majority of the youth unemployed – including the educated – I don’t see us ending poverty. We have very few people who are working and they cannot sustain the economy especially when you look at the economy of the household level, the education of our children, school fees, health and so much more. All those cannot easily be sustained by very few individuals. So, what programmes do we have as a country to ensure we end poverty through the creation of employment opportunities for our youth?  

Mr Speaker, I also want to find out on the issue of health because it is also a broad goal. Where are we, as a country, in terms of ensuring that we have quality healthy living for all Ugandans? Where is the insurance health scheme, for instance, Ministry of Health? Our people down there have all sorts of challenges –(Member timed out_) 

4.29
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The 17 SDGs to be signed off in September are a welcome venture but one thing I would like to highlight is the need to ensure that as we go along in discussing these SDGs, we should consider incorporating whatever we discuss dignity, prosperity, justice, partnership and people. This is because as we go to sign off these 17, steps to fight climate change, end violence against women, provide universal health coverage and end poverty are entwined around living nobody behind. We are hopeful that this time round, we shall all be at the same understanding of the SDGs, unlike the MDGs were some people could measure differently.
 
The beauty about these SDGs is the number of mass targets, which have been set with their respective indicators to measure implementation. Where we are now, it is difficult to find out whether - even as Members of Parliament, it is not easy to know how we have measured the MDGs! We normally have monitoring and evaluation results from the M&E facility but how is this information disseminated? 

I think having doubled from eight to 17, we are now moving from a fixed menu to ala carte, where as a country we need to prioritise. However, as we prioritise, what is the basis of our prioritisation? We need to understand where we are coming from. We need to know the level at which we are. What is the level of our development so that as we go ahead, all the stakeholders understand that we are going to prioritise these SDGs based on the results of the monitoring and evaluation of the MDGs that we have been having? 

Therefore, as a country, we need to be more imaginative and creative as we go ahead to discuss SDGs. Let us work together with the Executive in order for us to prioritise these SDGs based on our performance and how we have delivered services in the past 15 or so years.  The most important issue to note is that we cannot end poverty without tackling inequality. Poverty as we say - (Member timed out_)

4.32
CAPT MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I rise to support this motion, which is very relevant. I want to approach this motion from the point of demographics. 

What torpedoes the MDGs is mainly the population growth. In order for us to attain quality from quantity, we have to refine certain things. The average fertility rate now has been 6.7 per cent with a population growth of 3.2 per cent. In the average, Uganda produces over 100,000 children every month and over 1.2 million babies every year. 

Honourable members, you do realise that out of this population, which is close to 36 million, 50 per cent is below 15 years, which is non-productive. This means that 18 million Ugandans consume, they do not produce and they depend.  Seventy-eight per cent of the population is below 35 years. It means that when you quantify in terms of numbers, the population between 15 and 35 years is about 11.7 million Ugandans. Again, most of them are unemployed and poor. Most of them are children.
 
It is therefore important for you to appreciate that as Government works towards refining and bringing content of quality into our economy certain fundamentals must be achieved and must be understood to contextualise the SDGs. Therefore, in order for us to achieve this strategic and focussed growth, which we will achieve because we have now discovered oil and gas and now we are building capacity in terms of infrastructure - we are developing an economy! When you look at the African Continent, it has seven of the 10 fastest growing economies yet it is the youngest continent in the world. 

I want to say that the future is very bright for the African Continent and this country. These SDGs that we are focusing on are the way to go. It is a long range short. Otherwise, I would like to assure you we have a bright future as Africa and Uganda.

4.35
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the movers for bringing this motion to raise awareness about Sustainable Development Goals. 

Before the mover moved this motion, she congratulated Ugandan women for winning a case in the Supreme Court where dowry will now not be refundable. Mr Speaker, I respect my culture and whereas the poor may not be able to refund, but those who can refund I believe they should though as far as I am concerned, I love the rich culture of Uganda. You cannot get a beautiful girl for nothing. You have to pay dowry to deserve it. 

Mr Speaker, I am on MDGs and SDGs - (Laughter) - I think it is important that the movers of the motion should have first asked this Parliament and Government, as to how far we moved on the MDG thematic group. How far did we move? What did we achieve in these various areas? I have looked around – I am not yet very literate on computer but I have goggled several times and have not yet found an analysis, which gives me the details of how much Ugandans have achieved –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are not very literate, how have you been goggling? (Laughter)

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have already declared my ignorance in the ICT sector and therefore the modern people tell us about goggling through the internet and I have learnt that language but have not been able to find, through the google system, the information –(Laughter) – Mr Speaker, please protect me.

I think it would be fair, Mr Speaker, for us as a country to be focused and this is not only about MDG it is also about the programme, which goes through the European Union. Parliament is not aware of who is doing what. I think that whereas we are going to pass this motion and which I support, I think this motion should add that the Government must come to this Parliament, to give us an - (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One more minute; please conclude.

MS OGWAL: To give us an analysis of what we have achieved in various areas - poverty, gender among others. We need to know all these things. When you talk about hunger – lack of food - if you go to my district, you will find that so many family units are still going hungry. So, we need to analyse and understand as Members of Parliament.

Secondly, we need to know whether our National Development Plan has captured those 17 areas we are talking about now. We need to understand that. If not, then we are just discussing for the sake of discussion but we are then not going to implement it because our channels of implementation are very loud and clear.

Third, we need to know how much foreign funding is coming into the country to help us finance these 17 areas that we have identified. If we do not have foreign funding, it may be difficult for us to achieve the goals. I know we are going to get the oil, but you are also aware that our President has been really emphasising the problem of disorientation - the lack of prioritisation of what is needed in the country.

We are disoriented; we have been so for over 50 years and let us hope that we shall not continue being disoriented, so – (Member timed out_)

4.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad some ministers have come. We are talking about a very serious motion but most of our colleagues in Government are not here but I am glad the Minister for Economic Monitoring has walked in.

Most of the things that have been said in the 17 points, the goals, we know about them and have talked about them. Some of them were the MDGs but like it has been said, Government would have done better if they brought us an assessment of what percentage we achieved on each goal. Maybe they will find time to bring that but it is important that we know, how far we came on the MDGs. 

When I first heard about this, about two months ago at the World Bank, these 17 SDGs were mentioned and I began asking myself whether they had just changed the name and added on some of them, then doubled them and added others. I then asked myself what was going to happen. This was because it is important that we draw an assessment of what we have done and add on more. 

Hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere talked about quantity here. He is a minister in a Government which actually believes in quantity and less in quality. We have seen that quantity is emphasised on UPE - a very good idea but more on quantity without any quality! We have seen also that in the health sector. There was a time there was a craze for health centres and we built health centres IIs. Everywhere there are kiosks all over the country but they do not offer any quality health services. On Monday, they are closed, on Friday they are again closed and on other days they are open for one hour in a day. But the peasants were given some thinking that health centres had been built for them. All these were part of the MDGs but how much did they deliver to our ordinary people? 

I think point number 16 or goal 16 is very important and I will read it: “To promote peaceful inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I think that we cannot achieve all the others unless we take this very seriously. Do we all belong to the country? Do we have a sense of belonging to the country? Are we all participating? Do we all believe that we are together? Are we fair to all? Is the development balanced? It is very important that we address these first. There are no institutions; they have virtually collapsed. This is the reason why I am talking about health centres, which do not open, teachers in school who come at 11.00 a.m. and leave at 1.00 p.m.
 
As long as we do not take care of re-building the institutions, we cannot achieve any serious goals. The biggest problem the government should be having – the current and the future government - is to build institutions and to make sure our institutions are actually working. Otherwise, if they are not working, we are just talking and it may end up as an empty talk. Thank you very much.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ECONOMIC MONITORING) (Mr Henry Banyenzaki): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make a contribution on this motion. I have been participating in this programme very actively because I am the Secretary General of African Parliamentary Network on MDGs.

The Parliament of Uganda has been effectively represented for that matter and other Members of Parliament like the hon. Alex Byarugaba and others have equally been participating in these.

As a country and as a nation, we should be very proud for the achievements that we have made in the implementation of MDGs. Much as MDGs formed part of the global development plan, as a country we localised these MDGs by making them part of our National Development Plan. As such, Uganda was the first country in Africa to achieve MDG I - curbing the percentage of poverty within the 15 years.
 
You are aware at the time when the declaration was made on Millennium Development Goal (MDGs) our poverty level was 56 per cent. As I speak, our poverty level is about 20 per cent, which means we have done a great achievement on this.

We have made other achievements, for instance, on women emancipation. We are one of the first countries in the world that recognized women participation in leadership. That is why our Parliament has effective representation of women. We are next to Rwanda, which actually copied the whole model from Uganda. We even achieved more, for example on children dying before the age of five and children dying before the age one. We did greater achievements on this. That is why we had these other programmes like UNEPI despite some hiccups and challenges and that is why, in terms of immunization and HIV as a country, we have achieved a lot.

Notwithstanding these, of course there are some others such as issues of international cooperation – you know it very well, Mr Speaker, that Uganda is again one of the countries on top of the game and that is why our President is one of the presidents mostly respected in Africa and he is; you know it very well. You know the contribution that we have done in stabilizing Somalia that used to be a failed state. Leader of Opposition, you know that. (Interjection)– Give me time to elaborate on that; I will give you the time. 

You know very well how we have contributed to the stabilization of Somalia. Even the might countries like USA had failed but Uganda took the lead and you know it very well that when we were contributing - the contingent army led by African Union - only Burundi joined us and later other counties came. That is the international cooperation we are talking about - (Member timed out _)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. One minute.

MR BANYENZAKI: Yes, one minute. Much as we are discussing the Sustainable Development Goals, you should know that the SDGs are not yet adopted by the UN. What we are implementing now are the Millennium Development Goals. Sustainable Development Goals are -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, please.

MR BANYENZAKI: Sustainable Development Goals are successor plan to the MDGs.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of clarification especially in regard to what the minister has referred to as “respect”. He has said that President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni is one of the most respected persons in the world –(Applause)– by the yard stick of the Millennium Development Goals, I assume. If that is so, are you, hon. Minister, aware that President Museveni that you are praising was one of the signatories to Agenda 21. 

Under Agenda 21, Resolution 40, Uganda is one the countries that have failed and refused to honour the contents of Resolution 40, which says: “In member countries of the UN, every country must protect existing forest covers.” Uganda has already negatived the existence of forests in Uganda by giving them to investors and fake investors. What are you talking about, honourable minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up?

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. The fact that the President of the UN General Assembly is our own, His Excellency Sam Kahamba Kuteesa, testifies that Uganda is one of the most respected countries within the UN and he was voted because of the leadership in Uganda. Therefore, I think that at an appropriate time, as Government, we can bring these reports. We have reports on MDGs; they are annual reports. We shall table them before the House. They are about the issues of Millennium Development Goals and how they have been proceeding and implemented.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, we have rephrased the decision that we are going take to capture the spirit of the motion. I now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament in support of the proposed global agenda Sustainable Development Goals due for consideration and adoption by United Nation General Assembly in September 2015. I put the question to this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member for Oyam, for this motion. Next item, please.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE JOINT COMMITTEES ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS AND GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE IRREGULARITIES IN THE RECRUITMENT OF IMMIGRATION OFFICERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that these matters were raised in a matter that came under matters of urgent importance. The minister was tasked to make some statements. However, before that, Parliament had taken a decision to halt the process until clarifications were made on the same subject that would make Parliament comfortable with the continuation of the process. We tasked our own Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs to look at it and come back to us. They are now ready. 

4.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 25 June 2015, during a debate in this House, members raised issues regarding irregularities in the recruitment of immigration officer trainees and immigration assistant trainees.

Consequently, on 21 July 2015, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs presented to Parliament a ministerial statement in response to the allegations. The House could not conclude the matter and you referred it to the joint committee of Defence and Internal Affairs and Gender, Labour and Social Development for further scrutiny. The joint committee now, begs to report.

Mr Speaker, before I continue, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the said report and attached to it is an advert, which was used by Public Service to attract the applicants. I also lay on the Table the Hansard of 25 June 2015, the Hansard of 21 July 2015, the Public Service Commission external advert and the minister’s response to the issues in the report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture those.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, I will give the background. 

The joint committee reviewed the Hansards of 25th and 21st July and summarized the issues of concern by the House as follows:
    1.  Allegations by the applicants over subjection to physical fitness tests without prior notice.
    2.  Discrimination of people with disabilities, breast feeding mothers and pregnant women in the recruitment exercise.
    3.  Alleged concerns of unfairness and lack of transparency in the recruitment process. And
    4.  Lack of adherence to the recruitment guidelines and jobs specifications as presented in the advert, which appeared in the New Vision newspaper of 29 December 2014 and the subsequent one of 30 December 2014.

Under 3, we have the methodology – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether it is only my iPad with a problem but – (Interjections) - Okay, then if it is there –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am being advised that it is there. Maybe you contact the technical people to assist.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, that report was uploaded yesterday afternoon. In way of methodology, we interfaced with Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Public Service Commission, the Chairperson of the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association, hon. Amongi Betty Ongom.

Under 3.2, those are the documents, which we reviewed. I request not to read through in the interest of time. 

Under 4 we have findings. The committee noted that, Article 166 (1) (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda mandates the Public Service Commission to appoint, promote and exercise disciplinary control over persons holding office in the public service of Uganda in accordance with Article 172.

In addition to the above, Article 166 (2) stipulates that when exercising its functions, “the Public Service Commission shall be independent and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority; except that it shall take into account government policy relating to the public service.”

In line with the above mandate, the Ministry of Internal Affairs requested the Public Service Commission to appoint 300 immigration officer trainees, 150 of whom were supposed to be immigration officers and 150 immigration assistants. The advert attracted 44,000 applicants and accordingly, aptitude tests and physical fitness tests were done, as was indicated in the Public Service Commission external advert No.3/2014 of 29 December 2014.

Observations and Recommendations 

1. Allegations by the applicants over the subjection to the physical fitness test 

The committee noted that the alleged subjection to the physical fitness test was provided for in the advert under other requirements. This stated that applicants for the posts of immigration officers and immigration assistants were required to pass the described physical fitness and health tests in accordance with the laws of Uganda.

It further stated that applicants were to successfully undergo the immigration specialised training for a minimum of nine months, at Government expense as a precondition for appointment.

The committee observed that the requirement for physical fitness and health tests were indicated in the advert. However, they were not clearly stated on where and to whom it applies. 

The committee recommends that in future, job specifications and requirements should clearly be stated and adhered to, to avoid causing controversies.

2. Discrimination of disabled persons, breastfeeding mothers and pregnant women in the recruitment exercise

The committee was informed that when the Public Service Commission realised that some applicants were pregnant and breastfeeding mothers and the other persons had disabilities, precautionary measures were put in place. These included providing a tent where Red Cross and counselling services were provided. 

In addition to the above, the applicants in these categories were registered totalling 71, and were informed that their cases would be reviewed and handled by the Public Service Commission at an appropriate time.

The Public Service Commission informed the committee that it had taken a decision to consider the concerns of the 71 registered participants in the above categories consequently agreed to allow the affected participants to proceed to the next level of interviews, with the view that those who succeed could be deployed in the non-specialised areas of the immigration department such as Citizenship and Passport Control, Inspection and Legal Services and the Office of the Director. However, vacancies in these departments had not yet been advertised. 

The committee observed that Article 33(2) and (3) and Article 35(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, as well as Section 3 of the Equal Opportunities Act 2007, emphasise the need to observe the rights of the women, PWDs and other marginalised persons.

The recruitment process was breaching the human rights of having a family under Article 31(1) a and non-discrimination against PWDs, since the Public Service Commission was recruiting public servants and not officers to join the armed forces. Breaching of the above resulted in the infringement on Article 24, which emphasises respect for human dignity and protection from inhuman treatment.

The act of side-lining pregnant women, breastfeeding mothers and PWDs during the recruitment process was an indirect way of saying that they could not get a job because they expected to give birth or because they were physically challenged.

There is urgent need to advertise the jobs in the said non-specialised areas of the immigration department like Citizenship and Passport Control, Inspection and Legal Services and the Office of the Director, to take care of these categories of officers.

The committee recommends thus: (a) whenever Public Service Commission is conducting such important national assignments, it should always ensure that proper procedures of all relevant laws applicable in a given situation are observed; (b) the ministry should present to Parliament a written commitment to the applicants in the category of PWDs and pregnant and breastfeeding mothers totalling 71 applicants, mentioned above.

3. Alleged concerns of unfairness and lack of transparency

 The committee expressed concern over the alleged discrimination against some applicants, for example, Ms Nakirima Sharifa No.15238, a former student of Makerere University Business School, because of her alleged underweight - although this was not specified anywhere in the advert, the applicant informed the committee that she was discontinued because of her alleged weight of 45 kilogrammes, which was purportedly below the required weight.

The committee further learnt that, even though the applicant completed a physical fitness exercise in position No.34, she was never considered to the next level of the interviews.

The committee observed that this administrative decision was unfair to the applicant and infringed on her right to a just and fair treatment, as enshrined in Article 42.

The committee recommended that applicants such as Ms Nakirima Sharifa, No. 15238, should be considered for the next level of the interviews in fulfilment of the requirements of Article 42.

In view of the above, and in line with Articles 20, 21,24, 33, 40 (1) b and 42, all applicants who were shortlisted for the aptitude test, should be allowed to continue to the next level of the interviews, that is oral, in accordance with the existing policies and procedure governing recruitment and selection of public servants.

The committee was also informed that the astonishing numbers of 44,000 applicants against the required 300 vacancies available, which indicated high levels of unemployment in the country - the exercise was preceded by a number of activities including but not limited to sending of SMS messages to all shortlisted applicants, display of the shortlist on the Public Service Commission’s website for a minimum of seven working days and display of notices in selected conspicuous places such as the Public Service Commission noticeboard, all aimed at ensuring that the exercise was conducted in a transparent manner. 

There was no form of bribery reported before, during or after the exercise because there was sufficient undercover security and intelligence presence capable of unearthing bribery or any other form of corruption if it had occurred. The job specifications, as indicated on the Public Service Commission external advert No.3/2014 of 29 December 2014, were followed.

Progress to the next level of the recruitment and selection exercise will therefore be determined by the applicants’ performance and in accordance to the approved budget.

The committee was satisfied with the explanation given by both the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Public Service Commission.

4. Lack of adherence to the recruitment guidelines and the job specifications 

The committee was informed that job specifications were strictly followed as indicated in the advert, for example, the requirement for physical fitness, health tests and specialised training were among those indicated in the advert. All these were in line with the principles agreed upon during the consultative processes, and the advice from the Ministry of Public Service, which amended the persons’ specifications.

The Minister of Internal Affairs had constituted a committee to investigate the matter, in augmentation to the parliamentary resolution. Further, copies of all related documents were forwarded to this investigating committee. The Public Service Commission also set up a complaints desk.

The committee observed that recruitment into the public service of Uganda is a preserve of the Public Service Commission, as stipulated in Article 166 (1) (b) of the Constitution.

The role of the Ministry of Internal Affairs in the recruitment into the public service could have, for the interim, stopped at the request for the specified staff or officers to join the service.

To allow the Public Service Commission to continue with its responsibility as provided for under Article 166 (1) (b) the ministry would then come in to take on the appointed officers for their induction training. The establishment of the investigating committee had no legal backing and therefore inconsequential.

Although the job specifications could have been followed as provided in the advert, the interference of the staff from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and other security agencies in the process of recruitment was an anomaly. 

Recommendations 

The committee recommends that - 
a) 	the Public Service Commission should be left to exercise its functions, complete the recruitment of the officers independently and free from any direction or control of any person or authority as enshrined in Article 166(2) of the Constitution;

b) 	Article 22 provides that rights and freedoms of the individual and groups as enshrined in Chapter Four of the Constitution of 1995, shall be respected upheld and promoted by all organs and agencies of Government and by all persons;

c) 	in view of the above, and in line with Articles 20, 21, 24, 33, 41(b) and 42, all applicants who were shortlisted for the aptitude test should be allowed to continue to the next level of the interviews, that is orals, in accordance with the existing policies and procedures governing recruitment and selection of public servants; and 

d) 	regional balance should be considered in this recruitment for avoidance of more complaints.

General recommendations

Considering that the Public Service Commission has agreed to allow the affected participants to the next level of the recruitment exercise, with a view of deploying those who will have qualified in non-specialised areas of the immigration department, the joint Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs and Gender, Labour and Social Development, recommends that the Public Service Commission should be allowed to complete the exercise of recruitment of the immigration officer trainees and immigration assistant trainees.

The committee expressed concern over the astonishing numbers of 44,000 applicants against 300 vacancies available, which indicates high levels of unemployment in the country.

Recommendation 

The committee noted that in view of the 44,000 applicants versus the required 300, it is evidence that unemployment is critical problems that affect the country’s economy especially the youth who are the productive age group. 

While fixing the problem in the long term, may require large scale intervention such as closing the wealth gap, smaller scale policy measures, efforts such as locally drawn programmes could offer reasonable relief. Therefore, Government should enhance its deliberate intervention/efforts of seeking for solution to this problem. 

The Clerk to Parliament should urgently communicate the recommendations in this report to the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Public Service Commission for immediate action.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that all Government agencies, unless it is by the command of the law, should desist from engaging staff recruitment exercises, which is the obligation of the Public Service Commission, to avoid misrepresentation and being accused of influence peddling. Refer to Article 166(2) as already stated above.

Mr Speaker, attached to this report is a minority report. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the report of the committee. We thank the joint committee but I am advised that there is a minority report and the author should now speak to the minority opinion.

5.17
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I move this under rule 194 of the Rules of Procedure.

Mr Speaker, whereas we agree with most of the observations and recommendations, we wish to dissent on recommendation (c) on page 9 of the main report, which states that, “In view of the above, and in line with Articles 20, 21, 24, 33, 41(b) and 42, all applicants who were shortlisted for the aptitude test should be allowed to continue to the next level of the interviews, that is orals, in accordance with the existing policies and procedures governing recruitment and selection of public servants.” 

Mr Speaker, I am one of those who raised concern about the way the process was handled. However, issues emerged after aptitude interviews had been completed. Nobody ever complained during the aptitude exercise or interviews. It is after the alleged militarisation, bribery and corruption at Kololo that members got interested in this particular concern.

Mr Speaker, those that were shortlisted for aptitude test were 12,000. I can imagine how we can ask the Public Service Commission to again begin interviewing, orally or one by one, to appear before the commission. 12,000 candidates may take the Public Service Commission a full year. Like the chairperson observed, if we are really to say that all appear, we shall sort of be usurping the powers of the Public Service Commission because we shall be like directing them that all those who were shortlisted do quality for the next level, implying their powers are being usurped.

Mr Speaker, the reasons advanced are:
1. 	That the recruitment process is already constrained by time. That is one of the reasons advanced because the sector is anxious to have our porous border points secured. Therefore, we feel these people are required by the sector. That is one of the justifications.

2. 	That the implications of cost involved in repeating the exercise are enormous and expensive. The monies involved for us to go back to point zero are so much. So, we feel costs may call for another budgetary provision or implication.

3. 	That the issues at hand started after the aptitude tests. That is what I was talking of - physical fitness, which we complained of demanding mothers and the likes to appear for physical fitness interviews. These came in after the aptitude exercise.

4. 	The urgency of us - Mr Speaker, I attentively listened to the chairperson when she was presenting the majority report, which hon. Theodore Ssekikubo signed, and I feel he is making me uncomfortable by heckling.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you. What we are saying is that the urgency of having the immigration officers recruited and trained for deployment in the country’s porous borders is of paramount importance. 

We therefore consequently urge the House to adopt recommendations (c) as revised below.

“In view of the above, and in line with Articles 20, 21, 24, 33, 41(b) and 42, all applicants who sat for the aptitude test and passed it should be allowed to continue to the next level of the interviews in accordance with the existing policies, and procedures governing recruitment and selection of public servants.” I beg to move. The minority report was signed by three members but the fourth has also signed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are the majority report and the minority report on this matter. There seems to be concurrence by both the majority and the minority reports that the process should continue with some qualification that is in the difference. That is what I gather from the two reports. They seem to agree on both counts that the process should be allowed to proceed except that the majority is saying that they should redo the whole thing while the minority is saying no, process should start from where the complaints started and move forward.

Those are the two positions and, honourable members, the motion is now for adoption of the joint report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and that of Gender, Labour and Social Development on the irregularities in the recruitment of immigration officers and immigration assistants. That is the report before us and I propose the question for your debate. 

Let us debate this briefly and see how we proceed. Debate will take two minutes for each member. 

5.17
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report and the minority report. 

My point is derived from the greatest cries that Muslims have been putting across all the time. The Ministry of Public Service has not paid sufficient attention to the Muslim cries and as a result, it is hard to find a Muslim officer when you go around. I have been interacting with different groups of people when they appear for submissions from different ministries. As they introduce themselves and as you count one by one, in a series of over 20 appearances of these officers, you will find only one Muslim and they will be pointing to that Muslim as a representative.

There has been sufficient attention paid to regional balance, women and people with disabilities but the Muslim factor has not been considered all the time, Mr Speaker. I therefore request that as part of its recommendation, Parliament should urge everyone in the Public Service to pay attention as some form of affirmative action to try and bring aboard these Muslims who have been neglected for a long time.

There has been a lot of talk that Muslims do not go to school but this has been defeated by the number of Muslims who have gone to school and presented sufficient documents when interviews are being conducted –(Member timed out.)

5.19
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Mr Speaker, it is rare for me to oppose recommendations of a committee of Parliament because I have a lot of interest and confidence in our committees. However, today I stand to be counted as opposing both the main and minority reports. My reasons are based disregard of the Constitution - evidence is on page 5 of the report.  Friends, let us turn to page five and let me read again; “Articles 35 to 40 of the Constitution emphasise the rights of people with disability and the minorities.

The committee goes ahead to say very clearly, the recruitment force was breaching the human rights of having a family in paragraph one of Article 31 and non-discrimination against people with disability since the public service commissioner was recruiting public servants, not officers, to join the army force. 

Clearly this was a breach of the Constitution. Humiliating breastfeeding mothers by kicking them out of the process is a breach of not only Article 33 but many other laws of the Constitution. Humiliating pregnant mothers is not only a breach of our Constitution but being inhuman.
  
Mr Speaker, I believe this is the time to stop the public service commissioners who are the oppressors to stop oppressing us to stop oppressing our sisters and our mothers.  What happens when we breach the Constitution? Under Article 2 of the Constitution, it is very clear that the Constitution is supreme and an act that is unconstitutional is void and null. This means the whole concept was null and void. The only way we can recognise and defend our Constitution is to trash the process. It should be repeated all together and we go back to square one and do it in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Constitution –(Applause). Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.23
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee, but I am also a bit disappointed that it was only Sharifah, who was underage, that was called to the committee. Therefore, in their own hearing, it was unfair and I think this was not good to bring only one person and left out PWDS and the pregnant women. You instead listened to the people who wanted the thing to be lifted and that is the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Public Service. I think the committee itself in doing its work did not look at the people who were affected.

I would also like to say when we talk about physical fitness, does it mean 10 kilometres of running? I am a teacher and I have done physical fitness and even at my age, I still do. Does it mean 10 kilometres? We need clarification because if it was 10 kilometres, we would have gone for Kiprotich to take this job; other than saying physical fitness, what is physical fitness?

I would also like to say when the committee is recommending regional balance, we demand for affirmative action. Three of the people of my category passed the aptitude test and I hope in the 71, they will be considered. I beg, Mr Speaker, that as we continue with the recruitment - people with disabilities under the Public Service Commission Paper have a space where we fill and some of these young people said they declared that they were people with disabilities but they continued to bring them on board until they reached aptitude and then when they would not run 10 kilometres, they were told they were not right to be there.

Mr Speaker, I ask for an explanation that our people should be considered in this recruitment; otherwise, we might not rest this cause in this Parliament. Thank you.

5.25
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work but I support the minority report. This is because the reasons they gave are compelling. Given a scenario whereby the vacancies were only 300 vis-à-vis 40,000 people, if I were a human resource manager, I would look at the particular issues to disqualify others and where they have put that physical exercise is allowed, if they have considered a woman and left outside one who is pregnant, that is not discrimination.

You look at the capacity and the ability to do the physical exercises that would follow and given the time, I cannot say more than what hon. Muwuma has presented. I beg that as Parliament, let us not bog down the process. We should begin with those that passed and they should continue for the test and whoever fails can always complain. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.25
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. To have 44,000 people apply for a job when you need only 300, you need some drastic measures of elimination; even appearance - (Laughter). Do you know why when you are in a plane everyone serving you is beautiful? There has to be a way of eliminating others. 

If there are 1,000 women out of those 200 are pregnant; it is in order to pick those who are not pregnant, who can go to the police camp. How will you go to the training camp with your breastfeeding child?  -(Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Mr Speaker, I have heard continuously, several people talk about pregnant women – that they should be discriminated. If your mother had not given birth to you or if your mother had not allowed to go and fetch water for you, would you have been on earth? Mr Speaker, I think this issue of discriminating and eliminating pregnant mothers – are you in order to continue saying that pregnant mothers should be discontinued from getting this job?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a strong objection to what you have just said.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged. I am not in any way discriminating against pregnant women but if I were an interviewing officer and we need people for training for six months, it is very unlikely that I would select the one who is pregnant.

However, having said that, I would like to support the minority report of hon. Muwuma. As an advocate, if we are left 12,000 and you remove me on the basis that the process should begin afresh, I will definitely go to court. Therefore, let us think of the 12,000 who have already passed stage one from the 44,000. Do not think only of the 44,000; they have a course of action. Thank you.

5.28
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This country, as I have always said, was founded on the basis of fairness. The founders of this nation knew that irrespective of your status; your tribe – I am talking of whether you are disabled or able-bodied; you come from Western or Northern, our future is shared. Therefore, by discriminating against the poor women because they were pregnant shows that there was a problem in the beginning. 

It is important to know that the committee based on that and saw that there was a problem in the interview process and therefore decided that we should start afresh. I believe that is the best way to go, honourable members. The fact that there was already a problem cited at the second stage means that the first stage also had a problem -

BRIG. GEN. KATIRIMA: Thank you, hon. Ebil for allowing me to give you this information. I am a member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs that investigated this matter. When the Public Service Commission appeared before us, I learnt – and I know that it is chaired by a retired judge, who is an outstanding human rights activist and he used the term “positive discrimination”. When they had finished the aptitude test, they realised that there was need to give additional support and they called the Red Cross and some other experts to give some guidance and counselling to some of the applicants and these are the 71. They were not discriminated in the sense of the word that you used but positively discriminated because they had understood the problem that was at hand. 

The commission further informed us that they are looking forward to carrying the 71 to another level. In other words, the 71 who did not run the 10 kilometres were not failed; they are still in the interview process, having been offered positive discrimination.

MR EBIL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I am saying here is that the fact that as Parliament - the people’s representatives – we depicted that there was a problem in the first place, it is clear that that process was a sham. Therefore, we take the committee report and we support it. Let us start on a fresh page so that we can believe in that process again. Mr Speaker, I urge Parliament to do the needful and support the committee.

5.32
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the minority report. This is because we did not realise any anomaly from the start; everything was okay. I have many people from my district who sat; there was no discrimination before that until after the aptitude test. I strongly support the minority report that says we start from the 71 people.

Much as the report explains that the 71 will continue, we are not sure. Therefore, I would imagine that these also undergo the oral exams and those who succeed are put on a reserve list so that when there is an opportunity, then they are given first priority.

I also thank the committee for bringing in the issue of regional balance. When you move around in most of these offices and even in some of these jobs that we have, you will realise that there are places where there is a lot of discrimination. You do not find people in high offices, for example from Sebei region, in most of these high offices; you do not find any of us. I really want to call upon the Ministry of Public Service that as they continue with any other recruitment, they should emphasise regional balance. Thank you.

5.34
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by saying that this advert, from the beginning was very vague because if it was a very clear advert, it should have spelt out the kind of physical fitness tests that it wanted these people to go through. Immigration officers are not border guards; the immigration officers take exercises that are really strange to their jobs.  Therefore, if you wanted to go through hard-core tests, you should have spelt it out in the advert.

Secondly, in your advert, you definitely did not spell out the physical fitness test and if we are to start afresh – in your recommendation, you are saying that we should continue – we should let Public Service continue with the recruitment; what specifications are we going to use? Are you using the same person specifications like the ones in the advert? And if so, how are you going to qualify the discrimination that you had earlier? This is because you used the same criteria and that is what you want to use now. 

My view is that we go and amend the advert –(Interjection)– honestly unless you are telling us that the advert you are using was somewhat wrong. However if it was right, then we need a same understanding. I know there is no time but let people understand the advert from the beginning. Let us not discriminate; if we want to minimise –(Member timed out.)

5.36
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you may all be aware, I am one of those who blew the whistle when some kind of discrimination happened. When I came with hon. Asamo with this issue, we did not hear issues of having been discriminated at the beginning. The discrimination only happened after the aptitude test and that is the issue that we reported to this Parliament; that after the aptitude test, then people were subjected to this physical fitness test, which culminated into the discrimination of persons with disability and the pregnant women.

Mr Speaker, we came in to say that the matter should be investigated. I am glad that the committees have come out with the report. I support the minority report because it is only dissenting from the majority report on only one aspect. When we support the minority report, it gives continuation of the process but bearing in mind the regional balance, the gender perspective and the affirmative action. I do not see why we should not boldly look at this issue. Supposing we went back to step No.1 and found that these people who had first qualified should not have not qualified, what message shall we be sending forward as a country? We seem to say that the Public Service Commission – (Member timed out.) 

5.38
MS ROSEMARY NYAKOKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I was among those people who went wild especially when they brought these issues to Parliament with regard to the discrimination against women. 

However, the report is talking about where they had stopped; and in other words, they had gone through the aptitude test and I believe that starting from where they had sieved is important for us because that was our point of argument; that where they had stopped, they should select those that had passed the aptitude test and go for further oral interviews and this is going to be –(Interjections)– yes, because when we reverse the whole process, it means that –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thank you, Mr Speaker and I also thank hon. Nyakikongoro for giving way. The information that I would like to give is that when this House mandated the joint committees, it was not a strait jacket and what members are trying to look at is the tail end. 

In the course of our investigation, we said that it is true they were now speaking on behalf of the 71 but how about those concerns that you ably raised but were not addressed? That is why we went back but did not say that we open everything. However, for those who had been shortlisted from the 44,000 that had applied, bearing in mind that petitions to this House should not be in vain – now for you to just open a small window and say that as long as you read that, you should not look elsewhere would erroneous.

I beg the indulgence of members that in view of that – leave alone the under weights or the 71, look at the product –

MS NYAKIKONGORO: You are now debating, hon. Ssekikubo. I thank you for the information which I have understood very well. However, all of us have ever done aptitude tests and you know the procedure for the aptitude tests. It was only the other part of the exercise where people were discriminated and issues came up –(Member timed out.)

5.41
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The unemployment levels in this country are very serious – 44,000 for 300 jobs which means 146.66 people per position. We have just been talking about Sustainable Development Goals – so you can see a problem.

The Constitution of Uganda is very clear; the people who are supposed to keep the peace and security and of this country are the Army, the Police and Prisons. I have never seen anywhere in the Constitution where it is written that immigration officers are supposed to be security officers. For the last 52 years that Uganda has existed, we have had immigration officers who have been there for all those years but I have never seen immigration officers being forced to go for military training - not at all. 

I do not even understand - we have all travelled and found disabled people in wheelchairs checking passports [HON. MEMBER: “Information.”] I do not have much time but I am supporting your report. They sit in wheelchairs and look at passports. I have seen both married and pregnant women looking at passports all over the world. Why are we subjecting these immigration officers to go and do military training? Are they military personnel to do the 10-kilometres? 

It is very unfair in this country where we have so many unemployed people and we have so many women. We have so many universities and graduates are always coming out of them. Why are we discriminating against these people? I support her report and that the whole exercise should be repeated.

Secondly, when you go for public service interviews, the Ministry of Internal Affairs sends an officer to sit on the commission and this officer’s word has influence among the members of the Public Service Commission. We now know very well that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is now being militarised –(Interjections)– you are in this country and you must have your ears on the ground; we know what is happening in that ministry. Immigration officers are not military people and the women, disabled, underweight should be recruited provided they have the qualifications to do the work. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.44
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. We are aware of what is taking place in this country and I believe that the committee did not investigate further into this recruitment process because there was bribery. An interviewing officer is given a bribe prior to the interview. There is also discrimination where it depends on who knows who and whether they are from the same area –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MS RUTH NAKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member holding the Floor is revealing very pertinent information, which he should have given to the committee when it was established to investigate. 

Having failed to give such information to the committee for further investigation, is he really in order to now stand up at the time when we are discussing the report and make such allegations that there was corruption, sectarianism and all that he has uttered without substantiating and particularly at this time when we are discussing the report?      

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have stated on the record that there was bribery. Do you have proof?

MR KATOTO: Mr Speaker, I am saying this out of experience.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have proof that there was bribery in this particular case?

MR KATOTO: I am talking through experience because – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am asking you; do you have proof that there was bribery in this case?

MR KATOTO: My proof is not substantial.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Withdraw.

MR KATOTO: I withdraw, Mr Speaker. However, if a committee is given chance for cases in the future, I request that we investigate people because we are here seated but people outside are suffering and I was talking out of experience. We once went for a job interview but some people had slept with the results of the interview.

Mr Speaker, there is one job which was in State House but we were told that the job was already taken and yet we had actually been called for the interview. Therefore in future, in case there is a chance to interview people –(Interruption) 

MR KWIZERA: The honourable member is aware that the personal staff of the President are recruited with the President’s approval. Is he in order to say that those staff positions were advertised and in which media? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should put on record things that we have proof of. Let us not be speculative in what we say in the House, please. 

MR KATOTO: Mr Speaker, on this I have proof; I even was called for that interview. The job was advertised and when we went for the interview, they told us the job had already been taken. If we are members of Parliament, we should stand on our legs and –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How do we stand on our heads again? (Laughter)

5.48
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu West, Kalungu): I also would like to thank the committee. During recruitment, there are a number of stages and according to the report we have got here, it is during one of those stages that there was interference and that already makes the recruitment a nullity. I cannot imagine the situation of a lady like Sharifah; we are fighting to reduce weight, she is underweight and she is denied a chance. This is very dangerous.

Today, in the Committee on Public Accounts, we had an issue of people with special needs. We need a private members Bill or one from Government for setting a system of recruitment of people with disabilities. You have seen the situation here; if they were 20, they might have taken one or none. These people must be given their own type of interview different from the others. In PAC today we heard that their items are not normally procured yet their money was allocated in the budget. That is how the people with disabilities are being oppressed.

Secondly, some of us who have gone through some military training and I do not know how someone’s breastfeeding can affect her job or doing any training and going through the process because already she has given. I wonder how they found out that some were pregnant; some women may be a day pregnant, how do you tell? This kind of torture is not allowed.

However, I am not happy with the committee because they have not brought to book the perpetrators of this problem. It is not about corruption only; it is even about other ways that you mishandle recruitment. They might not give you money but what we have seen here was uncalled for. What have given us as a recommendation to bring these people to account? If you go back to another recruitment process, it will cost Government money and it will be at the expense of those people who perpetrate it by bringing all this.

I request that we should fight as hard as we can to put a law in place which gives opportunity to the disabled the way it is done in Europe. In Europe you cannot board a plane when there is a disabled person in front of you or behind you –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The allocated time is two minutes for each member and I would like this to be enforced properly so that I can exercise my discretion.

Honourable members, there seems to be some confusion about what is being said here because the committee is not saying that they should repeat the whole exercise; no, the committee is saying the Public Service Commission should be allowed to complete the exercise of the recruitment of the immigration officers, trainees and emigration assistants. 44,000 people applied, 12,000 were shortlisted and 71 were affected through a process of positive discrimination, as the General put it.

Madam Chairperson, what was your recommendation in terms of where to start from so that we are clear about what we are talking about?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. According to the main report of the committee, we recommended that the Public Service Commission should allow the 12,000 applicants who were shortlisted for the aptitude test to continue to the next stage. However, after listening to the debate in the House -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what did you recommend? 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, that is what we stated in the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your recommendation is that the 12,000 should be the ones to be handled. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the minority report is saying only the 71 -

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, after the 12,000 sat the aptitude interview, 1,376 passed. These are the ones that were being subjected to physical fitness tests, discrimination due to maternal challenges and they considered about 900 leaving out the difference on discriminative grounds. Some were disabled, others had maternal challenges but those that had passed the aptitude test were 1,376. Our argument is that the Public Service Commission should start with those.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the figures are in four categories; 44,000 people applied, 12,000 were shortlisted and they did the aptitude test, from that 1,376 passed the aptitude test. In the process of going to the next level is where they were subjected to physical exercise where 71 people were automatically disqualified because of their conditions; that is where we are. The majority report of the committee is recommending that they should redo from the 12,000, is that true?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Yes, that is what is in the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report is saying they should redo from 12,000 and not from 44,000 or the whole process and the minority report says, no, let us go to the 1,376 who passed the aptitude test and were supposed to be subjected to the physical exercise. They say that they should start from there and then the 71 should be eventually absorbed in the process and be part of the process of this 1,376.

The whole number including the 71 who have been moved away for some reason should be put back to 1,376 and the process continues from there; that is where we are, okay? The total that has passed the aptitude test is 1,376 out of which 71 have already been removed because of their condition. The minority report is saying that let the 71 be considered together with the whole group that passed the aptitude test - the total of 1,376. That is where the debate is, honourable members. That is what the minority is saying and the majority is saying we start from the 12,000. Are we clear on this, members? 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, after listening to the debate and putting into consideration the several phases of the interview and also given the huge number of applicants of 44,000, the Public Service Commission had to undergo a very intensive elimination criteria. I hereby do concede to the recommendation of the minority report that we proceed from the 1,376 applicants who passed the aptitude test. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, 1,376 persons passed the aptitude test and it was at this point that the complaint was raised because the 71 were discriminated against. That is where are since the 12,000 had been removed, let us have a debate on the basis of this. 

5.57
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In any organisation, you will find that there are common cadre staffs and professional staffs. I support that the process that was done by the Public Service Commission be allowed to continue since there is no discrimination now. However, in interviews, we still use deduction and elimination methods. Therefore, you cannot avoid reducing the number to arrive at the people you want. 

It is also a long impression for members to think that immigration officers are not security officers or military officers. World over, we never used to have terrorism but when it came in, the whole world has adjusted to make sure that immigration have intelligence and military capacity to counter the forces that are coming in. Therefore, the issue of saying that an immigration officer will not have capacity in military terms is wrong and that is why we should professionalise them. Therefore it is not correct.

Secondly, if in the 300 we find that there is gender imbalance then the matter can come. However, the moment Parliament continues interfering in processes, in performance of institutions and agencies, the costs of recruitment will be high and we shall be giving a vote of no confidence in our public service, which we believe is developed and competent and its membership was passed by Parliament.

I would therefore appeal to members to be courteous and know that even when you are not able-bodied, you can serve as a common cadre staff but not as a professional staff because you see immigration officers are armed over the world. They must be professionals to counter the challenges of the time. If you were born before computers and now there are computers, can you work in ICT? You must adjust –(Member timed out.) 

5.59
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report and I think that they did not do a more analytical job. I expected that this type of practice should have been seriously condemned by the committee report. You analysed all the parameters, the legal, the policy framework and you fell short of seriously condemning this practice and I thought that modern day discrimination is really embedded in laws, policies and practices and this one borders on one of them. In fact, I think that this matter should have even called for sanctions on people who perpetuate this type of practice.

Secondly, when the chairperson talks about 71 people being allowed into non specialised areas, we cannot accept that as a position of this House because this is furthering the discrimination. The very thing we set out to fight is now the very thing we are capturing in the committee report that the 71 will be put in non-specialised areas. Who told you that if you are pregnant your brain is not working or if you have a disability your brain is not working? Who told you that you can not be a professional with a disability? I find these proposals quite offensive.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, while I agree that given that there is a group that sat the aptitude test and passed and before the aptitude test we did not have issues, I agree with the 1,376 to move forward. However, I would like to be educated by this House on how you are going to remove the lenses of this panel from the 71? This is because the committee should have advised us to either propose to Public Service a change of panel because they already know who the 71 pregnant women are. What will you do? Yes, you have told them to go forward - there is nothing in this report that demonstrates the possibility that the physical fitness results will be discarded. Please show me how. You are telling them to go and become part of the 1,376 but they already know Alaso was pregnant, so and so had a disability; therefore, it can be carried forward by the panel.

My proposal is to advise that this particular panel by the Public Service Commission be reconstituted even when they are taking on the interviews to the next levels. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is 6 o’clock and we need to take a decision one way or the other. If we cannot, we will move to next week but I would advise that we could possibly consider finalising with this issue so that next week we have those issues that we need to deal with at an appropriate time. Leader of the Opposition, do you want to say something on this matter?

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson on why they had proposed that we go back to 12,000 and why after she sat there, she was convinced that it is no longer valid.

6.04
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I clearly put my reasons why I was conceding to the minority report. First of all, putting into consideration the overwhelming number of applications, already is an indication that the Public Service Commission had to put in place vigorous elimination criteria.

Secondly, I remembered that sometime back, I sat an aptitude test and Public Service conducted it in such a way that you do not even write your names there, you do not indicate your disability or sex but you are just given an index number. They mark the aptitude test against an index number and thereafter, the results are supplied to the individual names. 

Therefore in the process of marking, you cannot identify who the owner of that paper is and it is very difficult for anybody to know whether that paper belongs to a pregnant woman or to a person with disability or a person from central Uganda or from Karamoja. 

After listening and then reconsidering, I realised that surely at the level of aptitude test, there must have been no discrimination and in addition, when I restudied the Hansard for that day, I realised that the issues we are handling today were picked at the level of the physical fitness test after all these people had gone through the aptitude test - those who had passed the aptitude tests and were subjected to the physical fitness. That is where these issues arose. 

After realising all this and putting into consideration that Government needs these officers as urgently as possible and we spent eight months on this recruitment trail, I reconsidered the position and realised that we need these immigration officers and if we are redo the exercise from the 12,000, it may take another eight months when our borders are suffering and the people of Uganda. I conceded that we proceed with the 1,376 persons. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, would that be fair?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am convinced by the answer but I wonder why they had wanted to go back to the 12,000 and yet the process had eliminated almost 10,000 and why they wanted to redo that aptitude test. I hope that now at the next stage, we are not going to military training. They are just going to use the aptitude test.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ndeezi, we have moved some distance now, please let us move forward. Proceed.

6.07
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Mr Speaker, I wanted to move a separate motion but for the sake of time, I agree with the minority report. However, we should also include articles 32 and 35 in the formulation by the minority report. 

Mr Speaker, Article 32 calls for affirmative action to address the concerns raised by my sister, hon.  Alaso. Article 35 raises the rights of persons with disabilities. Therefore, I beg to move that we go by the provision of the minority report but add articles 32 and 35. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we together now? Can I now put the question that the process should go on and only in respect of the 1,376 applicants so far? Can I put the question to that recommendation?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there will be a special sitting of Parliament on Monday at 10.00 a.m. However, the regular and ordinary sitting of Parliament will be on Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. as we had agreed before. As I explained yesterday, the purpose of sitting on Tuesday is to enable us take some decisions that can make us move the Constitution amendment process forward. Therefore, the ordinary sitting of this House stands adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. while we have a special sitting on Monday at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.09 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 11 August 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

