Thursday, 30 August 2012 

Parliament met at 10.50 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I apologise for starting a bit late because I had to receive some petitions before coming to the House, which I was able to finish with.  

On a sad note, death has occurred to Justice Joseph Mulenga; he died yesterday. Justice Mulenga has served this country in different capacities. He was the Attorney-General, Justice of the Supreme Court and he has been in the East African Court of Justice and also the African Court of Justice.   

Government has decided to accord him an official burial. Tomorrow, the body will be brought to Parliament at 9.00 a.m. to lie in state. Beginning 2 O’clock, we will be giving our messages of condolence to the family and the country at large in this House. So, tomorrow’s session will be a special sitting dedicated for that purpose.  

We will not have tomorrow’s regular sitting to deal with business of the House, so the implication of that is that we have to do everything today. We have five committee reports and three Bills. Yesterday, we did four committee reports and two Bills. So, just one addition of each is not too much. We will be able to move with your cooperation. With good time management, we will be able to deal with this and complete so that what will be left will only be the issue of the Appropriation Bill, which we will then have time to deal with next week. 

For today, there is a lot of business and time will have to be used very sparingly. What I am going to do is to limit the general debate to 30 minutes and contributions from the members will take the usual three minutes. For the responses, we shall stick to the five minutes. There is no additional time for the ministers; five minutes means five minutes of the clock and not of the Speaker. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

10.52
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Mitooma): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I stand here to submit the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2012/2013. 
 
This statement is laid in accordance with Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure. 

The committee considered the policy statements of the following votes: 

•	Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; 
•	The Electoral Commission; 
•	Uganda Law Reform Commission; 
•	Judicial Service Commission; 
•	Uganda Human Rights Commission; 
•	Law Development Centre; 
•	the Judiciary; 
•	Directorate of Public Prosecutions; 
•	Parliamentary Commission; 
•	Inspectorate of Government; and 
•	Uganda Registration Services Bureau.  
 
Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

The mandate of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is to provide legal advice and legal services as well as supporting the machinery that provides the legal framework for good governance. The ministry also provides technical service on matters of law to Government and advises on the interpretation of various provisions of the Constitution. 

The ministry, in the last financial year, performed at 161.27 per cent, which was more than expected. This was due to supplementary releases of Shs 21.8 billion aimed at building budgetary deficits during the course of the financial year. This supplementary release was 61.2 per cent of the initially appropriated budget. 

In a bid to justify this, the Ministry of Justice informed the committee that prior to the appropriation of the budget, the non-wage budget was reduced by Shs 1.6 billion. The committee notes that it is this inappropriate budgetary allocation that partially accounts for the supplementary requests by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The phenomenon of supplementary budgets creates distortions, which ultimately defeats the logic of planning and forecasting as a core tenet of prudent budgeting. For budget items like wages to be met by supplementary requests is an indictment of the planning function in public administration and management. 

The output of the ministry is given on pages 5 and 6. I will turn to unfunded priorities, one of which is operationalisation of the Centre for Arbitration and Dispute Resolution (CADER), which requires Shs 3.5 billion. Another is the facilitation of government witnesses, which requires Shs 100 billion. There are also domestic arrears of Shs 305 billion.
 
I will now turn to observations made by the committee, since I am hard pressed for time: 

Counterpart Funding for JLOS House 

The committee notes that whereas land for the proposed JLOS house has been secured in Naguru, construction is yet to begin. The committee noted, with satisfaction, that the Minister of Finance has taken seriously the issue of Government constructing its own premises. This commitment was exhibited in the ministry’s desire to have construction of the JLOS house commence this financial year. The committee notes the importance of construction of the JLOS house as this would save the government a cumulative total of Shs 111.6 billion. 

In the short term, the committee has resolved to institute an inquest into the procurement and renting of office space with a view of ascertaining the current dynamics and projecting the sustainability of the continued expenditure on rent. The committee will also investigate and report to Parliament within two months as to why the Ministry of Justice ignored a parliamentary resolution and entered a fresh tenancy agreement for another four-year period at a cost of Shs 2.4 billion per annum. 

In the long term, the committee recommends that the various agencies of Government currently renting office space should liaise with Uganda Land Commission and secure land, develop bankable projects and access credit to construct their own office premises. This will not only save Government substantial sums of money but also add to the assets of Government. The committee supports the Ministry of Finance that Government ministries, departments and agencies that have deserted Government-owned premises in favour of renting should terminate their tenancy agreements and occupy the Government premises.

Restructuring and Staffing 

The committee notes that while the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has been undergoing a restructuring exercise, the process has dragged on for a very long time. The committee recommends that the process of filling senior positions in the ministry should be concluded within three months.

Operationalisation of the Centre for Arbitration and Dispute Resolution (CADER) 

The Centre for Arbitration and Dispute Resolution, which was created under Section 68 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act to steer and guide the growth of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms so as to decongest the courts, remains non-operational in spite of the committee’s previous recommendation. The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Finance avails Shs 3.520 billion to enable the operationalisation and running of CADER for at least one financial year. An operational CADER will go a long way in reducing the backlog of cases in the courts.

Election of Local Councils 

In the financial year 2011/2012, the Electoral Commission had pledged that these elections would be conducted but they were not. The committee recommends that the requisite amendments to the laws be effected expeditiously, and the required Shs 20 billion should be provided so that LC elections are conducted before the end of 2012. Funds should also be provided so that election tribunals may be put in place to hold residual elections.

Compensation and Court Awards 

The committee notes that the Ministry of Justice has outstanding arrears of compensation and court awards amounting to Shs 305 billion, as broken down below. There is a table with a disaggregation of the outstanding monies. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Justice liaises with the Ministry of Finance to establish a payment schedule for this outstanding obligation.

Remuneration of Judges and Judicial Officers 

The committee notes with grave concern that the dismal remuneration accorded to judges and judicial officers is not befitting of an arm of Government. Whereas the committee is aware and supportive of the effort by the Ministry of Public Service to establish a salary review commission to harmonise pay scales across the public sector, the committee recommends that as an interim arrangement, Government should immediately consider enhancing the emoluments of judges and judicial officers. 

The Heritage Arbitration Case 

The committee notes that in the financial year 2011/2012, the ministry incurred Shs 6.5 billion on the Heritage oil case. Of this, Shs 5.2 billion was spent on payment of external legal services. The committee is however concerned that the ministry is yet to provide exact details of how much funds have been approved, released and spent on this arbitration case. The committee will, therefore, inquire into these details and report back to the House within one month. 

The Administration of Justice Bill 
The committee observed that for more than three years, the Ministry has failed to table this Bill. The committee recommends that the ministry should table this Bill in Parliament within the next three months.

The Ongoing Restructuring 

The committee, in its previous report on the policy statements for the financial year 2011/2012, specifically recommended that Government provides Shs 572 million to enable the restructuring of the departments of the Administrator-General and the Law Council. The committee proposes that in the interim period, the ministry should liaise with the Public Service Commission so as to implement the aspects of the restructuring exercise that do not contravene the freeze on the recruitment of new staff until such a time when the freeze is lifted.

The committee notes that much as the process which began in February 2012 is still going on, the current freeze on the recruitment of new staff by Government may adversely affect the recruitment process. This is why the committee proposes the above measure as an interim solution.

The committee therefore recommends that Parliament approves the amount of Shs 52,699,220 for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

Vote 102 - Electoral Commission

The Electoral Commission is established under Article 60 of the 1995 Constitution. Its mandate and achievements are listed on page 13. The commission’s performance was at 76.29 per cent in the last financial year. The key planned activities are on page 15 of the report. I will go to the observations and recommendations:

The Ramifications of the Proliferation of New Districts

The committee noted that the creation of new districts poses a huge strain on the Electoral Commission especially considering that it requires the establishment of well facilitated, equipped and staffed Electoral Commission offices. The committee, therefore, recommends that the policy of creation of new districts be suspended.

Staffing and Staff Remuneration

The committee notes that the current wage structures of the Electoral Commission were last set in 1999. The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance should liaise on the need for wage enhancement and harmonisation. 

However, without prejudice to the above, the committee recommends that in the interim, Government implements the salary increment proposals that have been agreed between the Ministry of Finance, the Public Service Commission and the Electoral Commission. This will go a long way in mitigating the absurdity of supplementary requests to meet wage functions.

Election of Local Councils

The Electoral Commission was unable to conduct elections for administrative units of LCs I, II and IV, and women councils. The committee recommends that Government should provide the Shs 42,244,555,892 so that the local council elections are held before December 2012.

Capital Development

The committee notes that the Electoral Commission capital budget allocation remains significantly low and inadequate to enable the undertaking of required investments, especially construction of befitting headquarters. The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Finance revises the MTEF ceiling for the capital development of the Electoral Commission to match the need for critical investment in office accommodation.

Domestic Arrears 

Much as the committee, in its report on the ministerial policy statement for 2011/2012, recommended that the Ministry of Finance provides funds for offsetting domestic arrears, which at that time were Shs 959 million, this money was not given and yet no monies have been allocated to offset this. The committee therefore recommends that the required Shs 959, 152,000 be provided to the Electoral Commission in the financial year 2012/2013 to offset domestic arrears. 

The committee recommends that the budget of the Electoral Commission be approved at Shs 66,470,255,000.

Vote 105 - Uganda Law Reform Commission 

The Uganda Law Reform Commission is established under Article 241(1) of the Constitution. The mandate of the commission is as given on page 20 and their achievements in the financial year. The commission operated at 96.75 percent. The commission has outstanding arrears of Shs 228,146,151. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ten minutes.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have very many institutions. 

This was passed onto the Attorney-General following a High Court case. The committee notes that arrears, especially in relation to court awards, attract interest which over time supersedes the principle hence defeating logic. The committee recommends that Government shows commitment to clearing these arrears. Government should also work out a programme of settling these arrears within three years.

The planned budget for the commission is given on page 22 as well as planned activities. The unfunded priorities are elaborated on page 23, amounting to Shs 2,901,000,000. 

Observations and Recommendations

Vehicles for Entitled Officers

The committee notes that the commission has five officers entitled to official cars. These are the chairperson, secretary and others. Currently, however, these officers are using old vehicles. The committee therefore recommends that Shs 680,000,000 be given to the Uganda Law Commission to enable the purchase of the required five vehicles.

Increased Rent for Offices

The Uganda Law Reform Commission requires Shs 160 million to cover rent arrears accumulated last financial year. The committee recommends that Shs 160 million accumulated in the last financial year 2011/12 be given and an additional Shs 233 million to cover rent increase in the financial year 2012/2013. The committee therefore recommends that Shs 393 million be provided for rent in the financial year 2012/2013.

Payment of Arrears to NSSF

The Uganda Law Reform Commission owes NSSF Shs 288,146,151, which we have already talked about. The committee therefore recommends that that the Ministry Of Finance immediately releases that money. 

Much as the committee, in its previous report on the policy statement, recommended that Government should provide this money, it was not done. The committee notes that NSSF contributions being a legal obligation should be considered a priority. A delayed payment may attract further penalties that will compound the resource constraints already faced. The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Finance immediately releases the Shs 288 million to offset the arrears owed to NSSF.

In addition, the committee reiterates its previous recommendations on the ministerial statements for 2011/2012, specifically the need for parliamentary committees to strictly adhere to rules 117, 118 and 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to ensure timely consideration of Bills. 

The committee recommends that the budget for vote 105, Uganda Law Reform Commission, be approved at Shs 5,200,110,000

Vote 109 - Law Development Centre 

The Law Development Centre is established under the Law Development Centre Act, Cap. 132. The mandate and achievements are listed on page 26. The centre performed at 95.8 per cent. Unfunded priorities amount to Shs 5,851,360,000.

Observations and Recommendations 

Capital Development

The committee noted that LDC had been accorded a development budget of Shs 1.3 billion, which was to be used for the construction of the auditorium. The committee recommends that Government reinstates the capital budget of Shs 1.5 billion per annum to fund the construction of the auditorium. It should be noted that the capacity of LDC to raise funds was adversely affected by the introduction of the pre-entry exams, which reduced the number of students admitted to LDC.

Enhancement of Practical Aspects of Training 

The committee recommended that this training that will strengthen the ethical conduct of lawyers and develop their practical skills should be supported and encouraged.

The Need to Strengthen the Ethical Conduct of Lawyers 

The committee recommends that LDC liaises with Uganda Law Society and the Law Council to explore modalities of strict enforcement of the ethical code of conduct for lawyers. 

The committee therefore recommends that the budget of Uganda Law Development Centre be approved at Shs 3,271,998,000.

Vote 106 - Uganda Human Rights Commission

The Uganda Human Rights Commission is established under Article 51 of the Constitution. It operated at 54.8 per cent. As earlier noted, the committee is concerned about the non-release of funds appropriated by Parliament since it adversely affects public service delivery. The key planned activities are given on page 31. Unfunded priorities are listed on page 32. There are many so I cannot go through them. 

Observations and Recommendations

Shortfall on Wages

The committee notes that the budget for the financial year 2012/2013 bears an inadequate wage provision that is not commensurate with the enhanced salary structure and approved staff structure for the commission. The committee recommends therefore that the Uganda Human Rights Commission be given Shs 6.7 billion as salary enhancement for existing staff since this directly infringes on the motivation of staff and ultimately their output.

The Uganda Human Rights headquarters are located in buildings that were condemned 20 years ago. Much as the Uganda Human Rights Commission informed the committee of the option of a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement in enabling the construction of a befitting office block, the committee recommends that a proper law and regulatory framework governing PPPs be put in place before entering into any form of PPP.

Low Levels of Funds Release

The committee notes that the commission suffered funds shortage for crucial non-wage functions such as civic education and opening of regional offices. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance periodically engages with sectors affected by delayed or non-releases in time so as to prioritise activities to match availability of funds. This will help streamline planning and prioritisation of activities across Government.

Domestic Arrears

The committee notes that the non release of the above stated amount, which is Shs 1,193,000,000, negatively affected the operations of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. So, the committee recommends that the money be released.

The committee recommends that the budget for vote 106, Uganda Human Rights Commission, be approved at Shs 10,803,918,000.

Vote 101 - the Judiciary

The Judiciary is one of the three arms of Government and it is established under Article 126(1) of the Constitution. It operated at 91.8 per cent. The key planned activities are given on page 36. Budget proposals are Shs 63,172,000,000. 

Observations and Recommendations 

Remuneration of Judges and Judicial Officers

The committee reiterates its position on the emoluments of judges and judicial officers on page 10, paragraph 4 and stresses that Government should immediately consider enhancing the emoluments of judges and judicial officers.

The Administration of Justice Bill -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, please, you will use the next 10 minutes carefully. Summarise, please.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

Administration of Justice 
The committee notes that the Administration of Justice Bill is yet to be tabled in Parliament and so it should be tabled. 

Staffing of the Courts 

There is concern that currently Uganda has 45 judges out of the established 50 slots. The committee further notes that this staffing deficit has compromised wage absorption; so there was a balance of Shs 14.2 billion. The committee, therefore, recommends that in the medium term, Government expedites the process of filling existing staffing gaps and in the long term, increase the number of judges to 82.

Cost of Rent

On this matter, the committee reiterates its previous recommendation - the Judiciary negotiates with the Ministry of Finance on the modalities of funding the construction of new offices. 

The committee recommends that the budget for the Judiciary be approved at Shs 63,168,907,000.

Vote 133 - Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP)

It operated at 97.6 percent. 

Observations and Recommendations

The Ramifications of Districts 

The committee notes that the DPP has presence in 76 districts out of 112 and yet plans are underway to create more. The committee, therefore, recommends that in the short term, the DPP be accorded the Shs 800 million to enable coverage of the already existing 46 districts in which the DPP has no presence. 

Government Policy on Renting Office Premises

The committee notes that the rent for the current premises of the office of the DPP on Workers’ House has almost doubled. The committee recommends that Government strives to ensure that all government ministries, departments and agencies secure land and develop bankable projects. 

Staffing 

The committee notes that currently, the DPP has a total of 614 staff spread all over the country. The committee therefore, recommends that in the medium term, Government should meet the budget shortfall of the DPP as earlier noted. 

Implementation of Parliamentary Recommendations

The committee recommends that all recommendations that were not implemented be implemented. The committee recommends that Shs 800 million be given to enable geographical expansion of the DPP. The committee further recommends that Government should provide the budget shortfall of Shs 505 million to enable the DPP pay for transport and lunch allowances for state witnesses.  

I will read all the other recommendations. The Committee recommends that:

•	Government avails Shs 560 million budget shortfall to enable the directorate to investigate crime. 
•	Government avails the DPP Shs 1,029,035,000 to enable it train their staff. 
•	Government avails Shs 877,488,333 required by the DPP to furnish and equip the offices. 
•	Government should come up with incentives and attractive packages for staff employed in hard-to-work areas. 

The committee recommends that a budget of Shs 12,685,642,000 be approved for the DPP.

Vote 104 - Parliamentary Commission

The Parliamentary Commission is established under Article 87A of the Constitution. Its mandate is given. The commission operated at 156.7 per cent. 

Unfunded Priorities

Parliament has a total of 386 Members, up from 333 in the Eighth Parliament, and this comes with increased demands.

Observations and Recommendations

Baby Care Centre

The committee notes and is appreciative of the effort by the Parliamentary Commission to establish a day care centre for children of Members of Parliament. The committee welcomes this initiative in as far as enhancing early childhood development of the children of Members of Parliament is concerned.

The Recruitment of Staff

The committee notes that currently the commission is undergoing restructuring. The committee welcomes the planned recruitment of more staff as this will boost the efficiency and effectiveness of the Parliamentary Commission.

Security Budget

The committee notes that the creation the Parliamentary Police Unit in light of contemporary security challenges has come with a budgetary implication of Shs 1,083,000,000 and it should be given. 

Office Accommodation and Rent

The committee noted that Parliament pays Shs 1.173 billion annually as rent to Baumann House. The committee further notes that Government had agreed to hand over Development House, which has 83 offices. 

The committee recommends that the Parliamentary Commission should consult with the Ministry of Finance so that the fifth floor of Parliament, with the capacity of 120 offices, may be commenced and expedited. The same method of eliciting government commitment to paying certificates on the parking yard should be sought for this additional floor.

In the mean time, the committee recommended to further study and visit the office space and facilities available at Development House and report to Parliament in the next two months. 

Vehicle Parking Space 

The committee commends this move as a stopgap measure, considering that the current parking yard under construction will be handed over to Parliament in May 2013. In the mean time, money should be given for renting of 80 parking slots at National Theatre.

The committee further reiterates its previous recommendations in the report on the policy statements for 2011/2012, notable amongst which is the funding for construction of the new Chamber. 

Government should, as a matter of urgency, provide the requisite Shs 12 billion for construction of the top floors on the East and North wings of Parliament building in order to ease the shortage of office space. In the meantime, Parliamentary Commission should expedite the process of exploring different funding options. 

The committee recommends that the Parliamentary Commission budget of Shs 222,435,269,000 be approved.

Vote 103 - Inspectorate of Government

The mandate and performance is given on page 52. The budget is at Shs 30,734,000,000. Planned activities are given on page 53. 

Observations and Recommendations

Appointment of the New IGG and One More Deputy 

The committee observed that during the financial year 2011/12, a new IGG was appointed and the name forwarded to the appointing authority for consideration. The committee lauds this development given that it implies that the Inspectorate of Government is now fully constituted. 

Government Support for the Operations of the IGG

The committee observed that whereas for the last two financial years Government has enhanced the wages for staff at the Inspectorate of Government, the operational funds have remained stagnant. The committee therefore recommends that Government provides an additional Shs 2.7 billion to the non-wage component of the inspectorate.

Rent for Offices

The committee recommends that the Inspectorate of Government takes the necessary steps to commence construction of its own premises. The committee recommends that the IGG engages with the relevant partners in time to agree on implementable priorities so as to be able to absorb all the money which is given. The committee recommends that Government approves Shs 800 million as required to enable the IGG open up a regional office in Bushenyi.

Financial Loss Accruing from CHOGM

The country lost, and continues to lose, a lot of money through the CHOGM issue. The IGG, in conjunction with the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Finance, should ensure that Serena Hotel and J&M Airport Road Hotel refund the above stated funds to ensure that Government does not lose. 

The IGG, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Justice should, within two months, provide evidence to the committee as to how much of the money has been recovered, outstanding balance and default measures which have been invoked against defaulting parties, if any.

The IGG should put more emphasis on the grassroots in addition to focusing on the urban areas. 

We recommend that a budget of Shs 30,734,951,000 be approved for the Inspectorate of Government.

Vote 148 - Judicial Service Commission
The Judicial Service Commission operated at 87 percent. (Member timed out.)


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, only deal with the figures now for the remaining votes so that we can save time. Go to 13.7, page 62.

MS KAMATEEKA: The committee recommends that the budget of Shs 2,335,068,000 be approved for the Judicial Service Commission. 

The unfunded priorities total to Shs 1,787,000,000 and the committee recommends that this be looked into. 

Vote 119 - Uganda Registration Services Bureau 

It operated at 85.9 per cent. The committee recommends that the budget of Shs 3,718,000,000 be approved.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam chair. Lay a copy of the report on the Table.

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, that is the sector report from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. It is a wide area - up to 11 votes. I thank the chair and the committee for dealing with it in a speedy way. We will open the 30-minute discussion on this subject. We have 30 minutes in all and three minutes each.

11.36
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. However, I have some observations on the Electoral Commission. 

We are having problems of death, people killing each other just over petty issues. It is mainly caused by lack of these small courts at the LC level. The Electoral Commission has not organised elections for LC I, LC II, women councils and the elderly, by the way. I do not even see the elderly captured in the report. According to the Local Government Act, we are supposed to have at every level an elderly woman and man. It is not even captured in the report. Because of lack of those bodies, people are having petty conflicts and it is causing a lot of problems. I wish this shortfall of Shs 42 billion could be found so that these elections are held. 

When you look at the budget for the Judiciary - it works hand in hand with these electoral bodies at the LC level - they have a shortfall of judges. At page 35, actually the committee says that there are pending cases for the Supreme Court, Court of Appeal but when you look at the Magistrates Grade I Court, which is normally at the district, there are about 17,655 pending cases. If these LCs were in place, maybe some of these cases would not be pending; they would have stopped at the LCs. However, the lack of this is causing a lot of problems.

The High Court needs 82 judges and according to the committee, they are not even in place. I really do not know what is going to happen. (Member timed out.)

11.39
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a good job done in producing this elaborate report. I have three observations to make.

On pages 7 and 8, the committee ably, and in detail, advised construction rather than renting of office space. If Government wants to be efficient in utilisation of its funds, we should move away from renting to constructing our own premises. Even developed countries have civic centres. I used to manage some government property and I had to fight various people, even within Government, from selling some of the Government properties. The example is Development House, which is now going to be vacated for Parliament. Even in front of Parliament, most of these properties were sold off. So, it is high time we went along this way rather than renting. 

Right now, we have the Ministry of Agriculture deserting Government premises to go and rent expensive premises in Nakasero and yet we are here crying that we do not have money. We were looking for Shs 260 billion yesterday for Ministry of Health, we were looking for money for judges, and yet you are going to rent as if we have too much money.

On page 33, issues of public-private partnerships are referred to. These issues are a problem. Currently, there is no law to regulate this arrangement and these arrangements are being used to sign for government funds. I have an example in my constituency, where a private company was given money for a NAADS programme. You will have a problem because you cannot ask the company to account, if you are the CAO at the district, because they are on a private arrangement. You say you have sent money to Sheema for a project yet I cannot ask a private company to account; so at the end of the day, Government funds are being siphoned. So, I propose we stop these PPPs until a regulatory framework is put in place to govern them.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, the salary review commission –(Member timed out.)

11.42
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me go straight to the point. On page 42, the report mentions election of local councils. As we talk, we have got LCIs performing judicial functions as enshrined in the law. I want to ask the Attorney-General about the fate of these illegitimate structures that are in place at this time.

The other time, we got a Bill to revise the Local Government Act. We thought at that time that the government had worked it out well with the Electoral Commission to ensure that these elections take place. But when you read the report, there is a shortfall of money. So, are we passing the law just to have it kept on the shelves or to ensure that we get the elections done?

Further, there is the issue of underfunding the Inspectorate of Government. When you look at the report, we have got a shortfall of Shs 2.7 billion for operations as far as funding the IGG’s office is concerned. The other day, I raised the issue of confiscation of property. One of the issues that was put forward was that we get more money from these people who steal Government funds and use it to fund the IGG so that the office can function. If we do not give this office the Shs 2.7 billion for operations, we might end up paying salaries only and not getting what we expect out of the office of the IGG. Therefore, I request members that we recommend that this Shs 2.7 billion be availed for the IGG’s office. 

Lastly, there is the issue of renting offices. This is an outcry across all committees of Parliament. From all committees, we have found out that Government pays a lot of money renting premises yet at the same time disposing off the little it has. I think we better pass it as a policy so that every Government ministry owns a home instead of renting. By so doing, we will save a lot of money, which will go into service delivery. If we do not do it that way, many of the Government – (Member timed out.)

11.45
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like clarification on the election of the local councils. The date was given - it was supposed to have been 8th August - but it was stopped along the way. What was the problem? No communication has been made. The people where those elections were supposed to take place are waiting. So, can the country be informed of what happened and when those elections will be performed?

Two, the issue of compensation; in the last financial year, Government had promised to provide Shs 300 million for verifying claims in the Teso region. Up to now, we are not seeing it being done or the money being provided. When is the government going to provide this money? Is it as we have read in the papers, that the President told the cultural leaders of Teso that the cows of Teso were not taken by the rustlers and the soldiers but that they were eaten by hon. Omeda Omax? That is totally unacceptable to us. He made a commitment during the previous campaign that he was going to pay and that he was going to provide money for verification. When is it going to be done?

Finally, there have been complaints regarding the IGG’s office in Soroti. There have been complaints from the community that they report cases but they have never been investigated, regarding award of contracts. So, take note and verify what is going on. Thank you. 

11.47
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On pages 21, 23 and other pages, we have found out that different agencies have got accumulated domestic arrears. This is not only in this area of legal and presidential affairs but also in different departments of Government. When the minister was presenting the national budget, she proudly said that Government can now fund 75 per cent of our budget locally. But in every report coming here, we are finding there are lot of unfunded priorities. So, my question to the minister is: are you maintaining that we are able to fund 75 per cent of our budget locally? May I propose that the domestic arrears that we have, of all government agencies, be brought to this Parliament so that we may know how much money Government owes in domestic debt? 

On page 7, the committee says it is going to investigate why the parliamentary resolution was ignored. I know that several times we have had resolutions that are ignored, but not all of the resolutions we make here are advisory; some are law in themselves. When we appropriate money, for instance, and say it should go to a given department, I believe this is breach of a legal decision which Parliament has taken. 

For that reason, I want to quote one case where Parliament appropriated money last financial year to the Ministry of Gender and the money was never delivered there. That money was for training the youth. The report is telling us again that another resolution of Parliament was disregarded. So, what is the remedy when we recommend something and it is simply ignored by the implementing departments? Is there no recourse?

On the issue of the emoluments of the judges, we cannot say that the country does not have money to pay the judges. We saw yesterday that the presidential initiative on tourism was asking for Shs 212 billion. Actually, it had been earmarked somewhere but we did not know that the Shs 212 billion will be for the presidential initiative on tourism. New districts are being created yet we say we do not have money for the judges and we expect them to administer justice to this country. I believe we are not doing things the right way. I think we need to identify –(Member timed out.)

11.50
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. On page 10, it mentions court awards and I have see HABA Group of Companies and yet they have issues to sort out with us here in terms of the money they have to refund to Government. So which compensation again are they looking at? 

The issue of domestic arrears has been a challenge and many Ugandans have lost property to financial institutions. The money is tied up in Government and people have lost property because they have done business with Government. Let us devise a way to clear these domestic arrears because Ugandans have lost property. It is not their will but they have done business like any other person and lost property to financial institutions because money is tied up in Government.

On the issue of office accommodation, this money - Shs 6 billion - is paid to the Judiciary per year. If they started a building under the PPP arrangement, which also has challenges, there is no harm. I think they can amortize this money and they have their own home. I see the DPP’s office on Workers House has had their rent doubled. Is it because of new rates or because of additional space? There are places here which have rates that are moderate compared to Workers’ House; why can’t they explore those opportunities?

On the issue of accommodation at Parliament, I do agree with the committee that a fifth floor needs to be put up. Mr Speaker, you will set a very good precedent for your term if we have an additional floor. The structural frame is already in place. I do not mind us vacating from Baumann to have the money that is paid to Baumann used to construct a building of our own. Even at times it inconveniencies us, especially when it is raining and we are moving all the way to Baumann.  

Regarding parking, this is a challenge but I request the Parliamentary Commission to at least assist us, the tenants of Baumann, to clear those scrap vehicles which are parked there as they have taken over the whole parking. I have seen that the report is asking for additional –(Member timed out.)

11.54
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have one or two comments from page 10. The committee clearly stated that the compensation for Northern Uganda has been earmarked as Shs 5 billion. I remember very clearly that there was a supplementary budget presented in this House last financial year. It clearly stated that Shs 20 billion was given, of which Shs 10 billion was spent in Lira Municipality. 

Northern Uganda is lagging behind simply because of the effects of war which took away most of the animals in the area. In the wisdom of the President, he said very clearly that the matter should not go to court; otherwise, the matter was already in court. I do not know why the Ministry of Justice, in its wisdom, cannot step up on these issues so that they come out with realistic amounts that can be used to compensate people from the North.

The Acholi War Debt Claimants Association was at the forefront but something happened, to the extent that even the money that the President recommended, the Shs 20 billion, to be sent to them to compensate the few from Northern Uganda was not spent. Most of the money was spent in verification rather than compensation. I do not think this Shs 5 billion can be enough even for us to approve that this money be taken for compensation. I would rather propose that Vote 007 should not be passed until they come out with a clear ground on this. 

This is my proposal; consider the entire North that has suffered because of the war and they are saying help compensate them so that they catch up with the economic development in this country. If they cannot take it seriously, then I think that there is something wrong somewhere. Let us stay this money until this thing is corrected. The President has a very good plan and attitude to solve this problem; what has happened to the Ministry of Justice? My stand is that their vote should not be passed until they correct this matter. I thank you so much.

11.56
MR MARTIN DRITO (NRM, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. I wish to extend my thanks for the good job done by the committee on the ministerial statement. 

The history of Uganda is very well known to us. One of the reasons that Uganda has faced such a very chequered history is because of the basic fact that a Ugandan is not conversant with the Constitution of his or her own country. Article 4 of our Constitution is very categorical, and I will read it verbatim: 

“The State shall promote public awareness of this Constitution by-

(a) 	translating it into Ugandan languages and disseminating it as widely as possible; and
(b) 	providing for the teaching of the Constitution in all educational institutions and armed forces training institutions and regularly transmitting and publishing programmes through the media generally.”

It is my prayer that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs takes into consideration the fact that lack of knowledge of the Constitution by the citizens of this country is one of the reasons why we are not able to respond to some of the negative acts such as corruption, marginalisation and so forth in this country. Therefore, it is my prayer that this thought is seriously considered by the committee or it should have been considered by the committee but it has been neglected. 

It is a fact, in my opinion, that the relevant ministry should very seriously consider this so that as we approach our 50 years of independence, we match into the next 50 years of existence well aware and conversant with our rights as citizens of this country. I thank you. 

11.59
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): I thank you, Mr Speaker. At the same time, I wish to register my appreciation to the chairperson of the committee for such a well presented report. 

My concerns go to, one, the constitutionality of the local councils. As I was reading through the report on page 22, they indicated the planned activities for this financial year but I think the primary legal issue is to have the local councils well constituted. What is now happening is that the crime rate is very high, and to make things worse even the citizens are seriously challenging the decisions executed by the local councils. The research that I did conduct in the magistrates courts shows that we have got a pile of cases that are so undecided, and this has come out as a result of the local councils not executing their responsibilities. 

The chairperson did mention the ethical conduct of the lawyers. It is true that most lawyers in Uganda have lost their moral values. In my constituency, in Buwekula, on land issues you find that landlords use lawyers to assess the loopholes within the law so as to exploit tenants. That is very wrong because at the end of the day, it deprives people of their rights. If at the end of the day people are not enjoying their rights but are instead having their rights violated, I think this is very dangerous. 

I have a suggestion on the matter of the cases that are piling up in the magistrates courts. It is high time the committee came up with a legal framework for reducing the bulk of cases. In most prisons, there are very many innocent Ugandans who are there; they have never been given the opportunity to be tried and they do not know their fate. I do not know how far the legal committee has moved through the prisons to investigate –(Member timed out.)

12.02
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the elaborate report. 

I want to appreciate this issue of establishing a baby care centre at Parliament. This will help our productive honourable mothers. I would like to propose that we upgrade it to a day care centre. If it is just a baby care centre, how about the kids from one to three years old? I always hear very many male MPs saying that they are going to pick their children from day care centres but if we have one here, it will relieve honourable Members of Parliament from being inconvenienced. 

On the issue of parking space at the National Theatre, I would like to appreciate the Parliamentary Commission for securing us this space for one month. I have been suffering in paying Shs 10,000 per day, which is about Shs 200,000 per month. So I am going to make a saving on that. 

There is a problem of crossing the road from the National Theatre to Parliament. You can imagine that as you plan to cross the road, a boda boda passes by and as you plan to cross, another vehicle comes. You end up looking like a thief, looking left and right. I would like to propose that we either have a traffic police officer to help us cross or have a zebra crossing. Otherwise, we are really bothered. 

It has been reported that the vehicles of the judicial commission are too old. Mr Speaker, it is actually true. One time I saw a judicial commissioner coming for burial and everybody was clearing the way for the big person to come and sit but as soon as he returned to his vehicle and started the ignition, it bellowed smoke. People were left wondering what was happening with these big people. It is not only with judicial officers but even presidential advisors are driving DMC vehicles. So, what do we do as Parliament? Let us lift the ban on buying new vehicles so that we are not embarrassed as Government. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have exhausted the 30 minutes. We have the committee reports for physical infrastructure; presidential affairs; finance, planning and economic development; and agriculture coming. So, choose the sector you want to speak on as we wind up on this. 

On this particular issue, we have closed. I am going to allow the shadow minister of this sector and then the ministers of Government and the finance minister to conclude. You have five minutes each. 

12.05
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing in for the shadow minister of the sector. 

I want to thank the committee for the job well done. I want to agree with the committee that at this time, there is no need for this Parliament to approve the creation of more districts. That, we agree with entirely, and it is good you concluded like that. 

I want to talk about the Electoral Commission. The Electoral Commission was established at a time when there was the Movement system. Now we are in a multiparty dispensation and therefore we need electoral reforms where all parties will participate in forming the Electoral Commission, and this should be taken seriously. You can see that the Electoral Commission has been taken to court and has lost many cases. That is why they have got arrears, and the Electoral Commission has never come up to show us their budget. They have never declared. They have never said how much money they have used. 

The Electoral Commission has failed to organise free and fair elections in this country. That is why there are so many cases. You saw what happened in Masaka recently. The chairman admitted, and he was standing helpless while looking at people carrying guns and sticks. The chairman was helpless and he was shocked. Is that what the Electoral Commission is supposed to do? It is terrible! We must have reforms in that sector. 

Uganda Human Rights Commission; they have done a great job, but is this a country of abuse of human rights? They registered 698 cases, mediated 149 cases, investigated 541 cases, heard 447 complaints and concluded 43 cases, and Uganda was taken to the Human Rights Commission in Geneva because of the abuse of human rights. Are we here only to handle issues of human rights? Aren’t these Ugandans? Aren’t these our people? Why should there be abuse of human rights? This is very embarrassing to this state, Uganda.

The Judiciary; you have read in the papers that the Chief Justice is paid about Shs 5 million only. Judges are poorly paid. This Parliament should look at the Judiciary and increase their salaries. When people lose cases, you know why. This is the same with the DPP. In the DPP, Government is losing cases because these people are poorly paid. We have been handling so many cases in the Public Accounts Committee. Why is Government losing cases? Government never wins at all. It is because the DPP and the Judiciary are poorly paid. This must be looked into and their payments improved. 

Before I conclude, the Electoral Commission also failed to organise LC I, LC II and LC IV elections. This country has been crying that LC I elections be held and these people have been sitting there illegally for years. This is because the Electoral Commission has not been able to organise elections. 

The IGG; there are so many cases that are pushed to the IGG and these cases are pending. We want the IGG, before their budget is approved, to pull up their socks and make sure that cases are investigated and those found culpable are prosecuted. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.10
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start with the submission by my colleague across the bench, that the Electoral Commission has never organised free and fair elections. I think that is an unfortunate statement because out of the over 300 elections that were conducted in the country, I think there are about only 10 or 20 petitions. That is an exception, rather than the rule. Are you trying to tell us that all these people who are seated here were not properly elected including yourself?  

The other issue I wanted to say outright is that translation of the Constitution is on course. The only hitch is that we have not been able to adequately facilitate and implement the executing organ. However, in due course, it is our desire to ensure that every citizen is fully and as much as possible equipped with knowledge of our supreme law, the Constitution. 

As for the lower LC courts, the Electoral Commission was on course but the laws regarding the elections of LCIs were at variance with the resources we had. So, we are working with the Ministry of Local Government to harmonise the law with the resources and we shall conduct the LCI elections. It is not that anybody has resisted conducting the LCI elections; it is because of the stringency of our resource envelope. 

Recruiting judges; I am glad to inform this House that the Judicial Service Commission is in the process of recruiting judges. So far, we have finished with Grade I magistrates and judges and we are now considering other levels and categories of judges of the High Court, the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal. We shall soon be submitting these to the Head of State who will in turn bring them to Parliament for approval.  

I agree with the committee that we should move away from renting to construction, - that is not disputable - and that there should be proper legislation for PPPs relations with Government. 

We organised the elections of town councils, but the hitch was the funding for the tribunals because they had not been provided for in the 2011/2012 budget. Now that they have been budgeted for, we shall soon rectify that problem and we shall soon have elections for town councils and other necessary organs. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your time is up. If you have a written response, you can lay it on the Table. If not, your time is actually up.  

12.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I wish to thank the committee for a comprehensive report. I want to mention that we appeared before this committee and held discussions and reached a reasonable understanding with the committee, but I want to comment on about five issues. 

Throughout the sectors, there is a quest for additional resources. The ministry appreciates the critical role of justice in overall national development. Additional resources requirements drawn to this budget for most sectors amounts to about Shs 2 trillion, and quite a number of these requirements genuinely deserve funding. This, however, leaves us with two options, either to expand the revenue envelope or do more in terms of prioritising the activities we might undertake as a government. The challenge is that our current resource envelope is very constrained and therefore cannot meet all the demands. As Parliament, we should interest ourselves deeply in the sectors we budget for to ensure that there is efficiency and value for money.

The second issue is on office accommodation. Government has considered this matter and a policy decision was made to have government offices instead of renting. Discussions are ongoing with possible financers to fund housing for government departments including the JLOS house.

The fourth matter is on court awards and compensations. The ministry is equally concerned about the huge outstanding bill for court awards and compensation, and sustainability. As agreed in Parliament, it is imperative that a law be put in place to expeditiously govern this matter. 

On the issue of arrears, in spite of the commitment control system, government institutions continue to accumulate arrears. There is need for ministries to adhere to the policy where you commit Government only where there is available budgetary funding. We shall constitute an audit of all these arrears to establish the exact magnitude across the board and then come up with remedial measures.

The public-private partnership policy and law is a concern to Government. The policy has been formulated and the law is before Cabinet. It will be tabled in this Parliament as soon as Cabinet has finalised.

The last issue that I want to point out is on budget allocations, and I want to make clarifications as follows: the budget allocation for vote 119, Uganda Registration Services Bureau, is not correct as provided in the committee report. The correct amount is Shs 2,718,754,000 as the total allocation for this vote. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chair, do you want to use one minute to reiterate your prayer to the House?

12.20
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the ministers for their responses and to thank the members for their contributions. I would like to appeal to the Minister of Finance that where it is possible, our increments to this budget should be considered especially, as we have agreed, in the area of the judges and several others. I thank you. 

I would, therefore, want to move that the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2012/13 be adopted by the House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2012/13 be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

12.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In view of the fact that I have been nominated to serve on the Executive and having consulted my vice-chairman, we had agreed that he would do the presentation of the report. However, yesterday after the Plenary, my vice-chairman fell ill; he is hospitalised as we speak. So, having once again consulted him, we have agreed that one of the members of the committee, hon. Biraaro, makes the presentation on behalf of the committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is good team spirit that any member of the committee can be prepared to present a report of the committee. Congratulations!  

MR AJEDRA:  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has 15 minutes to proceed and do not take any of it anymore. (Laughter)

12.22
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am here to present the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2012/2013. 

Pursuant to Articles 90 and 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and in compliance with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and sections 9 and 11 of the Budget Act 2001, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure considered the ministerial policy statements of the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

The committee now wishes to report on the budget estimates for the sectoral vote covered by the two ministries and the committee’s proposed recommendations and alternative approaches to policy implementation. 

Scope of the Report

This report covers both policy and financial issues focusing on recurrent and development estimates for vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport; Vote 113, Uganda National Roads Authority; Vote 118, Uganda Road Fund; Vote 012, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; and Vote 156, Uganda Land Commission for financial year 2012/13. 

The committee has made some comments on other votes that draw funds for physical infrastructure under the Ministry of Works and Transport. These include votes 501 to 580, local governments and vote 122, Kampala Capital City Authority. The committee’s findings are reported in two parts; part one covers votes 106, 113 and 118 and part two covers votes 012 and 156.  

The methodology is clearly laid out in the document and members can read it for themselves. The committee met with the concerned entities during its deliberations and they are very clearly listed. Because of time, I beg to continue. 

Ministry of Works and Transport

The mission and vision of the ministry are clearly laid out in the report. The mandate on page 4 is very clear as well.
 
Works and Transport Overall Sector, Financial Year 2011/12 Budget Performance Review 

The committee noted the following as the overall budget release performance for financial year 2011/12 - The table below is very clear, but you can see that the total budget performance was at 84.9 per cent. 

On page 5, the total budget approved for the works and transport sector for financial year 2011/12 amounted to Shs 1,357.88 billion, out of which Shs 327.41 billion was for recurrent expenditure while Shs 1,017.545 billion was for development. By the end of May 2012 a total of Shs 1,152.77 billion had been released representing a performance of 84.9 per cent of the approved budget. This is attributed to the low performance in the development budget category, at 82 per cent. Members can read the rest for themselves since it is very clear. The table below also refers to the above mentioned. 

Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport 

The total budget approved for financial year 2011/12 amounted to Shs 123.36 billion of which Shs 19.27 billion was recurrent expenditure while Shs 101.07 billion was for development programmes. By the end of May, a total of Shs 68.763 billion had been released which represents only 55 per cent of the budget. Table 3 refers to what we have read above.

The key achievements of the sector are clearly laid out on page 6 up to page 7. 

Vote 113 - Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA)

Table 4 shows the budget performance of UNRA. The total budget approved under vote 113, UNRA, amounted to Shs 836.41 billion of which Shs 27.18 billion was for recurrent expenditure while Shs 799.24 billion was for development activities. Budgetary performance by the end of May 2012 indicates that Shs 826 billion had been released representing a performance of 98 per cent. 

On the same vote 113, UNRA, the committee noted some achievements; Members can easily read the names of roads and the distances that were covered and then make comments thereafter.  

Vote 118 - Uganda Road Fund (URF)

The table on page 9 shows the budget performance for the Uganda Road Fund for the financial year 2011/12. The total budget approved for financial year 2011/12 under vote 118, Uganda Road Fund, amounted to Shs 280.949 billion of which Shs 1.995 billion was for wages while Shs 278.954 billion was for road maintenance operations (non-wage). 

Key Achievements 

National Roads Maintenance 

The details can be seen in Annex 1. The committee observed that in spite of release of funds by the ministry, the supervision and monitoring mechanisms are still very weak. The committee recommends that future ministerial policy statements should provide detailed information on which work was done, when it was done and reports on the supervision and monitoring functions be provided.

District, Urban and Community Access Roads 
The details on these roads are listed in the report. I will go to the observations. The committee requested for a summarised list of disbursement of the Shs 45.810 billion to the districts for the above activities but this information is not yet provided.

Votes 500–850: Local Governments

The local governments’ key achievements can be seen on page 11 and the details are attached in Annex 2. 

Works and Transport Overall Sector Financial Year 2012/2013 Budget Outlook 

This is shown in a table on page 12 and all the figures are in billions of shillings. You can refer to that table for a better understanding. However, the total proposed allocation for the Works and Transport Sector amounts to Shs 1,642.83 billion, of which Shs 325.27 billion is for recurrent expenditure while Shs 1,295.87 billion is for development programmes.

Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport

On page 13, there is a table summarising what we have been talking about on the previous page. The total budget proposed for vote 106, Ministry of Works and Transport, is Shs 120.37 billion of which Shs 18.36 billion is for recurrent expenditure and Shs 102 billion is for development.

The committee noted the key planned activities for the Ministry of Works and Transport; they are listed on page 13 and also in the table on page 14. 

Vote 113 - Uganda National Roads Authority

The total budget proposed under vote 113, UNRA, amounts to Shs 1,213.19 billion, which is Shs 376.77 billion above the financial year 2011/2012 level of Shs 836 billion, including taxes. For the details of the UNRA planned activities, I request members to refer to pages 219-220 of the ministerial policy statement of 2012/2013. Table 9 refers to the same.

Vote 118 - Uganda Road Fund

There is a table showing the budget outlook and explaining the narration on page 15. The total budget proposed for Vote 118 is Shs 280.284 billion, which is a 0.2 per cent reduction from the financial year 2011/2012 level of Shs 280.949 billion

The URF Planned Activities

The committee noted that the fund will finance the periodic and routine maintenance of:

a) 	21,000 kilometres of national roads.
b)	22,500 kilometres of district roads.
c) 	Removal of bottlenecks on 30,000 kilometres of community roads.
d) 	Procuring an integrated Management Information System.

The committee observed that in spite of release of funds by the ministry, the supervision and monitoring mechanisms are still very weak. The committee therefore recommends that future ministerial policy statement reports should provide detailed information on which work was done, where it was done, and reports on the supervision and monitoring functions carried out. 

Votes 500–850: Local Governments 

The details are in the report.

General Observations and Recommendations

Low Wage Release Performance

The committee recommends that Government should expedite the process of filling vacant positions in the ministry to enable it efficiently deliver on its mandate. The committee further recommends that the Government should hire staff in accordance to competitive prevailing (market) rates or preferably hire them on contract basis.

Poor Transport Services and Infrastructure Release Performance The committee strongly recommends that:

a) 	The ministry should fast-track the procurement of the contractors and ensure that this important activity is undertaken urgently.

b) 	Future procurements and plans should be improved so that contractors are identified in good time and the work commences as soon as the funds become available.

Uganda National Roads Authority 

Relocation of Funds 

The committee noted that UNRA reallocated funds from some approved roads projects to unapproved ones totalling to Shs 70 billion. You can see the attached budget reallocation schedule in Annex 3 for details.

Contract Financing 

The committee recommended that the process should be expedited as an alternative source of funding for infrastructural development in the country.

Supplementary Expenditure 

The committee noted that UNRA benefited from a huge supplementary budget amounting to Shs 77.9 billion. The committee further noted that despite the supplementary, releases to a number of projects performed over and above their revised budgets, that is, approved budget plus supplementary expenditures compounded. The committee was informed that projects whose financial performance exceeded the revised budgets had benefited from intra-sectoral reallocations from other projects managed by UNRA.

The committee recommends that in future, UNRA should desist from this as it leads to disruption in already planned activities and defeats the spirit of budgeting. In addition, it becomes rather difficult to hold project managers accountable. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you have given a very comprehensive coverage of this sector. I suggest that you go to page 28 and then I will give you 10 minutes to deal with the next part, which should only be about observations and recommendations and the final figures you are proposing. This will save us time.

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, allow me to read a small portion of part 6 on page 28. Subject to the above observations and recommendations, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the budget for votes 016, 113 and 118 totalling to Shs 1,613,842,232,000 as follows: 

•	Works and Transport – Shs 120,365,578,000; 
•	UNRA – Shs 1,213,192,658,000  
•	URF – Shs 280,283,996,000. 

That is the prayer I had that as the committee recommends, let it be approved and adopted by Parliament.

Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development 

The committee noted that this ministry is mandated to “ensure rational and sustainable use, effective management of land and orderly development of urban and rural areas as well as safe, planned and adequate housing for socio-economic development.”

As for the overall sector financial performance, the details are on pages 29 up to the table on page 30. 

The committee learnt that the following were some of the key achievements of the ministry - We can read below for the details. On page 31, the achievements under physical planning and urban development are listed. The ministry’s planned activities are also clearly outlined for members to read. The proposed budget outlook is on page 32 and the details are very clear and they need no correction. So, members can read up to the table on page 33.

Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission

The key achievements are very clearly shown for the previous financial year. On page 34, the planned activities are also clearly listed.

Observations and Recommendations 

Low Wage Release Performance 

The committee was concerned about the low release performance of both the wage (72 percent) and development (donor and Government) budget performance. 

The committee recommends that Government should expedite the process of filling vacant positions in the ministry to enable the ministry efficiently deliver on its mandate. Government should consider parallel scales for some technical positions which do not attract suitable candidates. 

Donor Releases 

The committee was concerned that there were no donor releases towards the ministry. The non-release affected the procurement of consultants for the national urban policy and the strategic urban development plan, which are core areas of the ministry’s operation. The ministry attributed the non-release to the delay in procurement procedures, caused in part by poor procurement planning and failure to adhere to donor procurement guidelines. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should improve its procurement planning and strictly adhere to donor funding guidelines.
 
Low Releases Performance 

The committee observed that there was poor release performance, with the government development budget release performing even lower, at only 70 per cent. The physical planning and urban development sectors were grossly under-funded with only a mere 36 per cent of the approved budget released by the end of May 2012. 

The committee strongly recommends that:

a) 	Government demonstrates more commitment to the ministry by providing more funds towards its operations because of its prime importance in enhancing productivity.
 
b) 	Given the growing importance of the region, Government should expedite the provision of Shs 2 billion towards planning of the Albertine Grabben area.

Unfunded Priorities 

The committee observed that despite the critical role of the following components in economic development of the country, these components remain unfunded - They are clearly listed there.

However, other issues which require funding include:

•	Fraudulent land transactions in the land registry process. It needs a lot of funding so that this practice can be eradicated.
•	Increasing district and international border disputes.
•	Inadequate staffing both at national and local governments.
•	Inadequate/lack of local government grants to implement physical development plans. 

The committee recommends that Government avails Shs 64.7 billion which is the funding gap for Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development in order to enhance infrastructural and urban development in the country. 

Lack of Land Fund Regulations

The committee reiterates the importance of the land fund regulations and expressed concern over the unnecessarily long time the regulations have been under consideration by Cabinet. 
Therefore, we recommend that as a matter of urgency, Cabinet fast tracks consideration of the land fund regulations and other important land related legislations to guide the implementation of the land compensation exercise. 

Computerisation of the Land Registry 

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendations on this issue. Members will be able to read those recommendations. 

Wetlands Encroachment and Titling

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendations that:

a) 	All structures erected on wetlands should be demolished forthwith at the owners’ cost without compensation and land titles withdrawn.  

b) 	Furthermore, the protection of wetlands should be considered a matter of priority by Uganda Land Commission.

Mr Speaker, there are other recommendations on the next page. 

Presidential Directives on Land 

The committee recommendations are as follows:

a)	The committee strongly advises against Presidential directives on land. 
b)	Uganda Land Commission should be empowered to competently manage and advise the government on land related matters. 
c)	A well streamlined procedure should be put in place to guide the process of land management issues in the country. 

Inadequate staffing levels

The committee considered this issue and made recommendations. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should treat the low staffing levels of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development as urgent and expedite the approval of the proposed structure so as to enable the recruitment of required staff. 

Domestic Arrears

While the provision being made in this financial year to clear part of the outstanding domestic arrears is a good initiative, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should this financial year avail Shs 1.752 billion to clear the outstanding balance. 

Border Disputes

The committee recommends that:

a) 	Before creation and approval of new districts, there should be consensus building on the boundaries from all concerned communities. When this has been obtained, the boundaries should then be surveyed, demarcated, and gazetted. 

b) 	Furthermore, the Ministry of Local Government should work with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to settle all the outstanding border disputes between districts.  

c) 	Government should fast track the survey and demarcation of all its international borders. 

Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission

The committee urges Government to table before Parliament the ULC Bill this year. 

Approval

Subject to the above observations and recommendations, I beg that this august House approves the budget estimates for the above votes as follows:

•	Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Shs 21,239,962,000; 
•	Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission, Shs 11,664,589,000. 

The total budget should be approved.

Conclusion

Subject to the above recommendations, I beg to move that this august House adopts and approves this report.

Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the documents concerning the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and the ministerial policy statement regarding the two ministries, transport and lands.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much. Do I call you acting chairman of the committee? You have done very well. This should be the spirit that should be adopted by all the committees, that any member can at any notice or no notice at all present the report of the committee. This is very helpful. Otherwise, we would have been bogged down by the appointment of the chair and the illness that has befallen the vice-chair, but now Parliament has been facilitated by the ability of a member of the committee to present the report. Honourable members, the 30 minutes start ticking now. 

12.49
MS EVERLINE TETE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for the report. Yes, we have approved the budget; thank you, chairman. 

Because of the limited time, I will go straight to the point. 

I am particularly concerned with the road that concerns my district, that is, Kapchorwa-Suam Road. I am happy to learn that Bukwo Road is among the 19 national roads. However, I am not convinced enough to believe that the road is going to be tarmacked. Like Thomas doubted Jesus, he wanted to push the finger into the hands, so I also cannot believe.

Apart from Bukwo Road appearing in papers, which has always been the case, this road has never failed to appear in the budget speeches of Suruma, Syda Bbumba and Maria Kiwanuka now. I do not know who next. In the State of the Nation Address, the road has been there, and it has appeared in the ministerial policy statements for the 12 years I have been in this Parliament. 

The road I am talking about is a road has not allowed Government programmes to reach the district. Yesterday, I saw women Members of Parliament proudly standing in this Parliament saying that UWOPA has been to their districts. I was disappointed that I am not among the proud women of this country who can stand to say that UWOPA has been to my district. Even UWOPA has failed to reach Bukwo District because they say there is no road. They were going out monitoring Government programmes, health units but they could not reach Bukwo because there is no road.

I want to thank the team led by Gen. Moses Ali and the Cabinet sub-committee on disaster which toured the whole of Mt Elgon region. When drawing up the programme to tour all Mt Elgon districts, it was unfortunate that because of that road, the team was not able to include Bukwo District. I had to move following these people and pleading with them to include us in the programme until at last they included us. 

That is why, Mr Speaker, I do not believe that the road is going to be worked on unless the minister tells us something about Bukwo Road. How determined are you now, Minister for Works and Transport? (Member timed out.)

12.53
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to commend the committee on the wonderful job done. However, I have some challenges to raise. 

I would like to support the proposal on page 19 to secure our road reserves because right now, they pose a security risk. If you drive along all these roads, you see the haphazard developments on these roads which really pose a security risk and they make our roads untidy. So, the earlier we secure our road reserves the better.

I support the proposal on page 23 for the Kampala-Malaba railway line to be upgraded to a standard gauge. This is very important in order to remain competitive in the East African Community. However, I also want to believe that the investor has betrayed us and has not worked or lived to our expectations.

In reference to page 34, I would like to request the government to make it easy for Ugandans to obtain land titles. Actually, I would like to propose that land titles should be a right and not a favour for only those people who can access money. 

They did not mention anything on civil aviation, but I see it as part of the activities. Uganda is landlocked, Uganda is a destination for tourists, and therefore it is high time that Uganda as a country developed its own airline or revamped Uganda Airlines in order to compete with the rest of the world. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.55
MR MOHAMMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague, who has effectively stood in for the chairperson, for this comprehensive report. I have three issues to raise.

Number one, I have not heard the chairperson talk about Entebbe Express Highway. We approved a loan in this Parliament and to my understanding it is in this financial year that the Entebbe Express Highway project is scheduled to begin. However, time and again, the people in the gazetted area or demarcated area for the express highway have no clear information on how they are going to be compensated, and this project is soon to be executed. So, I would like the honourable minister to clarify on this matter. More so, I would like him to engage the Members of Parliament from the area, right from Kampala to Entebbe Municipality, so that they are aware of the progress of the project such that we can mobilise our community to support this project. 

Secondly, my colleague has talked about revamping or having Uganda Airlines work again. This would be wonderful. However, I want to mention that air traffic has increased from sometime back up to now; unfortunately, there is the traffic flow from Entebbe, which Entebbe Express Highway is intended to serve - I look at this as a mere future solution that is not going to stand the test of time. 

We were deliberating on a report yesterday and we observed that other than developing the railway line, we are not going to promote trade, tourism, mention it. In the report, they have mentioned upgrading the railway line from Kampala to Kasese; upgrading where there are no sleepers? Is this upgrading or reinstating? The sleepers are not there, now what are we going to upgrade? 

In regard to transport from the airport and other business centres, I saw that one of the unfunded priorities was the development plan for infrastructure. This is very necessary; it needs to come sooner than later. When we do not plan and gazette land for the railway line from Kampala to Entebbe and other areas, it is going to become very expensive for Government later on to construct a railway line. I mentioned this in the last Parliament here. Unless we plan for the railway line from the airport, gazetting the area - We may not have the money at the moment, but - (Member timed out.)

12.58
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I proceed straightaway to page 22 on the railway sub-sector. The committee reports that there is going to be upgrading to at least a standard gauge by the year 2012/2013. There is a total amount US$ 1.2 million for Kasese-Kampala and US$ 913 million for Tororo-Pakwach. That is very excellent and I support it. However, I do not understand what full upgrade and partial upgrade means. They also provide for partial upgrade as in increasing the speed of the railway to 64 kilometres per hour, 100 kilometres per hour and so on. Would this not be duplication of service if you are going to have full upgrade and you are again telling us there is going to be partial upgrade? It seems like here we are going to apportion money for pre-planned corruption.

On Uganda Road Fund, I think the mess with the road user charges should be settled once and for all. Can we, therefore, request that the Ministry of Finance commits itself that they are going to propose amendments in order to harmonise the two Acts, the Uganda Road Authority Act and the Road Fund Act? The reason the Uganda Road Fund was created was to ensure that the road user charges would go directly to the fund and maintain our roads time and again without running up and down asking Parliament and so on.

On Uganda National Road Authority, they are doing a very good job. However, we are all members of the district road committees and we find it very hard when the charges are not taken directly to Uganda Road Fund. It hampers the operation of UNRA in the sense that Ministry of Finance also releases funds very late. The Uganda National Roads Authority is a self-accounting body, very autonomous. So, I expected the committee to bring us a report as to why the vote of UNRA is still being held by the Ministry of Finance and therefore causing delays in the remittance of the funds while our roads are getting worse and worse. 

On the budget, there was supposed to be another bridge from my constituency connecting Nebbi to Congo. It is not reflected here and I am wondering why.

Finally, there is an allegation – this is now on vote –(Member timed out.)

1.01
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want the minister to help the people of Soroti. In past few days, there have been heavy rains in the region. The information we are getting this morning is that Awoja Bridge has been almost swept away. There had been some work going on but the water has flowed over it and yet there are very heavy trucks going to Southern Sudan. We want some commitment from the government on what they are doing in order to solve the situation as emergency works are being carried out to build a new bridge in that part of the country. Otherwise, you cannot be able to cross. You now have to go through Serere if the rains continue the way they are advancing.

On page 8 of this report, on the table, there is an approximate Shs 18 billion which is not accounted for. Can the minister explain to us under what circumstances UNRA has failed to account for Shs 18 billion yet we know the state of our roads? The roads are so bad and they need this money. Please, we need an explanation. If not, we direct the Auditor-General to carry out a special audit of this project. Thank you.

1.03
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a few issues to raise. The first one is on road maintenance and the contractors UNRA has been providing to maintain these roads. I observe that the roads, especially the murram roads, are becoming slimmer in width as they continue maintaining them. We have these people down there –(Interjections)- ok narrower, whichever way. We see them continuously becoming narrow yet we have seen these officers at the district supervising them. I keep wondering, and this is my question to the minister: as you travel to do supervision, do you see these roads becoming smaller, slimmer and narrower? What is your view? What do you do to the supervisors of these people who continue sanctioning payment?

Priorities of Government; for the last two financial years, you have been prioritising Kasese Airstrip to be upgraded to an airport. Today, I am not seeing it anywhere. How did you drop it and come up with other priorities yet in the last two financial years, you have been prioritising Kasese?

The other issue is on physical planning in the Ministry Lands, Housing and Urban Development. We have been seeing people moving from rural settings to urban areas and you are seeing urban areas coming up everywhere. Again, there are very slim urban planning units in these urban areas. It is my observation that urban areas are being built haphazardly. I wish to propose that you use the big team you have at the ministry to go and help these small units at the districts and urban areas to plan for these areas so that we can - (Member timed out.)

1.05
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the acting chairperson for presenting a very good report. I only want to draw the attention of honourable members and the presenter of the report to page 21, which has the famous 10,000-kilometre road. It is reported that Government upgraded a 10,000-kilometre road. I want to state that you should subtract 11 kilometres, which were never upgraded in my constituency. 

There is a road from Muhoro to Ndaiga, which is 33 kilometres. They only upgraded from Muhoro to Kyaterekera and stopped there. They never even touched a single inch on the 11 kilometres from Kyaterekera to Ndaiga down the escarpment. So when you keep reporting to the Ugandans that you upgraded 10,000 kilometres, that is misrepresentation; subtract 11 kilometres from 10,000 kilometres, which should be that Government upgraded 9,989 kilometres. The honourable minister reported to the committee - I know they have not gone there - that they upgraded the 11 kilometres. They are not upgraded. Who ate this money? (Laughter) 

I see on page 22, the committee makes a recommendation and I think they are trying to make a very good recommendation, but I do not understand what they are saying. “The committee recommends that an intra-sectoral...” – what is this? Is it an allocation or what? I am interested in seeing that at least this balance of the road, which remained un-upgraded from Kyaterekera to Ndaiga, is upgraded. At least these roads should also be considered every time for maintenance because they are very important to our farmers. (Member timed out.)  

1.08
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Government for the procurement and distribution of road equipment to districts. If the road equipment is put to good use, it will solve the problem of lack of capacity by our local contractors. 

We have been losing money to these fake contractors. The Minister of State for Works is aware. A contractor called Prime was given Shs 280 million to work on a 32-kilometre road. Instead of getting graders and road equipment, this guy decided to go to a government prison and hire prisoners to work on the road. I reported to the minister, the minister went there but up to now the road is impassable. People are wondering whether the Shs 280 million went to the prisons or is now being detained in the prison. So, the issue of road equipment will help us.

In the report and in the ministerial policy statement, I have not seen money allocated to maintain the road equipment at the district level. It is useless to have road equipment at the districts when there is no fuel. It is like ambulances in our hospitals; you have an ambulance but there is no fuel. To have road equipment with no fuel will be very disappointing. So, may I know from the minister whether money to maintain the road equipment, to buy fuel and work directly on our roads has been provided in this financial year? 

I also suggest that we stop contracting murram roads/feeder roads. Instead, we should use this money to maintain our equipment and buy fuel and use direct labour. After all, many of the districts have engineers. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.11
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for giving us this brilliant report. 

Moroto roads are badly affected right now. The road to Moroto is now impassable. Actually, there are no roads, I would say. However, I am happy that Moroto Road has been particularly mentioned for the coming session of construction. I want to know from the minister when the tarmacking will start. I could be one of the doubting Thomases, but I want to know when you will start. 

Mr Speaker, one of the companies ferrying marble from Moroto, that is, Moroto Cement Factory, is one of the biggest spoilers of Moroto–Nakapiripirit Road. So I want to ask the minister, what is the contribution of Moroto Cement Factory to Moroto Road?

Secondly, why are roads in Uganda most of the time being repaired? Do these contractors have the due qualifications? What materials are being used to construct these roads? What is the timeframe for constructing these roads? Year in, year out, these roads are under repair; could the minister tell this House what is going on?

I want to comment on Kampala road. There is a lot of traffic. What plans does the minister have for Kampala road? Do they intend to make highways in Kampala? We would want to get clarification on that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.13
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to also thank the committee for the good work done. 

I want to go straight to page 8 of the report, vote 113, on key achievements. The committee noted that during the financial year 2011/2012, some roads that were substantially completed included, among others, Masaka-Mbarara Road. Those who have been using this road can agree with me that much as progress is being made, the way work is done on the road leaves a lot to be desired. They patch one area here and jump to another area, they do not put up road signs, and everyday there are road accidents. 

I request the ministry that at least they put up a timeframe for working on this road because it has been worked on for the past five years. There is heavy traffic and you have to stay in the jam even when you are rushing to attend Parliament. I spend over six hours on that road. When I get here, Mr Speaker says, “You came in late, where were you?” We are on the road trying to travel from Sembabule to Kampala.

On page 10, district roads and urban roads; UNRA has failed the expectations of many Ugandans as far as maintenance of district roads is concerned. For the last five years, UNRA took over three roads in Sembabule, that is, Masaka-Matete-Rwebitakuli; Matete-Sembabule; Sembabule-Ntusi-Lwemiyaga and no work has been done. 

This takes me to page 16, where the committee noted that the fund will finance periodic maintenance of some kilometres of national roads. Why didn’t they break them down so that we can know where they are going to work? Here they are not rightly budgeted for. In every State of the Nation Address, for example, the President happily mentions that they are going to tarmac the road from Villa Maria to Sembabule and I clap. I clap hard and members envy me and I go away with a wide smile. The budget should equally –(Member timed out.)

1.17
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the good work and I will go straight to the point. I want to thank Government for the road from Kabale to Kisoro. However, as I speak now, there are no road signs or reflectors. I am wondering whether it is the contractors removing them or somebody else. I would like the ministry to tell us because this exposes us to accidents. 

I would like to comment on the issue of physical planning. A few years ago, the ministry in charge of urban planning gave some town councils funds to carry out physical planning. They made for them structural drawings and detailed layout plans. After making these plans, they were submitted to the town councils. Unfortunately, in the structures of these town councils there are no physical planners. So I wonder who is going to interpret these plans for them. Secondly, I assume that at the time they were going to give these funds to town councils, they were ready to help these town councils implement these plans. So I want to know from the ministry whether they have plans to fund the town councils so that these plans are implemented. There is also need for compensation; if they had planned that this is going to be a road, they need to plan for compensation. So I want to know from the ministry what plans they have. 

According to what I see here in Annex 1, there are bridges that they are planning to work on in 2012/13. I am wondering whether the ministry really goes down to check on these bridges. Last financial year, they promised to work on Kyamateke Bridge in Busanza. I think they are waiting for a disaster to first take place then they will work on this bridge. I request you to go down and check on what is going on with the different bridges in these districts; otherwise, we are headed for a disaster. 

Finally, I want to ask the ministry for the cost of roads per district. We want to know whether a road in Iganga is going to cost a certain amount per kilometre and is it the same amount that is going to be spent in Kisoro. Thank you.

1.20
MS SARAH KIYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for the good work done. I will start with the reallocation of resources from the already identified roads to be worked on to the new roads that were not even in the budget. We are doing a disservice to some of the people of this country. My road has appeared in the budget since 1996 up to today - Bumbo-Lwakhaka Road. It comes one financial year and disappears in another financial year and up to now, the road has never been worked on. 

When you see the new roads that are going to be worked on now, they were not even in the budget last financial year. We are reallocating resources from one area to the other. Even those that are being disadvantaged by this reallocation are not being thought of in the next planned activities. This is done basing on who goes to visit the President and then the roads are changed. We should stick to our plans, programmes and to the budget, the way we have planned to do things. 

Kampala City gets a budget of Shs 42 billion. I believe that last financial year, this is the money that was allocated to work on the roads but when we look at the roads in Kampala, they are very bad and impassable. I wonder where the Shs 42 billion really goes. At least if we can have one or two roads that are worked on very well, we can say that in the last financial year, such a road is in good shape.

The upgraded roads from the district to the centre; my road was taken over by UNRA but when you now look at the road, it is impassable. It is one thing taking over the road and another maintaining it. If you take over this road and then you leave it to be impassable, it does not give us hope and it makes us think that taking it over has not helped a lot. 

Lastly -(Member timed out.)    

1.23
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): I thank you, Mr Speaker. There are two facts, whether we want it or not; the first is that there is not enough money to cater for all these roads. So, Government must prioritise and you must prioritise in terms of the economic gains that you are likely to get.

The second fact is that whether we want it or not, South Sudan has now become our biggest market. Therefore, the route through Kaya, Juba and Torit must be prioritised when you are planning to tarmac roads. Whether we want it or not, that is the fact. I would therefore ask the Minister for Works and Transport to do this. There is this road of Gulu-Anaka, Gulu-Kitgum-Patiko to Ataik-Palabek; sometimes traffic gets diverted from there and it passes via Patiko Road, but the Onyama Bridge has collapsed because of heavy traffic.

Mr Speaker, I now have to represent you because I know that when you are chairing, you cannot talk. There is a highway under the Ministry of Works called Moroto Road; for goodness’ sake, the road is worse off than any other highway. It is bad! It is supposed to be Gulu-Moroto Road via the Speaker’s constituency - not only his constituency but his home – but one day, the Speaker will get stuck and we will have no sitting here. (Laughter) So, when are you going to work on that road?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member shall stop lobbying for more time. (Laughter)

MR OKUMU: Secondly, there is the question of the railway line. When you are prioritising, you know Sudan is our market, why don’t we prioritise it? All these heavy trucks passing through Soroti and other places would get their way by railway to Gulu or Pakwach before the other extension from Gulu to Juba is built. So, why don’t we prioritise the northern lines over the other lines because that is where the business is, that is where there is money, that is where the oil is and all those kinds of things?

Lastly, I want to ask the Minister for Works when all the districts of Uganda will be connected by tarmac. I think that remains a priority. When are we going to connect all our district headquarters with tarmac? I support the committee on cautioning – (Member timed out.)     

1.26
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): I thank you so much. I want to thank the committee for the work well done. However, I have comments to make, especially from page 19. You realise that the committee discovered that there is inadequate capacity to supervise and monitor some of these road works. I have a question to the ministers: what is it? Why and what kind of people do we put in place to supervise and monitor some of these works?  

Mr Speaker, you will realise that in my constituency in Lira District, especially in Aromo Sub-county, there is a bridge that had been started and constructed by the Chinese. It was stopped half way and yet money had been spent on it; up to tomorrow, it is incomplete and nobody minds about it. Nobody is working on it, it is not in the budget and it is not in the plan. There is nothing completely, and I wonder what the Ministry of Works is up to.  

The other issue on road construction is the bridges. There are quite a number of bridges; we have Agali Bridge in Erute South, which is incomplete and there is no budget or plan for it. There is also the Kaguta Bridge that brought a lot of problems. I will never stop talking about Kaguta Bridge because it is a presidential pledge. It had started but of recent, the people have removed their machines and gone. There is no communication and now there is nothing completely. I do not know what the ministry is up to. We need an update on such things, please.

Lira District had contributed land to Government and this was way back in Amin’s time. It was a big chunk of land for an airfield, but you know that once you leave land idle, people encroach on it. Up to tomorrow, we do not see any signs and plans for such an airfield. Do we encourage our people to encroach and work on it because we also want development in that particular place? Please, would the Ministry of Works mind planning for that airfield so that Lira District also develops from a district status to a city status? I thank you so much. 

1.29
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): I thank you for this opportunity, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for letting me know about the bad changes that the minister or his group made. 

On page 17 we see that funds have been relocated from roads or projects, including bridges, which had been planned and waited for a very long time. Kia Kia Bridge, a very important bridge linking and shortening the road from Kampala-Pakwach-Rhino Camp-Obongi-Moyo-Kajo Keji-Juba. This road has been talked about but the problem is only a bridge which is a distance of about 18 kilometres, but you travel 200 kilometres. If this bridge is built, you reduce the distance to Moyo and Kajo Keji by 100 kilometres. Honourable minister, what happened? Why did you relocate the money for Kia Kia Bridge under BADEA to other bridges?

Entebbe is very important to us but why do you want people who can drive very fast to go to Entebbe Airport to fly. You want to build the highway, you want to improve things here, but you have not even facilitated people who cannot crawl to crawl. Why did you shift money from the Atiak-Moyo-Afoji Road to the Entebbe highway? That is unfairness of the highest order. Hon. Reagan Okumu, thank you very much for highlighting the importance of Sudan as a market. Afoji is one of the border posts, which brings money to this country. The Atiak-Moyo Road, including the Afoji post, needs to be handled expeditiously.

Lastly, on the issue of Arua international airport to-be, this is a very big disappointment. We have only one airport, Entebbe Airport. For goodness’ sake, should there be heavy traffic here? Where will the alternative be? Arua is the biggest inland flight destination in Uganda. Congo, DRC, Juba, need that airport. There was a time I wanted to go to Juba from Obongi; I was forced to come from Obongi to Entebbe to fly to Juba. I could have flown from Arua to Juba, which is a very short distance. 
To provide for emergencies, which God forbid should happen, if there is a problem with Entebbe Airport we have no way out. Why don’t you forward Arua to become an international airport? Thank you.

1.33
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I will go straight to the issue of the land fund. The committee reported that there is no regulation, and I want to assume that it is because of the lack of the regulation that this fund is abused. 

Last financial year, the Budget Committee recommended that the Shs 11 billion that was set aside to procure land for the Mumbere in Kasese be given to the thousands of peasants who do not own land and are squatters and are being evicted every day. This is the case in Nakasongola District; 80 per cent of our people do not own land, they are squatters. The absentee landlords are willing to be compensated and give peasants land.

So, I want to know from the Minister of Lands what has happened to the Shs 11 billion. Where is the list of the people who have been compensated so that we can see justice happen to our people? What procedure is there, now that we do not have regulations to compensate people? 

The other issue is about the cost per unit for roads. This House has been recommending several times that we get the cost per unit for roads per kilometre standardised so that we avoid fraudulent measures. This is because you would find UNRA roads and national roads constructed for Shs 22 million per kilometre and the same kilometres in the same district are constructed for Shs 7 million. I want to know whether we are about to standardise the cost per unit for roads. How far has the ministry gone in standardising the costs? 

Lastly, I have been waiting for the ferry from Rwampanga to Namasale. This was an issue in 2001 when I was in the Seventh Parliament. I went on forced leave, came back, but the ferry has never been delivered. I think my colleagues who were there can bear me witness. Since this ferry was supposed to be commissioned in March this year, what has happened? Should we still tell our people that the ferry is going to be commissioned? What are the reasons for the delays? I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will bear with me; we had agreed to use 30 minutes but we have used one hour and 30 minutes. That is one hour more than what we had agreed. We have three more reports and three Bills remaining to be finished today. Bear with me. I will start with the shadow minister and then come to works, lands and finance. Five minutes each please. 

1.36
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Roland Mugume): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am surprised that I do not see Mitaano Bridge. I have perused through annex 1 and 2 but I do not see Mitaano Bridge. For those who do not know where Mitaano Bridge is, it is the bridge which connects DRC and Uganda. It is important that this bridge is worked on. Actually, this bridge is on the highway. We want the minister to give an explanation. 

Secondly, as shadow minister, I request this august House not to pass the budget of Ministry of Works unless they account for Shs 18 billion. When you look at table 5, which is on page 8, under the projects supplemented under vote 113 in the financial year 2012/2013, there is Shs 18 billion which is unaccounted for. 

Those who have used the Kampala Northern Bypass Road will tell us that it is completed but if you go there physically, that road is not yet complete. There is some work going on - (Interjections) - I am just presenting and you are taking up my time. 

Mr Speaker, the other issue is about Kingdom Hotel, which they had planned to construct at the former Shimoni Teachers College. They were supposed to put up Kingdom Hotel but today, there is a mall which is coming up. Now, there is Nakumatt Mall, there is Parliament, Radio Uganda; we need to know what plans the ministry has with regard to access because we are going to have traffic jam around this place and you need to plan for it early. We do not want to get into problems. 

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is probably the most important sector of any functioning economy. However, this is a sector which has many problems. There are rampant evictions, land grabbing, mismanagement of public land, encroachment on forests and wetlands. When you read this report on page 38 and 39, you will see the problems we have in this country. 

A minister has no mandate to stop people who are encroaching on land. I can inform this House that we have ad hoc land fora in this country coming up. There is the Land Protection Unit of the Uganda Police Force; the Presidential Land Task Force; and State House Directorate of Land Management. These are fora actually more powerful than the ministry. We want the minister to explain why these fora are more powerful than the ministry when we actually think the ministry should be empowered to help us in this area. Otherwise, we have a big problem in this country –(Member timed out.) 

1.41
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I sincerely thank my colleagues for the interest they have shown. Before I go into the details, let me thank the chairman for presenting the report very well. 

There was a complaint about supervision and monitoring. Yes, I agree it is a problem and we have realised it; so, we are seriously restructuring UNRA because the structure of UNRA is so small. As I speak, we are procuring the consultant to assist us on this. In the Ministry of Works, we have recruited more people and we still need more. We have advertised but we cannot get all the people we want because the nature of qualifications, engineers, is not easy. 

There was an issue on contract financing. This is an innovation by the Uganda government where we require contractors who can mobilise funds to come and discuss with us the terms. We will want to know the interest rates, the repayment period, the grace period and if the terms are good -are they concessional loans or are they commercial? These are issues we are going to discuss. They will give us money and we will work on the roads that people have been talking about. 

My sister, hon. Tete, has said that this Kapchorwa road has been on budgets and budgets. We are sorry about that but I can assure you that it is one of the roads in the contracts of financing. Roads have been appearing year in and year out for many reasons and one of them is that we were over ambitious. We were putting more roads than necessary. However, this is something we have corrected. Anybody who saw this year’s budget can see that we were very careful to be conservative and included only what we can do. There are those which depend on the budget. As you know, the budget is not money available but anticipated. So, if we do not get it, we cannot do anything.

Thirdly, constructing a road is not like taking a photograph - you just snap and get a photo. Roads take three to four years, and for each year they must appear because they are ongoing. So, if you see it for one or two years, it is because of the fact that this is construction and not photography. 

Hon. Fred Mwesigye talked about the national airlines. There is a government policy, which is still outstanding, of disengaging ourselves from this field. However, I am in the process of writing a paper to my colleagues in Cabinet to see if we can reverse this and reintroduce a national carrier. 

There was also talk about airstrips. Yes, Kasese is very important. As I speak, the designs are ready and we need about US$ 50 million to do the necessary works. We want to expand it and put up good driveways. Arua is another one where we have already done some studies and also Gulu, but we must work within our means. We should not be over ambitious.

Mr Speaker, some of my colleagues have talked about our connections –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I remember in the last two years we have had a question here; there is money which we passed, US$ 250 million, to establish a national airline. The name of the airline, Victoria Airlines, was even proposed. Where did that money go because you are just telling us that you have a policy to reverse it? Where is the US$ 250 million?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, as I said, budgets are estimates; they are anticipated. We anticipated but we never got it. 

There has been a lot of talk about connecting us to our brothers in Southern Sudan. Let me inform the House, Mr Speaker, that the government has worked very hard –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, one of the cardinal assignments of Members of Parliament is to check financial excesses. A matter has been brought on the Floor of the House, namely, that some time back, Parliament earmarked a sum of US$ 250 million to address the national airline, which went into oblivion. Is it in order for the honourable minister holding the Floor to bypass an important matter of that magnitude and choose to zigzag into issues that dodge the circumstances? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The information is factual and it is not in the knowledge of the Speaker. I am unable to rule on that. 

MR BYANDALA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just did not want to go into detail. Actually, what was passed here was US$ 250,000 and not million. I just did not want to embarrass him. 

Colleagues here have talked about the importance of our linkage to Southern Sudan. The Government of Uganda is ahead of what we are saying. If you recall, we already started work on the Vurra-Aura-Koboko-Oraba Road. We have already started on Gulu-Atiak and we have already awarded Atiak-Nimule. These are all roads going to Southern Sudan. 

For the railway line, the prioritized line as I speak is taking us from Tororo-Pakwach to Gulu and eventually to Southern Sudan. Soon, I will send my colleague, hon. Chebrot, to meet with the Minister of Transport in Southern Sudan. So, these are issues that we are already handling. 

The Entebbe Express Highway; Yes, the country has waited for long and eventually we are there. All technical issues were finalised. We have signed a contract and the contractor is mobilizing and very soon, works will start as we compensate. Compensation is starting in September, honourable colleagues –(Member timed out.)

1.48
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a highly enlightening report –(Interruption) 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure. The report on infrastructure has been elaborate enough to indicate on page 8 that the sum of Shs 18 billion was not accounted for. As Parliament, we are responsible for checking excesses of government expenditure; would it be procedurally correct for us to proceed without clearing that dust? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a matter that has come from the committee. The committee has the express authority to deal with it to its conclusion. So, the committee should proceed and deal with it comprehensively. It is within the mandate of the committee. The recommendation that has come before the House is what we are dealing with.  

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, you are right but I think the correct way is for us to just ask the Auditor-General to take interest, to have a special audit project, because that is when they will analyse so many things. From here, he cannot be able to complete that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Precisely that is what I am saying. That should have come from the committee.

MR OKUPA: We take it that the Auditor-General has taken note and will report within two months. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, all projects we came here to get supplementaries for were clearly marked and shown. It is just a question that my colleagues did not get the details right, but all the money we paid for was supplementary and they showed what the money was for, and this money was clearly used to the satisfaction of all.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, matters pertaining to public finance are constitutional and very important matters and they should not be taken lightly as is the case right now. The Shs 18 billion was not accounted for; can we just pass this budget of the ministry? Should the minister talk so arrogantly like that? Can’t we refuse to pass this budget? What is he talking about? (Laughter) Is it in order for the minister to behave in that way when we are clearing the taxpayers’ money? Is the committee lying by referring to Shs 18 billion as unaccounted for?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have spoken on that subject. As for the conduct of the minister, he has conducted himself with dignity and decorum. He has not violated any order. As for the substance of the debate, as the hon. Okupa also submitted, it is for the committee to make the clear recommendation on the way forward on this. We will deal with it at committee level and then come to the House and we deal with it. Please, honourable minister, could you finish quickly. 

MR DAUDI MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a very good report and the chair for presenting in the manner he did. I would also like to thank members who have spoken in support of this report in particular on matters of lands, housing and urban development. 

There were issues about issuance of land titles, that this needs to be eased as much as possible. I would like to assure members that there is reorganisation taking place in the land registry. There is computerisation of the land registry and equipment has been received. By November, we should be in a position to handle everything using the computerised programme. This will greatly ease access not only to information on land but also access to land titles, which we have been looking forward to for a very long time. 

We are also opening up zonal offices in the countryside and our people will no longer need to come to Kampala in order to acquire land titles. So, we are going to greatly ease access or procurement of land titles by February 2013. This will all be in place and it will no longer be a problem. 

There were issues of physical planning raised by hon. Mbahimba and the honourable member for Kisoro. The fact of the matter is that we have physical plans for many of the emerging urban centres. Our biggest failing is in regard to implementation of the plans and compliance with the plans that have been worked out. 

It is true we have a shortage of manpower in as far as physical planners are concerned, but what we have been doing is to share the few that we have at headquarters with the various urban centres in the country. Whenever there is need for physical planning to be undertaken, ministry headquarters has always been in position to send out physical planners to the various centres in the countryside and they have been doing a good job.  

We have a problem in that the remuneration of such people is not in line with what the market generally offers and, therefore, we at times have a problem accessing such people. However, we have been negotiating with the Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance and soon we may be in a position to find a solution to the general problem of remuneration for the technical people that are highly on demand and are supposed to serve our sector. 

Mr Speaker, there were issues concerning the Municipal Development Programme. This is covering a number of town councils in the countryside. I want to assure the honourable members that there is a component for compensating those who are likely to be affected as a result of rehabilitating infrastructure in these urban centres, but also general development of infrastructure in these urban centres. 

The honourable member for Nakasongola raised the issue of the land fund and how we have been utilising it. It is true that we have got regulations before Cabinet, which my ministry has developed, and we are trying to ensure that we fast track approval of these regulations. As soon as this is done - (Member timed out.)

MS KOMUHANGI: Mr Speaker, I have a procedural concern. When we come here as Members of Parliament, we have to account to our people about the issues that we raise. When we raise them and do not get adequate responses from the ministers, then we are at a loss. What do we tell our people? I think we need more time for the ministers to answer some of those issues. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the time was five minutes and that time is up. That is the time that has been assigned. The circumstances we are dealing with are clear to all of us. So, let us deal with it in the way we are doing now. 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, can you grant me some more time so that I can answer? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairman, would you like to ask the House to adopt your report? Let the Minister of Finance first come in. 

1.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. There are a few issues to correct under vote 012, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. On page 33, Shs 5,848,000,000 was erroneously allocated under the ministry for domestic arrears. This anomaly has been corrected through a corrigendum and the correct total recurrent budget allocation for the ministry is therefore, Shs 9,642,440,000. 

An issue was raised about funding for physical planning in the Albertine Grabben. I would like to inform the House that for that purpose, Shs 2 billion has been provided in the budget. Thank you, Mr Speaker.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have not done very well in terms of time for this morning part of our sitting. Chairperson, wind up in one minute. 

2.00
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the members for doing justice to the report. I urge them to read the report because there are details in the report and serious issues. Land determines our being and it is the most valuable asset. Roads are the basis of our growth and development. So, I appeal that the House approves the budget 100 per cent and also the Ministry of Finance should make releases of 100 per cent. 

On the issue of the Shs 18 billion, the committee has taken serious steps and has suggested to the Auditor-General to do a general audit and a value-for-money audit on all the projects being undertaken by the ministry. So I am appealing to the House not to cause any stalemate in these important sectors. I hope the Auditor-General will do justice to the report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2012/2013 be adopted by this House. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is 2 O’clock; the House is suspended to 3 O’clock. Have one hour for lunch and let us meet then. 

(The House was suspended at 2.00 p.m.)

 (On resumption at 3.10 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome back to this second part of today’s sitting. You are aware that Uganda Revenue Authority has been in Parliament since 20 August 2012 providing e-tax registration for income tax identification numbers and motor vehicles. Due to the important event which will take place in the foyer in the South Wing tomorrow, the officials of URA will relocate and be available on the third floor of the South Wing next to the restaurant, to extend these services to you. You are also reminded that tomorrow will be their last day in Parliament. Honourable members are therefore encouraged to complete all their registration as the VIP treatment by URA will not be extended any further. Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

3.13 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Barnabas Tinkasiimire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In accordance with Article 115(4) of the Constitution and rule 177 of Our Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Presidential Affairs is mandated to discuss and review the estimates of revenue and expenditure to examine and make comments on policy matters, evaluate the previous financial performance of the institutions listed in the scope below, and make recommendations to Parliament.

Scope 

Our scope covers the following institutions:

•	Vote 001 - Office of the President; 
•	Vote 002 - State House; 
•	Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister (OPM); 
•	Vote 107 - Uganda Aids Commission; 
•	Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity; 
•	Vote 159 - External Security Organisation (ESO); and 
•	Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA).

In fulfilment of the committee’s mandate: 

•	We studied the previous policy statements and parliamentary reports on the institutions above; 

•	We held meetings with representatives of the above institutions; 

•	Carried out field inspection visits to selected parts of the country to assess some of the projects and programmes being implemented by the OPM and President’s Office in order to ascertain value for money; and 

•	Considered the current policy statements.

Since I have very little time, I will just want to guide honourable members. Since honourable members now have the report with them, they will find performance of the votes I have mentioned as follows: 

•	The President’s Office on page 3; 
•	On page 10, you will find State House; 
•	On page 14, the sector performance of Uganda AIDS Commission; 
•	On page 16, the sector performance of Ethics and Integrity; 
•	Page 19, you will find the performance of vote 159, that is, External Security Organisation; 
•	On page 27, you will find the vote performance of vote 003, the Prime Minister’s Office; and 
•	On page 39, you will find the performance of vote 122.

Allow me now to go straight to the observations and recommendations of the committee. 

Vote 001 - Office of the President

The committee observed that following its recommendation in financial year 2011/12 that Shs 3.5 billion be allocated towards the construction of 35 office blocks for RDCs, each costing Shs 100 million, contracts were executed and works commenced for the construction in a phased manner of office blocks in eight districts of Abim, Amuru, Buhweju, Buvuma, Kamuli, Kiryandongo, Lamwo and Otuke. The committee noted however that the process was constrained by the cut in budgetary allocation and the continuous rise in the cost of construction. Therefore, in the financial year 2012/13, there are plans to construct new offices in only two more districts. 

It was further observed that in most districts, RDCs are accommodated at the district headquarters offices because they do not have their own offices. It is the considered view of the committee that this, in a way, could compromise their constitutional role of overseeing implementation of government programmes. If they are housed by the very officials they are supposed to oversee, then their reports can easily be compromised. 

The committee also noted with concern that the Office of the Prime Minister continued to rent offices yet the Presidency had received from the Chinese contractors the newly completed office block on Plot 9-11 Apollo Kaggwa Road to house the Office of the President and the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Recommendations

i) 	The committee recommends that construction of government offices should be done to save the exorbitant funds that are spent on rent. Further, the committee recommends that office blocks should be built for RDCs to allow them have independence that will enable them carry out their constitutional mandate of monitoring the implementation of government programmes without bias.   

ii) 	The Office of the Prime Minister should shift to the new premises with immediate effect to save the funds that are being spent on rent.
	
The committee noted that an exercise to verify academic qualifications of RDCs and Deputy RDCs was completed and the appointing authority had made new appointments of RDCs and deputies. The committee recommends that a list of all newly appointed RDCs and deputies be submitted to the committee to verify their qualifications. Further, the Presidency should execute plans to retire RDCs and deputies from service, and resources should be provided to pay retirement benefits to particularly those retiring officers. 

Internal Security Organisation 

Outstanding Arrears

The committee observed that despite its recommendation in the financial year 2011/12 for Government to clear the outstanding arrears incurred by ISO, the arrears had continued to accumulate to the tune of Shs 23.5 billion from Shs 13.1 billion in year 2010/2011. The cause of accumulation was non-provision/under provision for staff gratuity and leave entitlements over the years.

Recommendations 

i) 	The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that all the outstanding arrears under ISO should be cleared by providing the required resources.   
	
ii) 	The committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Finance should provide enough resources to ISO, as opposed to inadequate budget provisions and insufficient budget ceilings allocated to the vote, to enable it carry out its mandate.  

The committee observed that its recommendation in 2011/2012 to create a separate vote for ISO was not implemented. The committee was concerned that ISO’s operations were being bogged down because of combining them with other vote functions.

The committee recommends that in light of the increased crime rate within the country, ISO should be able to effectively detect, prevent and curtail terrorism, insurgency and crime countrywide without any hindrance. The committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that ISO should have a vote status like ESO to ensure effectiveness in its operations.  

Facilitation of District Internal Security Officers (DISOs) 

It was observed that the DISOs and GISOs are not adequately facilitated due to budgetary constraints. The organisation has over the years been appealing for budgetary enhancement in order to improve on facilitation, but this situation has not been addressed.

The committee recommends that the DISOs and GISOs should be properly facilitated, bearing in mind the fact that these are people who have a lot of information on how the country’s security is handled and, therefore, they should not be led into compromising situations through use of illegal means to survive.  

High number of Presidential Advisors 

The committee noted with concern that despite its recommendation in the last financial year, that the portfolio of the various posts of presidential advisors be re-evaluated with a view of scaling down their number, the number had instead gone up from 62 to 96. The committee was also concerned that their job descriptions, qualifications and mode of recruitment were not well spelt out. The committee further noted that some presidential advisors doubled as public servants, therefore earning two salaries.

Recommendations

a) 	Government should streamline its recruitment policies for the presidential advisors in order to rationalise their roles and terms of service, and the portfolio of the various posts of presidential advisors should be re-evaluated.

b) 	Presidential advisors should become very vigilant in keeping an inventory of all presidential pledges and reminding the President or the concerned sectors to fulfil them.

c) 	The appointing authority should ensure that the persons appointed to serve as presidential advisors do not hold other public offices. It is unconstitutional for a person to earn two salaries. 

The Department for Economic Monitoring

The committee observed that the Department of Monitoring and Evaluation was concentrating their activities in the same districts instead of spreading to several districts in the country. This was evidenced when the department monitored 36 districts on the status of Prosperity for All (PFA) implementation and the same districts were monitored on the development of urban and rural markets and on value addition in the year ending. The same districts were also planned for in this financial year. 

Recommendations 

a) 	The department should spread its monitoring activities to other districts instead of concentrating in the same districts. If they concentrate in the same districts, implementation of government programmes in other districts will not be properly monitored leading to misappropriation of funds.

b) 	Government should provide enough funds and personnel to enable the department undertake this important role and to address random sampling monitoring. It is necessary that effective monitoring and evaluation of implementation of government programmes is done countrywide to ensure value for money.

The committee observed that implementation and operationalisation of government programmes under Prosperity for All was not clear.  The office does not provide the public with information on how the programmes are run and how services can be accessed. The committee was further concerned that in spite of the existence of this programme, the poverty levels were going up and yet funds were appropriated to this sector every financial year. 

Recommendation 

The public should be made aware of how the programmes under Prosperity for All operate. Information should be disseminated on how to access the services. Further, the committee should be availed quarterly reports on the implementation of this programme. 
	
Presidential Pledges

It was observed that most presidential pledges had not been fulfilled and this was affecting the image of the President because he makes some of the pledges during public rallies; for instance, the President pledged to give each household six cows but this is not reflected in any Government plans neither is it in the budget. Furthermore, the President pledged to set up model parishes in every district to carry out good farming practices but this had not been done nor were there any plans of fulfilling this pledge. 

The committee recommends that an inventory of all presidential pledges should be developed showing all presidential pledges made. The Presidency should streamline all pledges and then channel them to the respective ministries for action.   

Uganda Media Centre

The committee observed that the Uganda Media Centre continued to be understaffed and did not have branches upcountry, making it hard for it to disseminate information. The committee was concerned that funds for revamping the media centre were not available.

The committee noted that basing on the success of the Kampala media activists, who hold weekly sensitisation meetings, the media centre decided that 15 upcountry centres be opened for the same purpose. These will be in Masaka, Mbarara, Kabale, Kasese, Fort Portal, Hoima, Arua, Gulu, Kitgum, Lira, Soroti, Mbale, Tororo, Jinja and Kampala. To accomplish this, the media centre will require those millions -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, 15 minutes are up. Why don’t you go to the last part of the report? We are really time pressed. Go to the part which deals with proposals which you want the House to act on.  

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. Since I had taken honourable members to the respective pages where they can find vote functions, for avoidance of doubt I can quickly repeat them: 

•	Vote 001, Office of the President, from pages 2 to 9; 
•	Vote 002, State House, from page 10 to 13; 
•	Vote 107, Uganda AIDS Commission, from page 13 to 16; 
•	Vote 112, Ethics and Integrity, pages 16 to 19; 
•	Vote 159, ESO, is highlighted on pages 19 to 21; 
•	Vote 003, Prime Minister’s Office is highlighted on pages 21 to 35; 
•	Vote 112, KCCA, is highlighted on pages 36 to 43.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, we wish to make a general recommendation, which is highlighted on page 43 of our report: The sectors of presidential affairs, which include the Office of the President, State House, Office of the Prime Minister, Uganda Aids Commission, Ethics and Integrity, ESO and KCCA, are the face of the Executive. The Ministry of Finance should provide sufficient funds for them to fully carry out their mandate of ensuring a strong democratic state of Uganda, the rule of law, and accountable leadership. This shall also stop perennial supplementary requests from this sector.

On the same page, our committee made proposals for reallocations, which stretch from page 43 to 45. With the limited time I have, I will go to the budget proposals.

Mr Speaker, allow me to read the budgetary proposals for the financial year 2012/2013 on page 46. The Committee on Presidential Affairs recommends that Parliament approves the following estimates for the respective ministries and departments for the financial year 2012/2013: 

Vote 001 - Office of the President 

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 83,591,988,000. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 4,939,592,000. 

Vote 002 - State House 

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 58,546,378,000. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 4,688,506,000. 

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister 

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 27,399,847,000. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 150,839,700,000. 

Vote 107 - Uganda Aids Commission 

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 5,347,000,000. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 127,809,000. 

Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity 

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 3,317,306,403. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 210,597,000. 

Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority 
•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 112,660,000,000. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 50,519,000,000. 

Vote 159 - External Security Organisation 

•	Recurrent expenditure, Shs 11,374,770,000. 
•	Development expenditure, Shs 442,000,000.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I thank your committee for the very good and very elaborate work. It is a very wide sector but you have captured it very well. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Abalokweri Primary School from Apac District. They are represented by hon. Maxwell Akora, MP Maruzi County, and the hon. Lucy Ajok, MP Apac District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. 

That is the report of the committee. Thank you, Mr Chairman, again. The time is tight; we will limit this general debate to 20 minutes. Will that be fair? Yes, 20 minutes will be good and then we go to the front benches on either side. Twenty minutes, each taking two minutes this time. Please, let us be quick and to the point. I will have Aswa, Vurra, Maruzi, Kitgum, Otuke, hon. Member for PwDs Eastern and Bukedea County. Let us start like that. Honourable member for Sembabule, you will not speak on this occasion. (Laughter)

3.40
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the question of the presidential advisors, I think Parliament needs to know what the presidential advisors do. From my readings and from looking at them, I think their titles should be changed; they should be called presidential assistants. I have failed to see the kind of advice they give to the President because the line ministers are there; they too are presidential advisors by virtue of their appointment.

Secondly, on page 9, the committee gave a recommendation on the National Leadership Institute, that it should be non-partisan. I support that. Mr Speaker, two weeks ago, I was in my constituency and I went to visit a secondary school, Sir Samuel Baker Secondary School. When I arrived there, I found the gates sealed by soldiers and I did not know what was going on there. As I drove back, I was called by somebody called Kawesa. He said that they were having classes for patriotism. He told me that they had brought all the head teachers and that they did not want politicians to go there. 

Again, I got a call from Masika, who also echoed the same ideas, but he invited me to go there and talk. I told him I did not even know what was taking place there. The point I am driving at is that this issue must be national; it must not be partisan. We are talking about nationalism and nationalism does not belong to one party. To say that Reagan should not talk to those people or even just reach the school, which is in his constituency, while allowing NRM politicians to go and talk to those people, I feel this is most unfair, very greedy and you are being very dishonest in the way you handle our politics.

Lastly, the question on intelligence, ESO and ISO; I think Government needs to clarify on the rivalry between the different organs of the State. You might find they are duplicating the same services. The Police is there, CMI is there –(Member timed out.)

3.43
MR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the chairman for this well done work. I have a few issues to raise. The first one is on RDCs. The issue of the qualification of RDCs has been raised very many times. I have noted that the matter is exaggerated. I want to give two examples. 

The RDC of Arua is called Ibrahim Abiriga. The assumption that I have been getting around is that this gentleman has never been to school. I have actually got all his documents with me – (Interjections)– I do not want to lay them on the Table today. He has not only gone to S.6 but he is now finishing his dissertation for a Bachelor’s degree. This is someone who everybody has been saying has not gone to school. I know this because I also teach at Uganda Martyrs University – for leisure, not for pay. (Laughter)  So, I believe it is necessary for this committee to review the approach so that they do not incriminate anybody just from hearsay.

The other issue is to do with translating equivalent or different courses in our hierarchy of the school system. I know another RDC –(Member timed out.)

3.46
MR PATRICK AKORA (UPC, Maruzi County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the House to the composition of the votes under the Presidency. Looking at the votes listed, I do not see the relevance of these votes to the Presidency. I do not see how the President can effectively supervise the Uganda Aids Commission, Department of Ethics and Integrity, Internal Security Organisation, Department of Economic Monitoring, Uganda Media Centre and KCCA. It is perhaps indicative of the way things are done in this country, that every new department or idea comes under the vision of the Presidency. I do not see how all these departments would add value to the Presidency. So I want the House to consider how these functions can effectively be discharged and supervised. 

The Uganda AIDS Commission has a very important role to play in HIV/AIDS; that should be a preserve of Ministry of Health. The Internal Security Organisation should coordinate with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to ensure that they rationalise their operations and that we do not have multiple security agencies operating in this country. The Department of Economic Monitoring should be in the interest of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Uganda Media Centre should be a key function of the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology. There is KCCA – I wonder where it should be. 

I want us to look at Uganda Aids Commission. Their budget is only Shs 6.48 billion for looking after the health, or trying to prevent the affliction of HIV/AIDS, in a population of 34 million people? Is this adequate? It has a development budget of about Shs 128 million. That can hardly buy one vehicle to do sensitisation around the country. No wonder the incidents of HIV/AIDS are increasing in the country. 

Mr Speaker, I want to reflect on the –(Member timed out.) 

3.34
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to begin by correcting the impression the chairperson made on page 13, under the general observations, that Otuke and Kisoro State Lodges enclosed private land without compensation. Actually, for the case of Otuke, people were compensated. They paid close to Shs 100 million for the acres of land that they bought in the area where the state lodge is located. 

I want to also comment on the way the DISOs who handle strategic and sensitive information concerning the security of this country are remunerated. Most of these people spend months without being paid and yet the work they do is very sensitive. I fear that in the future, they may be compromised. I pray that this House puts aside a special budget for them so that they are able to do their work effectively without being compromised by other people who may want to take advantage of them. 

On the issue of the RDCs, a lot has been said but some of them feel that maybe they were appointed without being consulted. I do not know how the appointing authority is going to –(Interruption) 

MS BUSINGYE-RUSOKE: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, it is true that there is a lot being said about the RDCs, and there is confusion and mixed feelings in the public. I have a case in point in Kabarole where a deputy RDC was appointed, and the picture being spread around is as if she was being dumped to give way, spoiling her strategies for the 2016 competition. This has gone to the newspapers and is all over the radios, as if we have a say in advising the President on whom to choose and whom not to choose. So, these are offices that seem to be a dumping place, according to people. It is ridiculous to minimise or despise the presidential powers. So, it should be clear that if these people are to be appointed –

MR BESISIRA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I happen to have served in this office of Resident District Commissioner and I am sure we are not very few in this House. Is the member in order to say that being appointed an RDC is being dumped when you are able to be there and come back here and be very useful to this nation? (Laughter) Is the member in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, my listening and understanding of the statement from the honourable member for Kabarole was to the effect that the impression is being created that that office is a dumping place whereas it is not. By saying that it is a dumping ground, they are abusing presidential powers. So, I think she does not violate the order that you are raising. Honourable member, please proceed. Honourable, you had finished and it is the honourable member who was holding the Floor.

MS NYAKECHO: In summary, Mr Speaker, I would also like to comment on the way –(Member timed out.)

3.53
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): I thank you for the opportunity, Mr Speaker. I was trying to go through the special programmes under the office of the Prime Minister and I found that there are no specific activities for the Teso ministry; I am wondering why. Whenever I go back to my constituency, which consists of those districts, I am asked about what the ministry is doing. Here, I see that Luwero is very clear, Karamoja is very clear, Lango and Northern Uganda are very clear but Teso is missing out. 

It is very unfortunate; maybe if they have been blocked somewhere, we need a very clear programme to know what we are doing for Teso and Bunyoro. Otherwise, our minister for Teso is in problems; people are up in arms and they are wondering what the ministry is doing. I think we do not even have staff. Please, clarify what activities the Minister for Teso is going to do in this financial year. I thank you.

3.54
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is basically on the following issues: One, the issue of RDCs renting houses for accommodation. Paying rent is becoming a problem. In order for their presence to be visible in districts, we need permanent accommodation for RDCs.

Two, the issue of arrears for Internal Security Organisation; training people to that level and you leave them without giving them their entitlements is very unfortunate. Once such a trained force becomes disgruntled, it can be a store for recruitment by people who have other motives and they can be very dangerous to state security.

The issue of GISOs; it is unfortunate that when a person is recruited to be a GISO – Like those ones who were recruited in 1995 are still serving as GISOs up today. Their terms and conditions should be stipulated so that they know their fate. Even when a person dies, they continue paying for just three months; so, they do not have job security. I think this should be taken very seriously.

When I was looking at the proposed budgetary allocations by the committee for ISO, having recommended that they should have a separate vote the committee should have gone ahead and budgeted for it under the proposed budget estimates. So, they allocate a vote for Internal Security Organisation and they give them what they are entitled to and then give us a total. That is what I would suggest. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.56
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you Mr Speaker. I want to take you to page 37. There is an item under (r) about the purchase of land meant for the development of markets. I am the Member of Parliament for Makindye East, where Ggaba Parish is, and I want to tell this House that this land that is being talked about has never been purchased in my constituency and it is not there. So, I want to know from the minister where the Shs 1.75 billion, which is indicated as having been used to purchase land for the market in Ggaba, is.

The second issue is about the school. The President donated or pledged a school to the people of Kansanga, and Kansanga is part of my constituency. I am aware that during the month of February this year, Shs 900 million was released for the construction of that school but it is not reflected in what is supposed to be done in this report. I also want the Minister for the Presidency to explain to this House where the Shs 900 million is and the fate of that USE school.  

Lastly, we passed money here during the last session of Parliament for the reconstruction of Kirudu Health Centre. However, when I look at this report on page 38, under 6.1.3, I see proposed fencing of various health centres and one of them is Kirudu. We approved money to reconstruct the whole – (Member timed out.)

3.58
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to draw the attention of the members to vote 002, which is State House, and in particular 4.2, which talks about the performance of State House. They show the wage, non-wage and development expenditure performance at 135.5 per cent, 251.8 per cent and 134 per cent respectively. They then give us the reason, that this was as a result of the supplementary budget, and that this was to cater for a shortfall due to fresh recruitment during the period under review. 

I want to refer you to page 11, 4.3.2, which is the proposed allocation under this vote. The total of that amount, wage, non wage and development, comes to Shs 63.234 billion. I am now wondering what has happened to the new recruitments. If you take them into account, you should be increasing that budget by a total Shs 85 billion. 

My question is to the minister and the committee chairperson is: have the people who were recruited been sacked or you are not budgeting for them so that later on, we come up with a supplementary? It would be best that when we are budgeting, we say it all so that at this stage, we start preparing for a possible supplementary budget, that is if you are just looking at the MTEF without considering that you have to get some other money from elsewhere to cover the gap. I thank you.

4.00
MR ABOUD KITATTA (NRM, Bukoto County West, Lwengo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work done. My concern is about the model villages on page 11, number 7. The committee says that there are model villages which were worked on by the President’s Office. Can we have the list of those model villages so that Members of Parliament can have a chance of taking their voters to go and study in those model villages? That is my first concern.

My second concern is about the Media Centre. The Media Centre is in Kampala. The department concerned should have more media centres upcountry so that people are sensitised in local languages, and at the same time be sensitised about development programmes, especially economics other than only about politics, which we have always heard from the Media Centre. 

Lastly, on Luweero; we have been told that money was distributed to some districts. We would be interested in the activities done other than money being distributed to people in the districts. Thank you.

4.02
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the recommendation on Kyankwanzi and State House undertaking. However, I am concerned about the will to fight corruption. I think as the appointing authority, there should be a will to even sack those who have been involved in any corruption –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, as we deliberate on very important matters, is it in order for the Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister to sleep away in the course of serious discussions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the honourable Second Deputy Premier is in deep contemplation of the matters that are going on. (Laughter) 

MS ANYWAR: I was talking about the will to fight corruption. I am challenging the appointing authority to punish or drop those who are involved in any corruption. As long as the headquarters of corruption is still based in the President’s Office, and yet there is power to appoint, the political will not show that we are really serious about this. 

I would challenge the President, who is the appointing authority, to deal with corruption issues without rotating or recycling them in the system.

The issue of facilitation of RDCs at the expense of civil servants; at the expense of our teachers; at the expense of our medical personnel and judges, and yet they are the very people who are mistreating our Ugandans in the villages, is not acceptable. It should be taken note of that RDCs are not independent minded in their work because their offices are used to rig the will of Ugandans. Therefore, they are not supposed to be given priority at the expense of other civil servants. 

Mr Speaker, I am talking about the issue of coordination by the Office of the Prime Minister. With due respect to my good friend, I think this office is overloaded. It is really overloaded –(Member timed out.)

4.05
MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work done. Mine is one major concern. When there was war in Luweero, after the war, there was affirmative action for that area. When there was war in Northern Uganda, after the war, there was affirmative action. When there was war in Teso, there was affirmative action; and yet the first destruction in this country was in Bunyoro. We were mistreated; we paid a very high price; up to today, there has been no affirmative action for this part of the country. Even when were promised a Bunyoro ministry, which I have heard that someone was appointed to fill, it doesn’t appear here. 

The question is, Is this a forgotten part of this country? Are you remembering us today because we have oil? There is no affirmative action that has been done in this part of the country. This is the area where roads are reportedly the worst in this country. (Interjection) They will make the roads because there is oil. Even the first road that is being constructed heads down where the oil is. (Interjection) We have been very productive, - Can I be protected, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have the protection of the Speaker.

MR BESISIRA: Mr Speaker, I am requesting Government to find something affirmative for this part of the country. I want to get assurance from my colleague, the chairperson of this committee. He has a budget for State House of about Shs 62 billion. The experience I have had, in the years I have been in this House is that after three or four months, there will be a supplementary yet -(Member timed out.) 

4.07
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will go ahead to comment on Vote 1303 under the Prime Minister’s Office. Here it is mentioned that Luweero-Rwenzori, had eight achievements in the last financial year 2011/2012. Northern Uganda had nine achievements. Karamoja had 11 achievements. In Teso, we had zero achievements. We are wondering why Teso should be under the Prime Minister’s Office when the Prime Minister’s Office decides to allocate funds to other regions and leaves out Teso. 

Recently, when we were considering these budgetary proposals, they had proposed to buy tractors for the youth of Kaberamaido, Katakwi, Bukedea and Amuria, but right now when we look at your budget, nothing is mentioned about Teso. 

We are also looking at war claimants. For a long period of time the Office of the Prime Minister through the President’s Office had been requested to look into matters of compensating war claimants in Teso; look at your budget. Mr Chairman, the recommendation you made, that at least the Prime Minister’s Office should look for funds in order to assess the proper claimants in Teso, was a mockery to the people of Teso. I think this is a very weak recommendation. We want the Prime Minister’s Office to consider the fate of the people of Teso.

I, therefore, want to inform my colleague who said that affirmative action took place in Teso, that it has never benefited the people of Teso.

There is one other thing I want to comment on. We have a minister of ethics in this country. I have seen under a certain vote that we have appropriated funds to that vote, but we continue to hear stories of huge sums of money being stolen from ministries (Member timed out.)

4.10
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report. I have two concerns about the office of the Prime Minister. I am looking at Vote 003 and I am interested in disaster preparedness, management and refugees and the management of special programmes like the Luweero, Rwenzori, Northern Uganda and so forth. 

I am concerned about the issues of disaster. When disaster strikes our areas, you write letters, you bring photographs to the office, nobody responds to say that the maize or tarpaulins are available or not available, but you will hear that some districts are getting as and when they write. So, I would like to know how you decide who deserves and who doesn’t deserve these items. At least if the items are not available, the people who have written should get letters of regret or letters of hope to wait forever or the next year, but there should be something written to the people who make requests. 

There are cases of wind and storms and hurricanes. It has happened to my constituency and I have never got a response from the office. Secondly, I am looking at the Luweero-Rwenzori programme. Mbarara District is supposed to be among those districts of the Luweero–Rwenzori programme. I am looking at the past performance and I do not see Mbarara. I am looking at the future plans and I do not see Mbarara District, and I don’t know what is happening. I know Mbarara is one of the districts, but we have never been invited to these meetings. At the beginning of this programme, we even got a small fund for a school. So, I don’t know when Mbarara will be –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will have the shadow minister for this sector – there are two sectors; there is the Presidency and the Office of the Prime Minister. Are you handling both? [MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: “Yes, both.”] Okay, you have five minutes. 

4.12
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AND REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Jack Wamanga-Wamai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The President derives his mandate from Article 99 of the Constitution, which spells out the duties of the President, and among them is to promote the welfare of the people of Uganda and promote territorial integrity of this country. And to be able to do that, this Parliament approves money for the President. In the 2012/2013 Budget, the President has been given Shs 95,018,286,048. But to be able to carry out this budget, one must follow the five-year plan and have discipline. However, for the years that this Parliament has been here, the President has been coming in to ask for more money. So, there is indiscipline in the Office of the President not to run the Presidency according to the budget that is given to him. That is why they ask for supplementaries. 

We have seen that the President’s Office has now become a meeting place. People are summoned from all over the country. Meetings and meetings are held in the State House and at the end of those meetings, khaki envelopes are given out. So, the State House has become a clearing house. People have even ridiculed the Office of the President because all businessmen who come to this House go to State House for clearance and to get contracts. So, the Presidency has lost meaning and it is this House that can protect the Office of the President because a lot has been heaped on that house and there are seven votes under the Presidency. We have over 100 advisors to the President. We have read in papers that these advisors have come up to say that they have never seen the President, but these are people being rewarded. 

The creation of more districts to appoint RDCs and deputy RDCS is wasteful expenditure. We do not need all these districts; we do not need all these RDCs or deputy RDCs. We need money to go to useful sectors. The chairperson of the committee pointed out that votes like the Uganda AIDS Commission need money. It has come out now that AIDS is on the increase. So, we should remove money from some wasteful areas such as of RDCs and give to the AIDS Commission to fight a scourge that is taking our people. 

Celebration of the golden jubilee for Uganda; this vote has been given Shs6 4 billion. Can you imagine Shs 64 billion for the celebrations while our people are swimming in poverty? Why can’t this money be shifted to useful areas? It is just wasteful, wasteful and wasteful! Mr Speaker and Members –(Interruption) 

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would not have come in, but I have been listening attentively to the colleague on the Floor and he has continued to say that Government is wasteful especially when appointing RDCs and their deputies. Is it in order for the honourable member to continue castigating other Presidential appointees when he was once a beneficiary to that Presidential appointment when he served as an ambassador until when he was recalled? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is struggling to forget the past. So, I think we give him that benefit. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. What I was saying is that State House has turned into a clearing house. Even with the issue of scholarships, we have a whole Ministry of Education that should give out scholarships to Ugandans, but we see some people who are favoured. More than 8,800 scholarships are given out by  State House. We want these scholarships to be referred to the Ministry of Education, and to be given out on quota system so that some poor people can also benefit from these scholarships. 

Ethics and integrity

The department of ethics and integrity was created to look at the morality of Ugandans, but you can see what is happening in this country. Corruption –(Member timed out.)

4.18
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR SPECIAL REGIONS (Mr Stephen Ochola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Special regions fall under the Office of the Prime Minister and I am grateful that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is around, because I want to start with the Office of the Prime Minister himself. 

Of recent, you have heard of the Office of the Prime Minister being in deep corruption scandals and I would like the Prime Minister to at least give us a statement on what is happening in his office. If the Office of the Prime Minister can be as corrupt as that, then I get worried, because I remember in the last financial year, I said here that I was so scared that even the allocations for special regions were not going to be implemented well because of corruption and indeed, we have seen what is happening. So, I would like the Prime Minister to give us some information on that. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at Karamoja Affairs, by today, I would expect to have water for production if we are to improve Karamoja. We can make Karamoja a green land. We have a lot of water bodies; we have a lot of rain water; but nothing has been done. What we have there are two or three small dams. We need something bigger which can irrigate Karamoja. We should be talking about irrigation now if we are to improve Karamoja.

When you look at Northern Uganda, we initially thought that Northern Uganda would only handle those districts which were affected by the war, but instead, many areas were brought on board, even those where Kony never stepped, and what we are getting there is very meagre.  So, I would ask the government to look into it and maybe add more funding to this region. Otherwise, we shall not see the real reconstruction of Northern Uganda. 

PRDP is almost losing its meaning because we had thought that it was an affirmative action, but there is very little funding currently. The other normal funding should have continued and have the PRDP as an affirmative action. But it is also losing meaning. So, Government should look into that.  I had expected the committee to address that issue. 

When you come to Teso Affairs, it is even worse. In this year’s budget, Teso Affairs has zero; there is nothing which has been allocated to Teso Affairs. I pity my senior colleague who is on the other side.  I don’t know what she is going to tell the people of Teso because she doesn’t have anything to deliver. So, we should have expected a programme coming from Government with planned activities and the funding. But the funds are not there nor are the planned activities and I don’t know why that ministry was created. I would recommend that Government scraps that ministry. 

The same thing with the Ministry of Bunyoro Affairs; there are no planned activities and no funds. Why is the ministry there? Is it just an issue of having a minister or we need a ministry? And if you have a ministry, there should be planned activities and funding given so that the people benefit. So, I hope that the Prime Minister will give us light on this. 

I would also like to address the issue of Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA). Could the Minister in charge of KCCA address the issues of the differences between the political leadership and the Executive Director of KCCA. If these wrangles continue, I bet you, Mr Speaker, we shall not have good work in the city and yet they have started doing well. I would have expected     that we handled those wrangles and got a smooth administration of KCCA and thus a better city to live in. 

As I conclude, Luweero-Rwenzori also has the same problem of funding. Some of the areas I have visited which are under this ministry are not getting any funding. It is almost only the districts of Luweero and a few surrounding ones that are benefitting. I would like the government to look into it and also increase the funding for Luweero-Rwenzori so that other areas benefit as well.  If only the funding could increase and other areas are brought on board, I would be very happy to find the people who suffered during the war in those areas enjoying better life like in the other regions. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will have two slots for the ministers of Government – Office of the President and Office of the Prime Minister. 

4.24
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Muruuli Mukasa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and honourable members for the very wonderful response towards this report. 

I agree with the honourable Member for Aswa that these patriotic classes should really not be partisan, and indeed they are not partisan. What happened in that unfortunate incidence when the honourable member reached the venue, the people at the gate wanted to make consultations and by the time they came back, because of his busy schedule, the honourable member had actually left. Otherwise, -(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Rt Hon. Speaker, with all the due respect, I expect that all of us should have some average level of response to justify the dignity we all hold. Is the Minister in order, therefore, to turn my statement down because I said I got a call from Mr Kaweesi who said they didn’t need politicians there?  

And yet, I was later told that a politician belonging to NRM went there and addressed the people. Is he, therefore, in order to say that I had a busy schedule and I couldn’t go there when I didn’t know what was taking place? I was actually going to visit that school and not going to address the people who were undergoing training. Maybe it was an opportunity to know what was really going on there. Is he, therefore, in order to fail to understand me when I was loud and clear? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the Speaker to be able to rule on this subject would call for evidence to be adduced because those are factual matters where I was not involved. I am unable to rule. 

MR MURUULI MUKASA: Rt Hon. Speaker, yes it is true the number of Presidential advisors has gone up because of the practical requirements for these people. It is also true, and I quite agree, that their portfolios should be evaluated and the process has actually started, so that we can have value for money. 

I quite agree over the question of RDCs. Yes, the qualifications of RDCs – we shall oblige to the committee by availing the qualifications of the newly appointed people, but there is no need for the old ones who have retired, after all the committee did its due diligence. So, the committee will have time to look at the qualifications of the newly appointed RDCs.

I think there is value and relevance for the votes which have been covered by the committee to still be within the Presidency. They are not there by accident; they are there – even this Parliament decide that they should be there. There is a very big reason why they should actually remain there. 
I quite agree that the remuneration for DISOs and their budgeting is still inadequate. I am quite happy that the august House has noted the gravity of the matter and I think the necessary response will be given so that these very important people are well looked after and they continue to serve us very well. 

As for RDCs feeling a little bit uncomfortable, well it is up to them. The President makes an appointment, and it is the RDC to either accept or turn it down if they feel they are not ready and there will be no harm done. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, the Member for Makindye East raised the issue of the market land for Gaba. Indeed, it is true that this land was never bought. However, money had been procured, but because of lack of an established structure in KCC, which as you remember took a long time, the staffing problem also took a long time, and so there were delays. So, this money had to be unfortunately returned to the Consolidated Fund. 

However, the commitment had been made earlier that the Gaba Market would be bought; the commitment still remains and as soon as this budget is over, another request will be made to Finance so that this money is availed and the Gaba Market is bought. It is one of those areas which have to have a market. Mr Speaker, (Hon. Lukyamuzi rose_) I do not have time, please, excuse me, CP President. (Laughter) (Member timed out.)

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LUWEERO TRIANGLE (Mrs Rose Nsereko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There were two questions that were raised on Luweero and Ruwenzori, and I will be very brief because other ministers will also make responses. First, Mbarara District is supposed to be under Luweero-Ruwenzori Programme and it is actually under it. However, because of the budgetary constraints, especially the budget cuts we are all aware of that all ministries, departments and agencies suffered in the last financial year, we were unable to disburse funds to all the districts. Mbarara was one of those districts that missed out.

As for hon. Kitatta, he said that funds were distributed to 17 – actually there are 43 district under Luweero-Ruwenzori Programme and funds were distributed to only 17 of them because of the limited resources. Hon. Kitatta was asking what the money was used for. 

First of all, the procedure is that we send money to districts on the basis of the work plans they have developed. I must say that the emphasis is on household incomes. For example, we provided tractors in Bunyangabu, heifers in Kiboga and Nakaseke and; motorcycles and sewing machines – skills development programmes in Wakiso and Kabarole; others are used for the construction of classrooms in those areas where we find that there are dire needs. Some of them are for monumental purposes and opening access roads. For instance, when seeds or maize mills are provided and they cannot access the markets, we have to open up those roads. Thank you.

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TESO AFFAIRS (Ms Christine Amongin): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee chairperson and the committee members for their report. Teso Affairs ministry has got a budget of Shs 2 billion and Bunyoro Affairs ministry has Shs 1 billion. My Ministry has planned to achieve the following outputs this financial year:

(a)	To establish an office in the sub-region.
(b)	To complete the Teso Development Plan.
(c)	To procure and distribute tractors for the youth in the districts of Kaberamaido, Katakwi, Amuria and Serere.
(d)	To procure and distribute oxen and ox-ploughs for animal traction, starting with the vulnerable groups, especially the women. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, too.

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Rebecca Amuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee and the Shadow Minister, hon. Stephen Ochola. I begin with a question from hon. Besisira who asked whether we had forgotten Bunyoro. I wish to assure you that Bunyoro is not forgotten – you have a ministry now, which will soon become operational. However, Masindi and Buliisa are under PRDP.

Secondly, there is a Member who asked why we do not have water for production in Karamoja. I wish to say that we are on the same page. We have started, but we cannot do it at once; we are moving on and moving very well. 

There was a concern from a Member that the Northern Uganda PRDP is overstretched. I have explained this over and over again that the war was not only restricted to the North; the effects went farther and beyond. And we think we should help the rest of the areas since they also helped us during the war. We are 55 districts and, therefore, some of the PRDP activities extend to Teso. So, do not think that Teso has got only Shs 2 billion because part of the funds will come from Northern Uganda ministry. Moreover part of our resources will also go to Karamoja. I, therefore, wish to state that we are on the same page honourable members and nothing is amiss. (Laughter) Thank you.

MRS KAROORO OKURUT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee. I wish to correct the impression created by my honourable colleague regarding the Golden Jubilee celebrations. He said that the budget is Shs 64 billion; no, it is just Shs 21 billion. I also wish to inform you honourable members that there is construction going on at Kololo Airstrip and even monuments being built.  Government is building four commemorative schools. So, generally, we should not downplay the importance of 50 years of Independence; it is a landmark; it is monumental and it is historical!. So, we should be proud of it.

Regarding the media centres, I agree, and we should support any budget that spreads out the media centres throughout the country. Thank you.

4.38
THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think there was only one issue raised regarding disaster by the honourable member from Mbarara. She wanted to know why we had not responded to the heavy rains which occurred in Mbarara.  I have explained to Members from time to time that the chairperson of the disaster committee in the district is the DISO. Therefore, correspondence to the Office of the Prime Minister should be by the DISO. We receive a lot of letters from Members and we do not want to be rude, but some of them are not really genuine. And some Members have attempted to use the food from the Prime Minister’s office as an item for popularity in the district. (Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order and I am really very sympathetic to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness. First, he says you must go through the DISO as though that is part of the structure under the Prime Minister’s office. Is it in order for the Minister to belittle Members by saying that whenever they raise issues concerning their constituencies, it is because of popularity? He has not even mentioned who that Member is and how that food was distributed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the statement you make without substantiating will leave this House in disrepute. So, I would ask you to substantiate your statement; if you cannot then you are ruled out of order and should withdraw it. 

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I was just beginning to speak when I was interrupted. I was going to explain that the right way - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please substantiate.

DR MALLINGA: Well for example, the honourable members from Mbarara and Kisoro wrote to the Office of the Prime Minister. We sent delegates to go and investigate, but the people on the ground said they did not want food -(Interruption)

MS BOONA: Mr Speaker I rise on a point of order. Is the honourable minister in order to make a statement in a manner that implies that I was telling a lie when in fact the letters I brought were not even written by me? They were written by the district. There were photographs to show the hailstorm. How do I, as a Member of Parliament, create a hailstorm and take photographs and then pretend there is a hailstorm? Is the honourable minister in order to substantiate that I was telling a lie when actually I did not even write the letters? I was used as a channel from the district to bring these letters to his ministry. Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this calls for further substantiation, otherwise you will have to withdraw and apologise to the Members. 

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, indeed there was a storm; indeed bananas were blown down, but when we sent a delegation to go and investigate if there was need for food in Mbarara what they told us is that because of the storm which had blown the bananas down, it had created a lot of food. The bananas had to be consumed at that time because they had been blown down. Subsequently, it needed more review to see if there was need for food or not and the people told us that they did not, at that time, need food. 

And the same thing happened in Kisoro. The hon. Member of Parliament from Kisoro wrote because of a storm which was there, bananas were blown down, we sent a delegation and they told us categorically, they did not need food at that time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable member, on account of your substantiation of the statement you made, you cannot be ruled otherwise. You have concluded. I now ask the Prime Minister. 

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much for a very fair judgement, Mr Speaker. Actually, the honourable Members of Parliament should work with their districts. Whenever there is a catastrophe in the district, please the chairperson for disaster in the district is the DISO. Let him write to us and we shall send a delegation to go and verify and find out what the needs are. There are some needs which are specific to ministries. For example, if a school is blown down that goes to the Ministry of Education -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Dr Stephen Malinga, Minister for Disaster Preparedness. Mr Minister you have repeatedly told us that when there is a disaster in a district the right person to be informed is the DISO. And yet in my own long service with Civil Service, the office of the DISO is not in the traditional Civil Service structure. 

I had the privilege of working in Ministry of Rehabilitation, which used to perform the same role that you and your docket are executing now, and at that time, until recently, we had the responsibilities bestowed upon the offices of Chief Administrative Officers. Before that they used to be called DCs or District Commissioners. You know that very well because you were a member of that great party when the DCs were in place. (Laughter) 

May we now be clarified as to what made this abrupt change, running away from the traditional Civil Service into the security docket when disaster is not in any way a security matter? Can you explain?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, let us roll this up. 

DR MALINGA: I think the honourable minister has been here for a long time. He says he used to work - that was a long time ago; there have been changes. If there is a disaster in your district, follow what I have told you. 

Mr Speaker, we know that all ministries do not have enough money to respond to what they should be doing. Disaster is not an exception. If we were to respond to every single disaster we will not be effective like we have been. Therefore - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please resume your seat. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have five minutes. 

4.47
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to respond to a few critical questions that were raised in the general debate. I am glad that the minister has responded to this question about the special - Hon. Stephen Ochola raised the question of Teso and Bunyoro. These were part of the Northern Uganda programme, generally, under NUSAF and PRDP, and so, although they were separated, until they are fully established, they are still benefitting from that budget. But as the minister said, this is going to be done as we prepare better to run those dockets.

The question of corruption in the Office of the Prime Minister

Mr Speaker, as we all know, there is a matter that has arisen, which is now before court. Police has investigated and so far investigations have led to the laying of charges against some officials in the ministry and I do not think, Mr Speaker, you will allow me to say more than that on that subject.

But let me assure colleagues that no stone will remain unturned until everything has been looked into and whatever went wrong will be exposed and handled effectively. 

There is an audit report by the Auditor-General. It came out recently. We are all looking forward to reading through that. There will be a value-for-money audit, which we have asked for - a special forensic audit. So, everything will be done.

I am happy with the work the Permanent Secretary has been doing in terms of raising the alarms in the first place, and steps he has taken to ensure that these investigations are facilitated to their logical conclusion. That is point No.1

Point No.2 - Wasteful expenditure

Mr Speaker, the hon. Jack Wamai is a very distinguished diplomat, but I think he exceeded in diplomacy and needs to expand a little more than just diplomacy because - read the Constitution. The Constitution in Article 203 - that is why I am carrying this Constitution;  I wanted to read it for Jack. It says, “Resident District Commissioner: There shall be for each district a district commissioner who shall be appointed by the President”. So, for Jack to suggest what he was saying -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mean the hon. Wamai.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: He is hon. Wamai, yes. Hon. Wamai, Mr Speaker, is also Jack. You know Stephen, when I refer to you as Stephen, I do not add honourable. If I were saying Ochola, I would say hon. Ochola. Now, I will have to teach you these as we go along. (Laughter)

So, hon. Wamai, therefore, to suggest what he was saying would be to suggest that the President should act in breach of the Constitution. So, as long as there is a district, the President is bound by law to appoint a district commissioner. Maybe you may want to consider proposing an amendment of this article so that that wish of yours can be realised. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for giving way. I would want to get clarification from the Prime Minister concerning the undertaking of his office in reference to the nodding syndrome. I have seen reference here to Northern Uganda and my good friend is the one in charge of coordinating interventions on nodding syndrome. I know that my brother here is also a chair though very disappointing. I would want to get that clarification, the interventions where you are the chair and coordinator should be reflected in the undertaking of your office. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I will quickly respond to that. The question of nodding syndrome is a question that is multisectoral. We have handled it under the many sectors; under the votes of Ministry of Health and Ministry of Agriculture, the spraying of - and so forth. It is not reflected as a stand-alone item, but it is well covered in the provisions of the budget. 

Now, I was talking finally - because I know your time is not in my favour - on the question of Kampala City Council. I am interested to know hon. Ssimbwa about the statement you made, that the land which is reported to have been purchased at Shs 1,750,000,000 is not there. We will follow that up, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, “A Member holding the Floor shall be heard in silence.” That is the rule of this House.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Finally, KCCA and the question of the political and the -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Our time is up. Finance has some short statement to make in two minutes.

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I just want to read figures here, which we thought should be covered by the Hansard to correct the various allocations as has been shown in the report.

While I thank the chairman of the committee for a report well written, I thought I should make this clarification. 

Office of the President 

•	Recurrent: Shs 84,816,110,000 
•	Development: Shs 4,939,592,000 

A total of Shs 89,755,702,000. 

Office of the Prime Minister

•	Recurrent: Shs 27,398,415,000; 
•	Development: Shs 151,214,904,000 

A total of Shs 178,513,319,000.

Ethics and Integrity

•	Recurrent: Shs 4,017,906,000 
•	Development: Shs 210,593,000 

A total of Shs 4,228,503,000.

Kampala Capital City Authority -(Interjections)

Mr Speaker, I thought we had been given permission to read these figures so that the Hansard properly captures these figures. That is what I was meant to understand last Monday. I am reading registered figures. Mr Speaker, can I seek your guidance on these matters, please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you saying that the figures read by the chairman and contained in the committee report is not the correct figure which was submitted.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Precisely, because those figures have been re-adjusted and I thought this House is entitled to know the correct figures as adjusted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, why I am asking that. The committee has proposed reallocations on page 45. That is what the committee has reallocated and come up with these final figures. The minister is restating the initial figures that were submitted to the committee. I see no contradiction. We will be able to reconcile this at an appropriate stage, but he needs to restate for the record.

What he is trying to do is to restate the figures that were sent to the committee. There were figures that were sent to the committee and then there are figures that the committee has proposed based on their reallocation arrangements. What the minister is trying to do is to restate the figures that were sent to the committee because the committee has come with new proposals. That is how I have understood it to be because I have seen on page 45, the committee has proposed allocations meaning they have made alterations to the initial figures that were sent to them. 

I am trying to do exactly that meaning the committee has made some changes in the initial figures that were submitted to the committee and they have made their recommendations. The minister is trying to restate what they had sent to the committee. Not to overwrite but put the two positions because these matters will be reconciled at the final stage when we come to supply. So, I think, let the minister restate these figures and we save our time, please. We are approving the committee report.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

Kampala Capital City Authority 

Recurrent: Shs36,145 
Development: Shs 38,253,480,000 excluding NTR. 

A total of Shs 74,399,318,000. 

I wish to submit, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think this situation just brings us in the know of the two situations. What is going to happen now is that when we come to supply, we’ll do it with the further figures which are harmonised. That is the figure which we will deal with. Mr Chairman, you have a minute to sum up and ask the House to -

5.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Barnabas Tinkasiimire): Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Minister of Finance is only stating the position which is in the policy statement. We met the respective minister, unfortunately, he is not a vote holder of any of those policy statements which we reviewed and we have proposed reallocation. The report we have made here is contained in the recommendations of the committee and I am begging to report and ask you to adopt it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAEKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Report of the Sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs on the sectors listed for the financial year 2012/2013 be adopted by the House. I put the question to that motion.

Question put, and agreed to.

(Report adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs first lay a copy of the report on the Table and then we proceed with the next committee.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the Report on the Sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs and I beg that it should be adopted. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Yes, chairman, proceed now. You have 15 minutes.

5.04
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am representing the Chairman, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Frank Tumwebaze, who was recently elevated to the level of a Cabinet minister.
 
Section 9 and 11 of the Budget Act 2001, and Rule 135 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, mandate sessional committees to critically examine Government’s recurrent and development budget estimates and make recommendations for general debate in the House.

Pursuant to these sections of the Budget Act 2001, and the Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development examined seven votes under its jurisdiction. These votes include:

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; 

Vote 130 - Treasury Operations; 

Vote 108 - National Planning Authority; 

Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor General;

Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority; 

Vote 143- Uganda Bureau of Statistics; and

Vote 153 - Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority

Mr Speaker, because of limited time, I will not read everything in the report as Members are being supplied with copies. I will go straight to observations, and not all of them, but the key ones, and then go to conclusions and the prayers of the committee. 

Under observations, as most of the Members of Parliament may know, Finance has got various vote functions and each vote function is appropriated differently. In this financial year, the main observation that was made under macro-economic policy and management was that the proposed allocation for the macro policy and management programme is Shs 75.745 billion reflecting additional funding of Shs 17.632 billion against the financial year 2011/2012 approved budget. This was on account of new funds coming on board. These include; The Graduate Venture Capital Fund of Shs 16 billion; Youth Venture Capital Fund of Shs 3.2 billion; and Agriculture Guarantee Funds of Shs 15 billion.

Tax Incentives and Waivers

The committee observed that Uganda’s domestic revenue mobilisation, which has stagnated at about Shs 12 percent of GDP is substantially lower than the sub-Saharan average of 20 percent and the lowest in the East African region. 

The committee learnt that Government had undertaken to pay taxes on behalf of the following firms: BIDCO Uganda Limited for 25 years; Picfare Industries for one year; Roofing Mills Limited for 10 years; Sameer Agriculture and Livestock Limited for five years; Quality Chemical Industries Limited; Southern Range Nyanza Limited; and Steel and Tube Industries Limited.

The committee observed that tax incentives for selected companies do not provide a level ground for competition in Uganda as a liberalised economy and can easily result into a monopoly with its defects. Issuance of tax exemptions and waivers worsens the already narrow tax base and revenue loss is estimated to be 2 percent of GDP.  

The committee recommends that criterion modalities to issue tax incentives by the minister should be made clear to Parliament otherwise, the issuance of tax exemptions should be suspended. (Applause)

Non Performing Assets Recovery Tribunal (NPART)

The proposed allocation to NPART in the financial year 2012/2013 is Shs 231 million of which a tax wage of N-PART Trust is Shs 124,764,000 and staff wage to the NPART Tribunal is Shs 105,761,000. In the financial year 2010/2011, Parliament appropriated funds for the residual winding up of NPART and agreed to reject any further request for more funds. 

In the financial year, 2011/2012, the committee recommended that the minister tables the Winding Up Bill before Parliament within six months, and that within six months, the minister reports on the status of the assets under NPART and the incomes recovered if any from the sale or hire of these assets. 

For a period of four years, Parliament has always been informed that a Bill is before Cabinet. The committee interfaced with the ministry during consideration of indicative allocation, on 25 April, 2012 and agreed to end NPART activities before end of financial year 2011/12. It was further agreed that no more funding is expected to NPART activities in this financial year.

The committee, therefore, recommends that within six months, the residual winding up activities of NPART should be finalised and no further requests for more funds will be entertained by Parliament. 

Accordingly, the committee recommends that Shs 115,500,000 be appropriated and a balance of Shs 115,500,000 be reallocated to other priority areas. 

Budget Release Performance

The committee noted that resource mobilisation has a satisfactory performance. Tax revenue collection amounted to Shs 6.208 trillion against the target of Shs 6.169 trillion, thereby registering a cumulative surplus of Shs 39 billion. 

The committee, however, notes that despite this satisfactory performance, total expenditure releases to MBAs underperformed by Shs 137 billion against the target of Shs 9,869 billion. The underperformance in expenditure releases was made worse when Shs 700 billion in supplementary budget resulted into 7 percent divergence between approved budget and final outturn. 

The committee further learnt that Government spent Shs 150 billion over and above what was appropriated by Parliament. The committee observed that supplementary budgets undermine budget credibility and the blame has always been put to Parliament as the institution charged with appropriation. 

The committee urges Parliament to refrain from approving supplementary budgets, especially those that result from the would-be foreseen activities as they would show weak planning. Government should also observe budget discipline as supplementary budgets result into budget distortions and negatively impact on service delivery. 

Financial Management Services

The proposed allocation to this department in this financial year 2012/2013 is Shs 6.244 billion of which wages is Shs 202 million and non-wage recurrent is Shs 6.04 billion. 

During examination of the planned activities of the department, the committee was not satisfied with the proposed allocation vis-a-vis planned activities and efforts to get additional information were futile. Considering the planned activities, the committee considers reducing the budget allocation from Shs 6.244 billion to only Shs 4.04 billion. The committee recommends that Shs 2 billion be reallocated to other priority interventions. 

Development policy

Research and monitoring
 
The proposed allocation to this vote function is Shs 28.076 billion reflecting a 37 percent reduction against the financial year 2011/2012 approved budget. With the proposed allocation, the vote function plans to prepare background to the budget, Government outlays analysis report for financial year 2011/2012 and a poverty status report. 

Presidential Initiative on Banana and Industrial Development (PIBID)

The committee observed that despite PIBID’s continuous budget allocations now amounting to over Shs 40 billion, the dream of having a state-of-the-art community-based banana processing industry at Bushenyi operating through a technical business incubator is far from coming to the end. 

While the committee noted with appreciation the strong commitment of the President to support research and scientific initiatives, PIBID is a project with unclear direction. Further still, PIBID is faced with accountability issues got in the financial and value-for-money audit according to the Auditor General’s Report for the year ended 30 June 2011. 

Among the issues are irregular payments of allowances to start totalling to Shs 92,491,385,000 bonus payment of staff amounting to Shs 494,253,000 and among the many financial audit queries, reference can be made to pages 111 – 110 of the annual report of the Auditor General for the year ended 30 June, volume 2. 

In the value for money audit, for the management of PIBID from financial year 2004/05 to financial year 2011/12, The Auditor General, concluded that despite receiving 97 percent of the appropriated funds to a tune of Shs 40,122,000,000 the project objectives have not been attained. Page 173 – 195 of the Annual Report of the Auditor General for the year ended 30 June, 2011 (Vol.5). 

The committee observes further that that escalation of project cost has led to increased burden on Government resources and tax payers. The committee further noted that in the absence of a clear authoritative plan has meant that:

1.	The scope of the project is not clearly defined;
2.	The investment projection are not clearly defined; and
3.	The timeline for implementation to a commercial production are unclear.

Therefore, the committee recommends that only Shs 5 billion for administrative costs be allocated to the project as a clear strategic plan defining the timeline, scope and commercial sustainability of the project is defined. 

The committee further recommends that the balance of Shs 5.2 billion to PIBID be re-allocated to other priority interventions and in particular to the support of other scientists projects. 

Youth Venture Capital Fund

The committee observed that a proposed budget of Shs 6.5 billion has been allocated to the Youth Venture Fund for which Shs 3.25 billion is from GoU and Shs 3.25 billion is bank contribution – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, I propose you go to page 30 and deal with the conclusions.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your guidance. On page 30, we have got conclusions and prayers. Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee calls upon Government to considered the census as a priority and, therefore, should identify resources to carryout preparatory census activities and finally the census in August 2013. 

With indicative multi-investments in infrastructure, education, energy and health sectors, a strengthened PPDA will ensure a transparent procurement process that will give rise to the most efficient firms taking on contracts and once this happens, the Office of the Auditor General will ensure that there is value for money. 
Therefore, there is need to bridge the resource gap in these institutions to effectively execute their mandates.

I now move that considering the observations and recommendations of the committee, Parliament appropriates the following estimates for the respective ministries, departments and spending agencies:

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development  

•	Recurrent Expenditure: Shs 47,972,776,000
•	Development Expenditure: Shs 203,079,718,000

Vote 108 - National Planning Authority

•	Recurrent Expenditure: Shs 8,923,234,000
•	Development Expenditure: Shs 580,416,000

Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor General

•	Recurrent Expenditure: Shs 39,400,352,000
•	Development Expenditure: Shs 20,719,629,000

Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority

•	Recurrent Expenditure: Shs 189,720,084,000
•	Development Expenditure: Shs 17,400,000,000

Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics

•	Recurrent Expenditure: Shs 20,620,768,000
•	Development Expenditure: Shs 24,430,904,000

Vote 153 - Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA)

•	Recurrent Expenditure: Shs 6,597,406,000
•	Development Expenditure: Shs 384,000,000

I, therefore, urge the House to adopt this report. I beg to report.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much, Chairperson. This is another committee that has brought forward a Member to present the report and we are happy for that. Honourable members, we will limit our debate to 20 minutes, taking two minutes each.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget estimates for the financial year 2012/2013. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. I thank you. We will limit debate to 20 minutes and each member will take two minutes. 

5.25
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): I thank you. I want to thank the committee for a job well done and will go straight to page 4. I would like to support the committee on the waiver of tax incentives, and would also like to commend that among the tax waivers - I think the Ministry of Finance should explain. When you look at the Budget Speech, on the Value-Added Tax, they are saying that they are reinstating VAT exemption on gambling and lottery services. I do believe that people who are really involved in these games have money. Why don’t we tax them? Why should they be exempted? 

I remember in the Finance Act of the last financial year, we did tax these people because we knew that they could afford. One of the major cannons and principles of taxation is – those people who are in luxury, who can afford, should be taxed to bridge the gap between the poor and the rich. So, the Ministry of Finance should tell us what the problem is with taxing these gamblers who are the fraudsters, who have money. Why should we exempt them? 

The second observation is on page 2; the NPART. I think it is very redundant that we are still providing these activities in the budget. This money can be appropriated and given to other activities because this Shs 11.115 billion cannot do much.

Lastly, I would also like to thank the Minister for Finance when she waived the threshold of Pay-As-You-Earn to Shs 235,000 per person. I would also like to request the Minister for Finance to also look at the business community. The threshold of VAT, which was established in 1996, was Shs 50 million. The exchange rate for the dollar was around Shs 1,000 but now –(Member timed out.)

5.28
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a job well done, and I will go to page 7 on the Presidential Initiative on Bananas in Bushenyi. I am a member of the Science and Technology Committee and we visited this project. Some good work has been done, some research is being done, and some structures have been constructed. 

However, the problem with this project is the definition of the boundaries of the functions of this project. We have research mixed with commercialisation. We have professors and people who are producing, and it is just a mixed bag. We have to define where research stops and where commercialisation and production starts. We either go for a parastatal for commercialisation or use UDC as a vehicle for investment in the commercialisation, if we can sort out the legal issues surrounding the reinstatement of UDC as a vehicle for investment by Government. Otherwise, at the moment, it is a mixed situation of research and commercialisation, and I think that is why they are having problems of accountability.

On page 9, there is this issue of the Public-Private Partnership again. We cannot over emphasise this point. We must get a regulatory framework to handle PPPs. Otherwise, they are vehicles for siphoning money that you cannot account for. I had already given an example of my district where money was given for a tea project, the district does not ask for accountability, the company is saying that it is a private business, and yet it is Government money, and it is counted on Sheema District. Therefore, we must stop this PPP until we have a regulatory framework as spelt out. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much, honourable member. Honourable members, you will recall that the honourable member for Kabula, while making his contribution, made a reference that the records do not need to contain. He referred to gamblers as fraudsters. I think gamblers are different from fraudsters, and the records should show this clearly that the honourable member meant gamblers and not fraudsters; or that gamblers are not really fraudsters. 

5.31
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank the committee for the good work because this is the first committee, which has identified money for re-allocation. When the Chair was presenting, I don’t know whether he skipped or he forgot to present the monies to be allocated, which is, annexes 1 and 2. You have really identified resources to be allocated. 

Mr Speaker, on the issue of tax waivers; it is good to help some investors, but others are abusing it. You remember one time, there were tax waivers given for CHOGM materials, but most of the materials ended in our markets. It is really a problem and we need to revisit this issue. 

Secondly, on the issue of the Presidential Initiative on Bananas; as a committee on budget, we visited this place. There are issues which they raised such as pending certificates,  and some people were threatening to sue Government because they had not been paid. But I see here wasteful expenditure. How do you pay bonus? Bonus is paid out of a profit. What is that? We need some clarification on that issue. 

On census, it is true Government had committed some money. First of all, I need to know its status because one time its report was thrown out of this House. I don’t know whether it was brought back by the Ministry of Finance. Government had committed money into this project, and aware that we have been attending presentations by NPA regarding the 2040 Vision, in which they are largely relying on information from UBoS; and Government had paid some money into that activity.  I think it is prudent for this House to commit money and we allow the project to take off. 

Secondly, according to the documents which they brought here, they have already signed contracts with service providers. What will happen to those contracts? Is Government going to compensate those people or they will leave them to go to court. 

Those are the issues we need to address, Mr Speaker. Otherwise, I thank the committee for the report, but we need to look at the allocations and see how we can appropriate money to other sectors. Thank you.

5.34
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a comment on page 14, that is, National Planning Authority. One of the key outputs given is that of the National Vision 2040, which will be finalised and disseminated. 

Mr Speaker, I recall that sometime back we had the National Vision 2025 that was headed by the late Dr Salim Bachou. I would like to know what happened to that vision. It just disappeared in oblivion. Why was it not implemented? And how sure are we that the Vision 2040 is not going to be shelved to gather dust just like Vision 2025? 

A lot of money was spent on Vision 2025, and if I can recall, His Excellency the President even flagged it. Maybe the minister should tell us why it was shelved and why this one will be implemented. That is all I wanted to comment on. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

5.36 
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have a few comments to make regarding the observations made by the committee. The first one is on page 4, under tax incentives and waivers. 

The committee rightly observes that Uganda’s domestic revenue mobilisation, which has stagnated at about 12 percent of GDP, is substantially lower than the sub-Saharan average of about 20 percent, and it is the lowest in the East African region. 

The committee further goes on to give an answer to that observation on page 21, under tax bracket: “The committee observed that the tax bracket is still very narrow” and that is very correct. “This narrow tax bracket explains why the tax to GDP ratio of about 12 percent is the lowest in the region.”

Mr Speaker and honourable members will agree that going by the composition of our economy, the formal sector constitutes only about 30 percent of our GDP. And what we have in terms of revenue collection is generated from that meagre percentage. 

I, therefore, want to commend URA for doing a very good job of mobilising the targets that we have seen continuously improving every other year, from only that fraction of 25 to 30 percent.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to tell this country that if URA –(Member timed out.)

5.38
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I have a few observations. The first observation is on page 9, and it is about the youth venture funds.

Mr Speaker, you will recall that we started talking about this issue, and requested the Minister of Finance to give us a report on the status of this fund, right from March this year. But up to now, we have not gotten any clear report on the status of this fund. 

You will recall that guidelines have been changing from time to time. I am now worried, Mr Speaker, that there is another Youth Venture Capital Fund that has come in. I am worried that even without a clear status report on the previous one, I don’t know how we shall realise the goals of this second venture.  

I, therefore, on that note request - I don’t know how I should stress this request because I have stood on this Floor of Parliament to request for that report, but it has not been availed. So, I don’t know how I can stretch my request on this fund. This is a question that we are always tasked in our constituencies to explain, but we cannot. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, recently we were talking about VAT on water. We all know now that that VAT has already been levied. We have not appropriated the budgets. We need a clear position or explanation from the Minister of Finance on how she will refund this money, or if it is just a mere allegation, then she should come and give us a clear picture. 

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, I am a member on the Local Government Accounts Committee. When Government was increasing VAT from 17 percent to 18 percent, the recommendation was that the 1 percent increase should go to local governments, but up to now –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you were not in the House when I informed the House that the Clerk had received a comprehensive statement on the Youth Venture Capital Fund, which will be presented to the House because the other statements were not acceptable to the House. We now have a comprehensive statement to the House. Time will allow us to deal with that.

On the issue of the tax, they are trying to use some provisional law, which gives them provisional powers to levy this tax, but we will deal with that at an appropriate time. 

5.41
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am on Vote 132 - Treasury Operations; page 12. We have always heard that money not consumed in districts and lower local governments is returned to the Treasury, but this is not reflected in this report and will never be reflected. We have always asked, where does that money go? I think the minister should help us put this straight. Does it go into what the born-again call a bottomless pit that we cannot discover where the money is? It should be reflected here.

Mr Speaker, the Youth Venture Capital Fund, I have no problem with it, but I wonder why the vote or the portion keeps on appearing in the Ministry of Finance. We have always said it should go to the right ministry, which is the Ministry of Gender. So, maybe the Minister of Finance will also explain. 

Finally, on tax exemption, I really applaud the committee report on tax exemption, and together with URA, I would imagine how you exempt a very rich company at the expense of poor boda-boda cyclists. For example in my constituency, they mostly purchase motorcycles, which are not registered, and they put the motorcycles on the road to look for money to go and register the motorcycles. Within three to four months, they are arrested ruthlessly, beaten and sometimes the motorcycles are confiscated. Now, if these countries hear of a rich company being exempted and these poor Ugandans who are trying to catch up are not even given time to pay the heavy tax burden that they are bearing in the course of trying to struggle to make money to make ends meet, then I think it really hurts because why should URA continue to levy the Shs 18,000? 

Also, reflected in the recommendation of the committee is especially the development of registering your vehicles online. This goes exactly to what my district has been suffering; URA has continued taxing the non-taxable threshold of councilors getting as low as Shs 70,000 but they keep on –(Member timed out.)

5.44
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add to the voices of the other members to thank the chairman of the committee for a good report. Mine are two questions, and one is on page 1, under the seven votes. I had imagined that the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology is one of your votes. I need clarification because I did not see it. 

Two, on page 4, we have the agricultural guarantee funds of Shs 15 billion. This is a new thing. Recently, we knew something called the Agricultural Credit Facility, which is not talked about anywhere in this report, and we don’t even know whether this money was actually used in the last budget. We have not had any farmer who has benefitted or accessed this money. Therefore, we need an explanation over this. Now, a new thing is coming up, which we don’t even know - these Agricultural Guarantee Funds - and I think we need to really understand what it means. 

Mr Speaker, through you, I wish to ask the honourable Minister of Finance. The last time she was here, she said that we need to support the productive areas and that to me was really very good, but when you look at the budgets and implementation, you do not see that she is really -(Member timed out.)

5.46
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to those who have appreciated the performance of the committee and I have a clarification that I am seeking from the Minister of Finance and this is in regard to the commitment that our country has to foreign bodies like the International Labour Organisation, the African Union, and the East African Community, because we find that we are always in arrears as a country and it gives a bad image and embarrassment to whoever represents us in such bodies. So, I want to get this clarification on how we are going to handle it this time round. Thank you.

5.47
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, District Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. My concern is on microfinance. I would like the minister to explain to this House how many SACCOs have so far benefitted from accessing these credit lines. I am also informed that in Karamoja, there are ghost SACCOs. There are SACCOs who have benefitted on behalf of  Karamoja. So, honourable minister, I want that explanation because our people would have benefited much from these SACCOs in terms of improving their livelihoods. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.48
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr Elijah Okupa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a few things to note because most of the things have been mentioned by the Members here, but Mr Speaker, for emphasis, we support the committee’s report, but there are areas which we feel that Government needs to take seriously. The issue of VAT on water; this is what touches the poorest person. Our view is that the VAT on water should be scrapped. There is no way we are going to see people who are going to enjoy themselves being exempted from taxation like the people going to gamble. If people are going there for leisure, why should they be exempted while the poor people in Katanga, in Kasilo, in Kisoro, and in Omolo are taxed? Surely, are we serious? Can we be serious and get those avenues where we are able to raise money to help the poor. So, we should be able to tax the rich people in order to help the poor people. Let us not misbehave, especially the Ministry of Finance. It doesn’t matter how much you feed a lizard, it won’t be a crocodile. We have talked about this, but I think the ministry is not listening. I hope they take this seriously.

How do you exempt or give waivers to BIDCO for 25 years? I will be 70 years by the end of the 25 years. Surely, how can this company not pay taxes for all that time of my remaining life? I think we are not serious. Tax waivers are necessary, but there should be a minimum time of say, three to five years, but not a quarter of a century. Surely, this cannot be accepted. Roofings - 10 years; unless you are telling us that you are shareholders -(Laughter)- This is the third time we are passing money for NPART to wind up. We extended their life in the Eighth Parliament; towards the end of last year we again extended and we are now again providing money for that. What is this NPART, which is not ending? I think this should be the end.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like you to help the Minister of State for Fisheries, especially about URA. There are fishnets from China and Korea being imported into this country, and are depleting resources in our lakes. How do these nets get to Kasilo? How do they get to Lake Albert?  Allow me show you – these nets here deplete fish from the lake, and they come from China and Korea, and we allow them enter our country. Where is Uganda Bureau of Standards? Where is URA? Are they just smuggled in? But you harass people on the lakes for using these kinds of nets. (Applause) Can we help hon. Nankabirwa because she is being harassed left and right by the fishermen on the lakes.  

Rt Hon. Speaker, I think URA and the Uganda Bureau of Standards should from now or midnight tonight, ban these nets and the local governments should go and inspect all the shops and confiscate these types of nets. Otherwise, as you are harassing the people of Kasilo, Uganda’s economy is also suffering because the fish exports will keep on dwindling.  Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to lay these fishnets on the Table. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, the Chair is not able to ascertain what exactly that is. It will not be accepted to be on the record of this House. So, please go back with it. (Laughter) 

MR OKUPA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I was just saying that these are fishnets which are now on our lake and they are imported into this country. So, this is just a sample which I cut off. 

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you for giving way. The information I would like to give is that The Fish Act bans those nets, but the Finance Act allows them. 

MR OKUPA: Whatever the case may be, this can be harmonised if there is a serious Government. These laws can be harmonised and we ban these fishnets because they are detrimental to our economy. Fish exports will go down and the people in the fishing areas will continue being harassed for using them and yet you are the ones importing them in the country. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, since we passed the law governing Parliament, the Office of the Auditor-General should fall under the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and not under the Committee on Finance, because it is an office of Parliament. With those comments, we support the committee’s report and I hope the government takes it seriously. Thank you.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Shadow Minister for Finance, honourable members, I urge you in your discussions to respect relations with foreign countries. You can make references to foreign countries without specifying because we have relationships with them. When you make statements sometimes they may misunderstand the House. So, if you are talking about a foreign country, just say, “A foreign country,” and that will be sufficient that it is being imported without mentioning a particular country. It would help us in our relationships. 

5.55
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am following a very dramatic performance; I will do my best. We welcome the Finance, Planning and Economic Development Committee’s report. We also welcome all the comments we received from the Floor. 

We are already taking action in cases like the tax incentive policy to make sure that all such transactions result in net benefits to the economy. In fact, Mr Speaker, I am pleased to inform you that tax expenditures as paid by Government as a percentage of GDP have gone down from 0.04 of 1 percent to 0.02 of 1 percent in the five-year period from 2008 to 2012. 

We will also make sure that all requests for clarification and information are answered because we have noted them. 

However, Mr Speaker, we also note a number of areas where reallocations have been proposed across votes in the committee report. The proposed reallocations, however, need further review and reconciliation by my ministry prior to supply under the respective votes. I pledge to do so in time for submission at the supply stage. I beg to submit.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Mr Chairman, do you want to restate your prayer or should we straight away take a decision? 

5.58 
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I note that there is an important exclusion that was not included in the conclusion in our prayers as a committee. This concerns Vote 130 - Treasury Operations. I beg to move that the figure of 1,100, 444,000,264 be included in our conclusion on page 31. I pray that our report is adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, is that particular provision in the report? 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, it is there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which page? 

MR MUSASIZI: Page 12 - Item 4.6.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development be on the ministerial policy statement for those sectors and budget estimates for those sectors for the financial year 2012/2013 be adopted by this House. I now put the question.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

5.59
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Kasirivu-Atwooki): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move under Article 90 and 155 (4) of the Constitution and rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, to present a report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

Agricultural growth picked up in the financial year 2011/2012 by 3 percent which was driven by the cashcrop sector and the livestock sector which is compared to the previous year’s -2010/2011 which had a growth of 0.7. 

Mr Speaker, the cash crops registered a growth of 16.2 percent within financial year 2011/2012 as compared to the decline of 6.5 in the previous year.
The cotton yield saw a dramatic increase of 77 percent in response to high farm-gate prices recorded in the previous season of 2010/2011. 

Tea and cocoa both registered significant growth at 18.5 percent and 10.6 percent respectively. 

The fishing sub-sector showed -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, could you state the votes you are going to handle for the record.  Just give us a list of them – I think they appear on page 2 of your report.

PROF. ATWOOKI: Mr Speaker, we are going to handle the following votes:

(a)	Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
(b)	Vote 121 - Dairy Development Authority
(c)	Vote 142 - National Agricultural Research Organization
(d)	Vote 152 - National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS Secretariat) 
(e)	Vote 155 - Cotton Development Organization
(f)	Vote 160 - Uganda Coffee Development Authority
(g)	Vote 500 – 850: A combination of local government votes for the District Extension Services and the District Agricultural Production and Advisory Services under NAADS 

As I was saying, the fishing sub-sector experienced some growth of 2 percent during the financial year 2011/2012 compared to 1.8 percent in the previous year. 

Export of livestock products in Uganda is limited to raw and semi-processed hides and skins. Inadequate disease control and the absence of the relevant quality and processing infrastructure are some of the factors that limit the expansion of beef and dairy products exports. The committee observed that the livestock sub-sector is underfunded and it does not get the emphasis it deserves. 
 
Just like it did in the last financial year, the committee recommends that in order to improve the performance, the Agriculture Sector, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be split into two ministries, namely the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries.

The agricultural sector budget for Government resources amounted to Shs 293.2 billion during the financial year 2011/2012. Of this amount, Shs 266.2 billion was released to the sector to undertake various activities. This represented a budget performance of 91 percent. 

The following observations have been drawn from the implementation of the ACF as follows:

This is an agricultural credit guarantee scheme which is being undertaken, but it is in the Ministry of Finance. The interest rate is between 10 – 12 percent, which the committee considered to be still high for investments in the agricultural sector. Consideration should be given to reducing the rate to not more than 5 percent.

The committee observed that:

i.	Despite interventions, the sector has remained uncoordinated. For instance, the livestock restocking programme is still under the Office of the Prime Minister, while the function of Water for Production was reverted to MAAIF. However, the funds for this function were retained in the Ministry of Water and Environment. This mismatch resulted into a cost to MAAIF. 

ii.	The Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA) Secretariat is still duplicating roles of the planning department in the ministry and many others.

iii.	We recommended that the PMA Secretariat should phased out or be merged with the Department of Planning and Policy in the Ministry of Agriculture. But that has not happened since.

iv.	Lack of a National Agricultural Policy to guide planning for the whole sector, which has created disharmony in existing policies.

v.	There are out-dated legal frameworks and absence of a number of them in place has rendered the regulation of the sector difficult, making the relevant institutions ineffective.


vi.	The planning of the entire sector is hinged on the Sector Development Strategy and Investment Plan, whose results have gaps. In addition, several activities have not been undertaken. A case in point is lack of land suitability mapping for various agricultural enterprises. Climate change effects are also not accommodated in the plan and sectors like sericulture and cocoa are not prioritised despite their value.

vii.	The sector has been implementing a number of projects in various sub-sectors like crop, livestock and fisheries. However, most projects have been characterised by slow progress and missing the objective targets. 

viii.	Agricultural extension in the country during the period under review continues to be neglected, as previous extension staffs at the districts have been rendered redundant by the NAADS reforms that never end.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that, in order to increase production and productivity, the Government should:

a)	Increase on its investments in the agricultural sector, which is considered to be the back-bone of the entire economy. However, as much as we keep saying agriculture is the backbone of the economy, when it comes to resource allocation, it gets little money.

b)	Expedite the process of developing a National Agricultural Policy to provide guidance to all actors in the agriculture sector to make investment choices that will increase agricultural incomes, reduce poverty, improve household food and nutrition security, create employment, increase value addition and exports, and stimulate overall economic growth. 

Mr Speaker, because of time, let me go straight to budget performance.

While the remaining amount under non-wage component of Shs 2.423 billion was utilised, farmers could not get free seed from CDO as has been the practice in previous financial years. Instead seed was provided to farmers at a subsidised cost of Shs 3000 per kilogramme. 

The purpose of creating a development project was to relocate CDO dressing stations from ginners’ premises to its own premises and also to upgrade the seed processing equipment. However, because the seed processing equipment was in the premises of ginneries, it was creating some form of conflict of interest.

The committee also noted the lack of value addition linkages for critical interventions to turn around the cotton and textile sub-sector in Uganda as we had recommended. And the committee still recommends that as a means of increasing domestic value addition and production and productivity, Government should consider promoting creation of a Technology Upgrading Fund to enhance local cotton processing capacity as a means of mitigating cotton farm-gate prices which are volatile and unstable. 

Mr Speaker, since I am the last presenter, I am assuming that I should have a little more time.

Fish exports were 15,226 tonnes, fetching US$ 90 million, due to the establishment of fish hatcheries, production ponds and fish feeds factory. The committee observed that though there was growth in fish production, it would have been higher had it not been for challenges like the increased fishing pressure due to fish depletion in the water bodies. Besides we had recommended that Government undertakes to restock the water bodies, which recommendation does not seem to have received a good reception.

The National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and Data Bank

Mr Speaker, last financial year, we did recommend that the Ministry of Finance provides a vote to this agency, but to date the vote has not been provided for and the money that we had re-allocated was never given to that organisation.

We still recommend that a vote is provided for this financial year. We had wanted Parliament not to pass the budget for Ministry of Finance if it has not provided a vote for this agency - if it was possible.

Mr Speaker, extension services are still a challenge and the committee acknowledged that most farmers in the country practice farming without adequate knowledge and skill and this calls for the need for close attention to farmers through extension services system support.

The current system under NAADS is of an advisable nature with assumptions that farmers know what to do and they will demand for extension services. We recommend that Government should overhaul the NAADS programme, review the NAADS Act and create the extension services.

On mechanisation, the committee observed that there is need for more efficient labour-saving technology for opening lands, including ox-ploughs and tractors, and we recommend that Government should establish a credit facility for farmers to acquire tractors and other farm equipment.

NARO

The committee was informed that NARO benefits from two main projects that is the Agricultural Technology Agribusiness Advisory Services Project which is a five-year venture. It was launched with a budget of Shs 638.494 billion. It is funded by World Bank, IFAD and DANIDA. 

NARO is also funded by a project called the East African Agriculture Productivity Project which is also a five-year project. NARO has made quite some achievements which are elaborated in the report, but it also has challenges. Top on the list of the challenges is land encroachment. NARO reported deliberate aggressive encroachers on Mbarara Zonal and Agricultural Research and Development Centre. There is also heavy encroachment in Kawanda, Kitgum DFI, Ngetta ZARI and Ikulwe in Mayuge, and Bulegani in Sironko. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, I suggest you go to page 65 and deal with final recommendations. 

PROF. BALTAZAR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Mr Speaker, we have the vote function and we have a drop in the budget; last financial year was 65.726 and this year it is 42, which is a reduction of 22 billion. Vote function for animal resources was also reduced -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, page 65: Conclusion.

PROF. BALTAZAR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: MR Speaker, I beg that Parliament approves the following estimates for the agricultural sector for the financial year 2012/2013:

Vote 010 - MAAIF 

•	Recurrent: Shs 22,123,894,823; 
•	Development: Shs 726,929,780,425 

A total of 99,053,675,248

Vote 121 - DDA 
•	Recurrent: 4,033,468,028, which is the same total because there is no development budget.

Vote 142 - NARO 

•	Recurrent budget of 24,540,954,000 
•	Development budget of 75,904,710,000 

A total of 100,445,664,000

Vote 152- NAADS Secretariat 
•	Recurrent: Shs 6,228,973,944
•	Development: Shs 46,716,162,839 

A total of Shs 52,945,136,783

Vote 115 - CDO 

•	Recurrent: Shs 1,489,000,000 
•	Development: Shs 2,296,000,000 

A total of Shs 3,785,000,000

Vote 160 - UCDA 

Recurrent: 1,052,750,000 

And, under Annex 3, we have votes 501 - 850 and we have a total of Shs 131.2 billion; and also under votes 501 - 850 under production and marketing grant, Shs 15.4 billion; and vote 122 KCCA Agricultural Grant, Shs 1.4 billion making a total of Shs 379.03 billion. 

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and thank you members of the committee. Mr Chairman there is just one thing before I open the debate. On page 63, you make reference to, “The process of enacting laws and formulation of policies on the following critical areas in the agricultural sector should be expedited.” From my recollection, if it does not let me down, is that (a) and (b) were already submitted to the committee. I remember I was chairing when the Bills were presented for the first time, that is the Plant Variety Protection and the Plant Protection and Health. I thought those Bills were in the House already.

PROF. BALTAZAR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: They are before the committee, sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are before the committee; so, how can the committee again recommend expedition when it is with it already?

PROF. BALTAZAR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Mr Speaker, we still have issues of a legal nature which the ministry is supposed to explain and the Parliamentary Counsel.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we open debate and we will limit it to 20 minutes with each Member taking two minutes. 

6.25
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chair and members of the committee for a good report. The issue of funding the agricultural sector actually seems to have been, I think, put aside because every financial year, Parliament makes recommendations that we do increase the funding for this sector. 

In the report, it is alluded to that this is a backbone. Really, a backbone should also be considered in terms of funding because it is not going to be a backbone without adequate funding; otherwise, it is not a backbone. Unless we really do the funding of this sector, we should stop talking about agriculture being the backbone.

In the sense of diseases, we need to do research and for the agricultural sector to do this, it needs funding. In the report, we are referring to quality seed both crop and animal. But how are we going to have the quality seed in terms of crop and animal production without funding. So, as a government, I think we need to actually walk the talk, rather than just paying lip service to this sector.
 
Re-stocking of the water bodies; yes, this is important, but if we do not also take measures to protect what we put in these water bodies, it has just been demonstrated here -(Member timed out.)

6.27
DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I also wish to join those who are thanking the committee for a good report. My area in Sheema depends purely on coffee and bananas for income, but we have challenges in these areas. When I look at page 17, it is said that there have been attempts to distribute varieties of coffee wilt resistant plantlets to farmers, but my understanding is that in my area, they are giving elite.

When I asked whether these are not coffee wilt resistant varieties and I understand we do not have enough money to multiply. Currently, we are using a private developer who can at maximum produce about two million. Actually, we need very many seedlings and, therefore, I wish to add my voice to the committee that more money should be provided in that area, but much more importantly, that UCDA should at least distribute coffee wilt disease resistant seedlings rather than seedlings that are likely to develop disease.

The second comment is on bananas. Uganda is the second largest producer of bananas in the world after India, and in Uganda of course, Sheema also used to be a big producer of bananas, but right now, our farmers are suffering with banana bacterial wilt disease. It is noted on page 41 that banana genotypes, which are resistant to bacterial wilt -(Member timed out.)

6.25
MR AMOS LUGOLOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman for a good report. My comment is about one very important organisation under the Ministry of Agriculture commonly called NAGRIC, the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre. This is a very key institution and I believe it has been behind the transformation or the genetic revolution of the animal population in the west. A few months ago, the President of Uganda led a team of Members of Parliament to Kiruhura and we saw a total transformation in the animal population there; and it did not end at that. Because of that transformation, the population in that area is completely transformed in terms of their wealth. 

Since this cattle corridor runs across the country, all the way from Kiruhura, Nakasongola into Kayunga, why can’t this model be replicated throughout the entire cattle corridor so that we get this transformation running across the entire country?

Dr Rwamirama is here; I would like to understand why this has continued to be a problem that has failed to be rolled out in the rest of the country, and why this NAGRIC has continued to be terribly constrained financially to support this genetic revolution. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.27
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will be a bit fast. First, on cotton, really, we should help these farmers. If possible let us give them free seeds and some of these other implements including the drugs. If not, they should be subsidised. 

Then the price; we should also help the farmers to ensure that they really get a good price for the produce, which they actually get from the farms.

Thirdly, I have looked at this document and one of the problems is medicines and drugs for these animals. Why can’t the ministry make the same arrangement like the Ministry of Health and create an institution like the National Medical Stores so that they can import the drugs or medicines for the animals. That way, you will have quality medicines and they will be available most of the time. 

I am also wondering about the ministry, all your arrangements are around the central region; production of chicks, production of piglets, production of coffee seedlings; why don’t you decentralise some of these things so that we really have them by region. It will make it easier for the farmers in the various regions to access these services. Otherwise, as of now, somebody has to come from Mbale -(Member timed out.)

6.29
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the very good report. We are all aware that agriculture is very important for us and I also commend Government for the effort it is making to improve our agriculture so that we improve our economy. 

Government has put in place very many programmes in hope of improving the lives of people through agriculture. We have this Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. It came and a lot of money was invested but there is no change. 

We introduced NAADS; a lot of money has been invested but nothing reached our people. What is the problem? One is that when the programme is introduced, we put a lot of money in administration, in buying cars, employing people but it does not reach down to the people we really represent. We believe NAADS would reach the people down at the grassroots, but how many people do they target? They target very few and only for one year. You are given seeds, very short training for a while then the next season, you are left out and you are back to zero. So, I would like to see that we really emphasis the training of our farmers so that they know what to do, when to plant and what to plant at the right time.

Quite often the seeds are given during the wrong season. For example, they will take to Koboko in October when it is the onset of the dry season. So, please, let us organise ourselves; train everybody not very few farmers.

Then the inputs are very expensive; the seedlings are very expensive. We need to subsidise our agriculture if we are to ensure that our people benefit. (Member timed out.)

6.31
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues to thank the committee for the job well done. As you peruse through this report, generally, you realise that there are a lot of mismatches in project implementation and also in the duplication of activities as far as activities of the ministry are concerned.

I would like to go to page 5 where the committee indicates that the 2012 Poverty Status Report shows that the poverty line has decreased from 43 percent to 27 percent. When you go down to our villages, it does not translate into what this committee has reported. I would like the committee to shed more light on this. 

We welcome Government interventions in as far as this ministry is concerned in bringing various facilities to our farmers. For example, on page 6, they are talking about an Agricultural Credit Facility, which is extended to farmers. I request that the ministry popularises these facilities so that our farmers can know where they are, and go and access them. 

There is also this very good intervention which was set up by Government; the Warehouse Receipt System. This is supposed to assist farmers during bumper harvests to store their products so that they can sell their produce during periods when the prices are high. I would like to inform the committee and the House that this project has been mismanaged. There are serious audit queries from the Auditor General as far as this project is concerned. I would like to call upon the committee to interest itself in this project because it is -(Member timed out.)

6.33
DR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate and commend the good work which NARO is doing. Probably, I would like to call the attention of the minister to the dissemination of the results resulting from the research carried out by NARO. I feel the dissemination is wanting. It is not reaching farmers adequately.

Secondly, the committee noticed that food production has increased by only 1 percent. This has made me become very concerned. When I see the population of Uganda increasing by 35 percent and the food production only increasing by 1 percent, it means we are a country heading towards famine. We are heading towards food scarcity. Therefore, I call upon the ministry to pay attention to this and try to increase food production.

I would like to repeat that the government needs to invest more in agriculture. We are all aware that about 75 percent of our population derive their livelihood from agriculture. Then when it is poorly-funded, it means the country is heading towards poverty. I concur with the former speaker that when we go to the villages, we really see that our peasant farmers and small-scale farmers are really poor. They are really living in abject poverty. 

Fourthly, I would like to recommend –(Member timed out.)

6.35
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Mr Speaker, my comment is on page 31. The Dairy Development Authority is a new phenomenon and the industry is really picking up. I would like to get a clarification from the chairperson of the committee when he was talking about it. It is a new sector and the development budget is not provided for. In addition to that, I know farmers who are involved in farming and the cost of recovery in that business is very difficult. It takes many years. 

I would also like to know from the Ministry of Finance why they are pushing these people to pay Withholding Tax. I thought the policy could by generally accepted Accounting Principles, those who are in businesses which are established could pay Withholding Tax, but what is happening now - I saw the list of people who are collecting Withholding Tax and they are pushing these farmers to pay; the local people there who are in farming. We are killing the industry. Leave it to grow and after growing - after these people have established themselves, tax them. This is a business which I feel Government should allow.. First of all, as many people have said, it is underfunded. When you go for a loan from the bank, with agricultural loans, the money we pass here, you cannot get it. These are people who get their own money the hard way. They establish massive production to employ people, but you are killing them at the beginning before they are established. I think the Ministry of Finance should harmonise the position and see how we can help these people.

The last one has been commented upon by my colleague and, I want to add on. I think Parliament should be radical. We cannot leave importation of drugs to whom it may concern. I had a problem while in Health -(Member timed out.)

6.38
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have two concerns for which I am asking for clarification from the minister. 

One concerns NAADS; at one of the functions which took place last week in the sub-region of Busoga, which was also attended by His Excellency the President, one of the organisers raised an issue which was not disputed by the Executive Director of NAADS, who was in attendance. This was something to the effect that a third of the money which goes towards NAADS is spent on wages and salaries. It left everybody wondering, because why does NAADS engage coordinators who are not part of the Public Service structure? We have the extension workers, for instance. I want the minister to comment on this. How soon are they mainstreaming the extension workers into this NAADS programme?

Sometime last year, the President floated a proposal which he said was going to be coordinated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Coffee Development Organisation. This was to do with what he called the Stabilisation Fund. I think it is also in line with what hon. Mawanda raised concerning the Warehouse Receipt System. I want the minister to make a comment on this one. How far has the Stabilisation Fund gone in terms of having it availed to the farmers to cushion them against, especially the ever fluctuating prices of cotton? I thank you.

6.39
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on the developing of the National Agricultural Policy. Whatever we are talking about is really premised almost on nothing. We do not have an agriculture policy in place. Remember in the other sector, we do not have a land policy in place. I leave it at that.

When we go to irrigation, you find no policy on irrigation; you find livestock restocking in OPM; Water for Production in MAAIF; but the funds are for the function in the Ministry of Water. -(Interruption)- That is another one. 

With regard to the building of warehouses and silos, Trade is doing it and Agriculture is doing it. Aren’t we duplicating services? The shift of MAAIF headquarters – I think the minister will have to tell us who did it and why. We have said that Government ministries must build their homes, but these people are running away from their own home to go and rent. So, we need to know, who owns the building? Why did the minister accept, and so on.

Then livestock subsector; I sympathise with hon. Bright Rwamirama. I know he is a hardworking minister, but there is no funding. When we have an outbreak of diseases, you see him running here for a supplementary. But is this how we should run the country?

When we go to the tea subsector; hon. Tress Bucanayandi is here; he is an agriculturalist and he knows it. Our people do not have plantlets. They just go to the bush and collect whatever is there and plant; and we think we are doing a service to this country? In UCDA, it is the same thing. You give Members of Parliament 20,000 seedlings, and you think you are doing a service to this country? Give the established commercial farmers enough seedlings. 

So, I believe, when we talk about agriculture in this country, we are just joking. We need to –(Member timed out.)

6.42
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Incidentally, when you look at research, I am glad the committee has allocated more money to research, that is, National Agricultural Research Organisation. In respect to the same, therefore, in many parts of the country, like in border areas, they have become so vulnerable to manipulation by unscrupulous middlemen who sell to farmers fake seeds. Over 60 percent of farmers from those communities plant fake seeds to the detriment of our farmers. That is very serious and if we can have proper seeds, I think we can do much better. 

If we cannot produce enough seeds now, it is important that if we have areas that get seeds from other countries we need quality control stations along the borders so that we can safeguard our farmers.

The other issue is on animal husbandry. There are many farmers who cannot afford the exotic bulls. So, we need artificial insemination to benefit the communities which cannot afford them. Communities like Bukwo and Karamoja – it is better to have AI services in those areas.

The other problem we have seen is that the one percent increase in agriculture does not reflect production in other areas because of accessibility; areas which are highly productive have no access to the Ugandan market. Like in Bukwo, the Cabinet sub-committee that went to Bukwo last time have a story to tell. There is a lot of maize and wheat, but there is no road. So, how can they access Uganda? So, we cannot count that as part of the productive areas. So, I think agricultural infrastructure can play a good role in connecting those parts of the country to the markets. 

Mr Speaker, the other issue is the farmer-friendly facilities, that is, the loan facilities for farmers, which are affordable and at low interest rates. Unless farmers access these facilities – the finances - they cannot open up large chunks of land which are available for production. That should be expedited by the ministry. If those few things are done, we shall go –(Member timed out.)

6.44
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Kevinah Taaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker; I am standing in for the Shadow Minister for Agriculture. We are talking about agriculture as the backbone of Uganda. We need to restructure the medium-term expenditure framework to increase the agriculture sector budget allocation vis-a-vis the needs of the population, which is now rapidly growing. The population is growing yet our agriculture is stagnant. 

We also need to realign the extension service delivery towards achieving higher productivity of a majority of small-holder farmers because we need to look at food security. Focus on agriculture research to achieve tangible qualitative and quantitative improvement in agricultural production to small-holder farmer’s level; enhance robust strategies for better value addition for agricultural commodities combined with effective marketing and internal distribution strategies. 

We also need to streamline the agriculture credit facilities to enable equitable access for small-hold farmers so as to enable them improve and expand their production and engage in the value addition enterprises so that they can earn higher incomes. 

Mr Speaker, we shall fight food security, we shall fight poverty; we shall fight lack of industrialisation; we cannot industrialise this country if we do not improve on agriculture. If we do this, the whole economy at large will grow. Thank you, Mr Speaker and Members.

6.47
THE STATE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDSUTRY AND FISHERIES (Animal Industry) (Rtd Lt Col Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for the report and the support we get from this House. Somebody raised the issue of fake drugs on the market. That is true and it has caused us a lot of problems. We have tick resistance and a lot of livestock have been lost through tick-bone related diseases. 

We are working out a framework where we can reinstate a system where we can restock genuine drugs as we used to do in the early days. At the moment, we privatised the function and people buy drugs on the market. However, we think some of the key drugs should be kept in our stores like our neighbours are doing. 

On low levels of funding in disease control, I think this is collective responsibility for all of us; NAGRIC is key but also poorly funded. However, I want to say that NAGRIC is better off than yesterday because now we have all the genetic materials available; we have had Maruzi restocked; we have had Aswa restocked; most of our farms which were originally not restocked have been restocked. And we can have any kind of genetic materials available and we have also rehabilitated the liquid nitrogen chain for availability of semen at all levels in the country.

One Member asked why we have not transformed the entire cattle corridor like Nyabushozi has been transformed arising out of the visit we made in Kiruhura. We are doing this; we have identified farmers along the cattle corridor; both breeders and model farmers. We have also rehabilitated infrastructure for veterinary including water facilities. We have also rehabilitated coolers in Serere, Katakwi, Tororo, Busia and we are moving on. So, we are taking the entire cattle corridor without exception.

One Member raised the issue of withholding tax. It has been brought to our attention. We are working with Ministry of Finance; I think at an appropriate time, she will have to respond, but we also feel it is not correct.

On the wire receipt system and post-service handling; it is not true that there is duplication. But as the Ministry of Agriculture, and specifically animal industry, we have a responsibility as stakeholders to organise farmers into cooperatives and avail them with coolers; we also do for beef; and at the point of warehouse receipt system, that is where the Ministry of Trade gets involved. So, I do not know where we have done –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your time is up. Minister of State for Fisheries - three minutes.

6.51
THE STATE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDSUTRY AND FISHERIES (Fisheries) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I thank you very much. I want to thank the committee and members for this report. I would like to respond to some of the recommendations and I will use three minutes.

There was a recommendation on training programmes for fishing communities. We are targeting the Beach Management Unit members because these are the ones who are managing the fisheries together with Government. 

On the increase of management and regulation of fish stock, we are carrying out licensing of boats and we shall be providing fishing vessel identification number plates. This will help us to regulate our fish stock.

There was also a recommendation on the review with the intention to recentralise some of the decentralised functions in the fisheries sub-sector. We are already doing this and as you may be aware, the regulation function was recentralised and that is why my ministry is moving around to make sure that licenses are paid for.

On restocking of all the water bodies, we have to begin by creating awareness because as we restock the water bodies, the fisher folk who are not aware of illegal fishing will capture this immature fish. We are, therefore, laying emphasis on the creation of awareness, surveillance and control of our water bodies and then in future, we shall begin restocking. 

However, through aquaculture, we are planning to help fish farmers by providing quality fish fingering for fish fries.

On the provision of substitutes for fish implements, where possible, we are doing this through the creation of fish price centres like in Mbale, Bushenyi and Arua. I want to end here by thanking you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, five minutes.

6.53
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDSUTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Tress Buchanayandi): Mr Speaker and members of this august House, I, first of all, wish to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture and his team for a beautiful report produced because that report is basically supportive of the actions of agriculture. 

One fundamental issue raised generally is the question of raising production and productivity. Clearly, the Ministry of Agriculture should remain with that policy because research is bringing up improved seeds which have to be passed on to commercial seed growers - produced, popularised, packed and commercialised, and this is taking place. 

What we want to be appreciated at this stage is that in a technical world, things have to be built in a process gradually. For example, at the moment, the total amount of seed produced is only 15 percent of the total requirement. If you take seed to cover all the grain, cuttings, seedlings, and livestock semen, it is a whole spectrum; it is a huge area. Therefore, we need time to put resources together to raise that level of production and productivity; but clearly, that is our direction.

On the question of restructuring of NAADS, we fully share that view that NAADS must be restructured. We have already written a paper and presented it to Cabinet. Cabinet has received, discussed and referred it to a sub-committee of Cabinet. Very soon, recommendations are likely to come up to restructure NAADS. What is for sure is that there are issues that have to be looked into because right now, extension is being implemented in the parlous stages. There is no way we can have that and we are thinking in terms of having a unified extension system. 

Besides, we think that the handling of inputs by extension workers is not healthy and that is what has led to corruption. The handling of inputs should be given to the private sector and that money channelled through financial institutions so that our staff are left to handle only inputs required for teaching, demonstration purposes and perhaps to meet Presidential pledges.

We are also trying to ask for additional numbers because the ratio of staff to extension workers is extremely high. At the moment, there are not enough numbers capable of reaching and teaching the farmers in their places because the numbers are too few.

The question of the relocation of the Ministry of Agriculture from Entebbe to Kampala is an issue that has again been handled, and I think handled well.  First of all, it has been foreseen and put in the road map, that we will move to Kampala in phases; but I think Cabinet has pronounced itself on this matter. It realised that Government was spending about Shs 1.2 trillion on rental charges alone. It has pronounced itself to the extent that those ministries that have houses or homes to go to, must go back to where they belong until they gradually build. This is consistent with logic; you never move away from your small hut, transit to rental premises in the hope that you will build. That is not logical and Cabinet is clear on that question.

On other issues of a structural nature, there was a recommendation that PMA should be fused or amalgamated with planning units. We welcome that idea and I think that we are going to have that implemented.

There was also a suggestion that the Ministry of Agriculture is too large and it should be divided. Clearly, this is not an issue that I can comment on, but can only say that when responsibility is shared by many, work becomes lighter for everybody. Therefore, there will be other powers to handle this.

There was a general feeling that agriculture is underfunded. If we had all the money to implement this, we would want to do that. We do appreciate that kind of sentiment and support. But I want to inform this House that there is always an envelope. The amount of money available for Government like in our own homes, is always limited and, therefore, you have to rationalise. 

I had the opportunity to share with my colleague, the Minister for Finance, and we have come up with priority programmes and lists and we have picked on certain commodity enterprises for concentration. We have picked on beans, maize, cassava, bananas and rice for food security. We have picked on beef animals, dairy animals and fisheries in the livestock sector –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you honourable minister. Your time is up. Finance.

6.59
THE STATE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Privatisation) (Mr Aston Kajara):  Mr Speaker and colleagues –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three minutes.

MR KAJARA: Yes, I do not have much; I have three points. I will begin where my colleague, the Minister for Agriculture, has ended. We absolutely agree that there is need for more funding to this sector because it is the backbone of our economy and definitely, as resources become available, we will be able to invest in it more money so that we can be able to see the sector improve. 

But many times, Mr Speaker, I would like to note that there are others resources put in other sectors which go directly to support agriculture for example, rural roads, rural electrification, agricultural credit policy, PRDP, micro-finance support – all these go to support agriculture. Maybe at an appropriate time, Mr Speaker, with your permission, the minister should come back to this House and be able to lay before this House the figures that actually go towards financing those sectors. 

Secondly, on the question of withholding tax on dairy products, we have just discussed with my colleague here. I want to assure this House that we are going to sit down together with the Minister of Agriculture and we shall come out with a harmonised position on this matter. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, the proposed budget figures under various votes, we have agreed with the Minister of Finance. We are not disagreeing at all. We only want to add that under Vote 152, that is, NAADS Secretariat, we are going to allocate an additional billion shillings to take care of the taxes for motorcycles that are going to be imported for extension services. 

Therefore, in line with what we have been doing, the figures will now read as follows: 

•	Recurrent: Shs 6,228,993,944
•	Development: Shs 47,716,163,839 

A total of Shs 53,945,136,783.

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you have one minute to restate your request to the House. And if you have not yet laid a copy of the report on the Table, please proceed and do it now. 

7.02
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Prof. Baltazar Kasirivu-Atwooki): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think let me lay the report on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you through? (Laughter) You have to Table it properly.

PROF. KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2012/2013. I beg to lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

PROF. KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI: Mr Speaker, the issue that I want to summarise is funding to the sector. During the Budget Speech, there was an indication that there was money which was direct and indirect to the sector. The committee tried to look for the indirect allocation and we failed to see it. So, we are confused when we say, yes, there is a small envelop or a big one and they are competing for it. Yes, we are all competing for it, but the stomach should be a very big priority for this Government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you honourable members, for pushing this far. The question is that the report of the committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2012/2013 be adopted by this House. I put the question.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and your committee; honourable ministers, thank you very much. Next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

7.04
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is it seconded?

MRS KIWANUKA: Yes, it is seconded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and the Minister of State for Fisheries. Proceed.

MRS KIWANUKA: The object of this Bill is to amend the Excise Tariff Act Cap.338 to:

a)	Provide for the excise duty payable for provision of airtime or talk-time for mobile cellular phones;

b)	Provide for the excise duty payable for provision of airtime or talk-time for public payphones and landlines;

c)	Vary the rate of excise duty payable on:

i.	Spirits made from locally produced raw materials;
ii.	Undenatured spirits; and
iii.	Cosmetics and perfumes.

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairperson, you have five minutes. 

7.05
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I am here to represent my Chair who is out on duty. 

The object of the Bill has been read, I will go to the effect of the Bill, on page 2.

a)	The taxable base for excise duty on airtime of mobile phones, public payphones and landlines is now clarified – please make the corrections as I read; there were some errors. 

b)	The rate of excise duty payable on spirits made from locally produced raw materials is increased from 45 percent to 60 percent.

c)	A new tax of Shs 2,000 or 80 percent, whichever is higher, is introduced on spirits made from undenatured spirits.

d)	A new tax of 10 percent has been introduced on cosmetics and perfumes. 

Observations by the committee

Capacity to monitor abnormal profits made by telecom companies

Clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill seek to clarify the taxable value of the excise duty tariff on airtime of mobile phones, public payphones and landlines. 

While the committee appreciates that this amendment is consistent with Excise Tariff Act and best practice, the committee notes that excise duty is a final tax on the consumer, so any increase in the excise duty would result into increase in the cost of airtime. 

Telecom companies tend to exploit their clients in several ways, for example, through dropped calls. The committee is concerned that Uganda Revenue Authority lacks the technological capacity to track all business operations undertaken by the telecom companies and depends largely on the technology used by the Uganda Communications Commission and on the self-assessment returns of the same companies. 

The committee recommends that the monitoring capacity of the Authority has to continuously evolve to capture advancing technology used by the telecom companies.  

Increase in the rate of tax on locally produced spirits and wines

Under clause 4(1), the rate of excise duty payable on spirits made from locally produced raw materials is increased from 45 percent to 60 percent. This is intended to standardise excise rate between spirits and beer. Further, a new tax of UShs 2,000 or 80 percent, whichever is higher, is introduced on spirits made from undenatured spirits. 

The committee understands that the rationale of Government is to ensure equity and standardisation in the rates applicable and also to raise revenue, and is in line with the committee’s earlier recommendation to tax luxury goods. 

In order to avoid alcohol abuse, the committee recommends that Government should ensure that the packaging of alcohol in small quantities should be kept at a regulated minimum. Thus, the government’s ongoing ban on sachets is commended. 

On the other hand, the committee notes that Uganda Revenue Authority has failed to control illicit trade and smuggling, which hurts this industry and many other sectors of the economy. Smuggling still remains a high-ranking challenge to Uganda’s local revenue collection and poses a threat to local industries. 

The committee, therefore, remains strong in urging URA to step-up its efforts in addressing or curbing smuggling and illicit trade. 

The committee observes that the manufacturing sector in the last financial year declined from 7 percent to 3 percent. The committee notes that the ministry needs to put in place measures to boost this sector. 

In this regard, Government is pushing for local content utilisation and as such, the committee commends the efforts to ensure stability of the economy by increasing the rate of tax on imported spirits and wines. However, Government has pointed out that this will amount to discrimination, contrary to the EAC protocol. 

Taxation of luxury goods

Last financial year, while considering the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2011, the committee observed that Government needs to widen its narrow tax base by exploring the taxation of luxurious goods. The committee appreciates Government’s response to this matter by the proposal of the government to introduce a 10 percent tax on cosmetics and perfumes which are classified as such. The demand for these goods is price inelastic and as such, it provides an opportunity for Government to raise revenue.

Increase in exercise tariff on Buveera 

This matter has been referred to in the committee’s report on VAT and Government’s proposal on the use of biodegradable packaging materials. The committee reiterates its stand on this matter by emphasising the need for Government to ensure that the ban on the use of Kaveera is firmly enforced by the government. 

Statement to justify the new fiscal policy

The committee notes that future tax-related Bills should be accompanied by a detailed statement on the performance of the projected tax reforms on the economy once passed by Parliament in comparison to the preceding financial year. 

The committee recommends further that a research report should accompany Bills on introduction to Parliament to justify the new tax regimes. The committee welcomes proposals in the Public Finance Bill, 2012; clause 11 - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have one minute to conclude.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We seek to mandate the minister to supply detailed information on fiscal development and forecasts for a given period. Having exhaustively scrutinised the government proposals in the Bill, the committee hereby underscores its recommendations and observations for Government action in the future, and it is upon those terms certified that the Bill be passed without amendments. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s report on the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2012. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that, thank you very much. Honourable members, our own committee agrees with the Bill and recommends its approval. I will put the question that the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the title to the Bill, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.15
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.15
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2012” and has passed it without amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.16
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING
                   
THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012"

7.16
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) ACT 2012”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

7.18
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any seconders to this motion? Yes, honourable Minister of State for Fisheries. Proceed.

MS KIWANUKA: The object of this Bill is to amend the Value Added Tax Act Cap.349 (2) (viii) to include among the exempt supplies the supply of baking, lotteries and game of chance

b) To remove from the exempt supplies the supply of biodegradable packaging materials.

d)	To remove from the zero-rated supplies the supply of water, excluding mineral water and aerated water, containing sweetening matter or flavour.

c (ii) The supply and installation of mobile toilets, ecolab toilets and components made from polythene.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

7.22
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will go straight to the observations of the committee - VAT on gaming, betting and games of chance. 

Last financial year, the committee observed that gaming, betting and other games of chance have increasingly become very lucrative in Uganda. The committee urged Government to consider this sector as a potential source of revenue. In this regard, the committee re-introduced VAT on gaming, betting and other games of chance. 

The committee appreciates the government’s concern in as far as computation and administration of VAT on the industry poses a challenge. Effectively, the Government proposes to exempt the industry from VAT, but has increased the tax rate of gaming and other games of chance from 15 percent to 20 percent as reflected in the gaming and pool betting. 

Control and Taxation

Gaming and Pool Betting Tax Order 2012, Statutory Instrument No.45 of 2012, clause 4a, therefore, seeks to reinstate VAT exemption on the sector of gaming, pool betting and other games of chance.

The committee observed that the Government stance on this matter is still in the interim. On its part, the committee recommends that the Gaming and Pool Betting Control and Taxation Act Cap.292 be thoroughly reviewed as indeed Government has undertaken to present a comprehensive and modern law on gaming in the course of this financial year. 

VAT on biodegradable packaging materials

While considering the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011, the committee observed that the ban on plastic bags commonly known as Kaveera has not been effectively implemented. Biodegradable materials were then exempted under schedule 2 in the Act. The committee, however, notes with concern the fact that Government continues to fall short in the implementation of this law. Thus, the committee recommends that Government should implement the law banning the use of Kaveera.

The committee also received submission from the packaging industry as quoted, “The exemption levy made it more expensive for the industry. We cannot increase the price because the imports would be much cheaper. So, if you do not claim input tax, the industry is ruined.” In effect, the packaging industry was in support of the Government proposal to standard rate the VAT on biodegradable packaging materials. 

VAT on the supply of mobile toilets
	
Clause 5(a) seeks to reinstate VAT on the supply and installation of mobile toilets - Eco-Loo toilets and their components made from polyethylene. Given that the benefit of zero-rating the mobile toilets and Eco-Loo toilets has not been transmitted to the end-user who cannot afford them, the committee observed that Government needs to improve on sanitation in the country focusing especially on: 

(1)	Island communities like Ssese and Buvuma Islands where the terrain makes it difficult to set up such facilities as latrines; 

(2)	Parts of the countryside which lack proper latrines; and 

(3)	Refugee camps.  

VAT on supply of water

It is important to note that last financial year, Parliament zero-rated the supply of water. The justification then was the need to reduce the cost of water to the ordinary Ugandan. 

Clause 5(b) seeks to reinstate VAT on the supply of water. The justification by Government is that the cost of water was not reduced and the measure caused complications in tax administration through granting refunds to taxpayers who were not exporters and caused a loss of 17.7 billion to Government. 

The committee observed that Government is under obligation to provide clean water to all Ugandans. It is in that regard that the committee has recommended that the government proposal to standard rate all water at 18 percent be modified to exclude water for domestic use from zero-rating to total exemption under Schedule II of the Bill. Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to move. I lay on Table the report of the Finance Committee on the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you, Madam Chair. Honourable members, the motion is that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012 be read for the second time. If there are any debates, this will be the appropriate time.

7.23
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Hon. Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this good report. The issue of banning kaveera has been raised in various reports to this House, including the report from the Committee on Natural Resources. I would like to actually hear from the minister as to what steps have been taken, because we have really never had any concrete report as to when the ban on kaveera is going to be implemented. It is very damaging to the environment and we have been saying this time and again. So, I would appreciate if the minister came up with an explanation on this.


I would also like to appreciate the proposal by the committee on exempting VAT on water for domestic consumption. This is very important because as we observed earlier on, there is no way we can subject the local people who use water, which is actually life to all of us, by having VAT reinstated. So, this is something which we should support and I believe the Minister of Finance is going to uphold this proposal. Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

7.25
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde):  Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I support the object of the Bill we are going to amend, but I have an amendment on Section II. Why am I saying that? On the gaming alluded to earlier, the major canons and principles of taxation are to tax the rich people so that you can bridge the gap between the rich and the poor. There is no way we can exempt people who are involved in gaming from VAT. 

I am reliably informed that the computation for VAT is difficult. But we should borrow a leaf and put Excise Tax on the proximate of the people involved in gaming so that it becomes easier to collect the tax so as not to lose that revenue. And for Parliament not to contradict itself - you can imagine taxing the poor for water in the rural areas, where everybody cannot afford and the rich people who can afford are not taxed. I appeal to the committee chairperson and Minister of Finance,  to reinstate the tax on gaming as stated in the Finance Act and as proposed by Parliament last year, so that we can collect the money that we would have lost on water through that Excise Tax on gaming. (Member timed out.)

7.27
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. Mine is about water. Government is in the process of providing water for the urban and rural poor. People are failing to buy a jerrycan of water for the urban poor costed at Shs 20. By putting VAT on water, many people will miss out on this chance of using clean water. Therefore, I want to propose that instead of reinstating tax on water, we charge gambling so that what could have been lost by not taxing water is gained through taxing gambling.

Secondly, when you talk about domestically used water, it becomes a problem. We have a problem in Kampala ever since the President announced that ground rent will only be collected from commercial houses. It is becoming a problem to differentiate between what is commercial and residential. So, the same issue will also crop-up here when we try to differentiate between domestic water and commercial water. So, to avoid those complications, let us go by what we decided in the last financial year; exempt water from tax and continue taxing gambling so as not to punish the poor. 

7.29
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a good job done.  I would like to concentrate on VAT on water supplied. I have spent some time in this sector and we had taken a decision in this House to get rid of VAT on water supplied and it defeats my understanding for Ministry of Finance to bring it back. 

Yesterday, we were struggling to find some money to enhance the budget on health. If you go to some of these areas in Kampala, especially those inhabited by the urban poor, the issue of supply of water becomes extremely important. And the industry has had to get donations - developing partners - to give money to supply water to the urban poor. The Shs 17.7 billion that we are trying to get from VAT, we could easily lose it in the poor health of our people. 

Politically, the next election is going to be won on the supply of water. So, Minister of Finance, we do not want our Government to lose an election. Please, do not bring VAT because we can recover this money from elsewhere and enhance the health of our people by giving them affordable clean water.

Mr Speaker, even if a jerrycan of water was Shs 20 –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do we have a problem with the principles of the Bill or are we going to propose amendments to improve on the provisions of the Bill? If you have no problem with the principles of the Bill, we could pass it at this stage then we go and deal with the details when we are doing the actual provisions. Is that proper? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] I can see the discussions are not on the principles, but on the actual provisions. I will put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill 2012” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

Clause 1

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we substitute clause 1 as follows: “That this Act shall come into force on 1 July 2012 except section 4(c), which shall come into force on 1 October 2012.”

The justification is to avoid retrospective application of the exemptions on different commencement dates. And also, to avoid the challenge of having Government to refund the taxes already collected under the Taxes and Duties Provisional Collection Act. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But Madam Chairperson, there is no 4(c).

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, 4(c) is clause 4 amendment of the section scheduled to VAT. That is the one I am referring to; it is in the amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What I am saying is that the cross-reference of “except section 4(c)” - there is no 4(c) in the Bill.

MS AKOL: It is a new amendment to be inserted in the – Let me check. We are introducing 4(c).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Then let us first deal with 4(c), otherwise we might be doing it in anticipation. So, we stand over clause 1.

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, the committee introduces a new section of clause 4 as paragraph 4(c) immediately after paragraph 4(b) as follows: (c) by inserting immediately after paragraph (i), (jj) the following: (kk) the supply of water for domestic use excluding mineral water and aerated water which contains sweetening matter or flavour.

The justification is:

i.	Basic water for consumption supplied to an average person, including a rural person for domestic use should be VAT-exempt.

ii.	Last financial year, the supply of water was zero-rated and the Uganda Revenue Authority had to refund approximately Shs 17.7 billion to National Water and Sewerage Corporation yet the cost of water was not reduced. It is advised that if the supply of water for domestic use is exempt then no refund on VAT will be made.

iii.	It is also important to note that the exemption is only granted to water which is for domestic consumption – not for commercial purposes which is standard-rated at 18 percent. I beg to move.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to clarify on the gaming taxes; apart from the gaming taxes paying 30 percent corporate tax and in addition, the gaming tax was increased from 15 percent to 20 percent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, we are dealing with this proposed amendment – 4(c).

MRS KIWANUKA: Oh, we agree with the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the amendment proposed by the committee stands part of the clause.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.)

MR KAKOOZA: Clause 4(j) states thus: “The second schedule to the principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after paragraph (i) the following: ‘the supply of betting, lotteries and games of chances’ and repealing paragraph (i) (jj).” This is what it means – what we have been talking about is that we insert a tax so that we maintain the second schedule and we not include the third schedule where it is exempted. So, I propose the following amendment: “The supply of betting, lotteries and games of chances should not be exempt and is referred back to the second schedule for taxing as it was in the Finance Act, 2011.” Maintain the status quo.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, you are proposing a deletion of this proposal. 

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, it is a deletion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing to delete 4(a)?

MR KAKOOZA: What I mean is that we maintain the status quo as it was in the previous law so that we remain with the law as it was.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you proposing to clause 4?

MR KAKOOZA:  I am proposing now that the principal Act of Value Added Tax Act Cap.3 to provide: “The supply of betting, lotteries and games of chances among the exempt supplies...” should not be “exempt”; should be “taxed”, instead of “exempt”. I am amending that word “exempt”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, what is the amendment you are proposing on clause 4?

MR KAKOOZA: Deleting (a)(i)(j).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Delete the whole of clause 4?

MR KAKOOZA: No, there is 4(a) (i) (jj). I am repealing paragraph (i) (jj).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Kakooza is proposing the deletion of sub-clause (a) of clause 4.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, I do second the amendment as proposed by hon. Kakooza.

MR TUMWESIGYE: I support the deletion of 4(a) (i) (jj) because it is just bad for politics. You cannot say that Government is providing for tax exemption on betting, lotteries and games. I support the deletion. 

MS AKOl: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable colleagues, the position you are seeking to reinstate is what the committee had proposed the previous financial year when we were looking at this Bill again. But the ministry came back to us and said, “As much as we want to impose VAT, collecting VAT on these games of betting and other games of chance proved to be a futile attempt.” So, to address this, the ministry introduced and revived the Gaming and Pool Betting Control and Taxation Order, 2012, Statutory Instrument No.45 of 2012, and revised the rates from 15 percent to 20 percent to compensate for the loss of the revenue on what we were going to collect on VAT. 

So, the issue you are talking about is effectively addressed by the increase of the tax from 15 to 20 percent through the Gaming and Pool Betting Control and Taxation, Gaming and Pool Betting Tax Order 2012, Statutory Instrument No.45 of 2012. So, to reinstate VAT will still be a futile attempt. Even if we reinstate it here, it will not be collectable according to what the minister explained to the committee. That is the clarification I want to make. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words it will be double taxation - would it not be?

MS AKOL: Can I clarify on this one? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, if we reinstate VAT and also leave in place this increase from 15 percent to 20 percent, I think this will be a heavy burden on the people who participate in these games because now you will have reinstated VAT and then also, the increase from 15 percent to 20 percent. But as I explained, it is a futile attempt to reinstate VAT because it is difficult to collect it. That is what the Finance ministry told us. Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: I happen to be a practitioner of taxation. If the nomenclature for defining an item in the Finance Act is specified - gambling is specified in its own HS code. When you specify a duty on that harmonised code, that is where the tax revenue authority go and charge. If the import duty is put on gambling, it cannot be the same as VAT, because when you are charging and calculating tabulation, you calculate the import duty and the excise duty; the VAT cannot be the same when you calculate. For the revenue tax, you introduce a tax like we did on airtime. For airtime we, in this House, raised it by 12 percent where there were abnormal profits. 

So, for us to exempt gambling, which is in a nomenclature of the harmonised code that the Revenue Authority can charge, you are leaving it free of VAT and Excise Duty, which are not the same, and they will not be calculated. So, if it is difficult to calculate VAT, then you charge Excise Duty, which can be calculated by URA, and is specified in the Finance Act, where Gambling is specified as a clear item. In the HS code, Gaming is in Chapter 93; that is where it is allocated; and at Revenue Authority the tax rate is charged according to the allocated code. That is why I am proposing that we maintain gambling in the second schedule where URA can charge a tax, and that is where you have put it.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am a member of this committee. Therefore, I will only give information to my honourable colleague. He is proposing that we move pool and betting to the second schedule in order to make it standard. But if we move it to the second schedule, it means we will have exempted it, because teh second schedule provides for exempt supplies and services. 

Mr Chairman, also, what I want to inform the honourable colleague is that the committee is not against pool and betting being charged VAT, but what the committee got to understand is that the administration of VAT is very difficult. Therefore, in order to get a win-win position we are proposing that we increase from 15 percent to 20 percent, which is even higher than the VAT we would charge as Ministry of Finance designs modalities the procedures and the laws governing the operations of such businesses such that we can be able to charge the VAT as the honourable member wants. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. But hon. Kakooza, what you are proposing is what is in the Bill; that they move it to the second schedule. So, what are you saying? Because the proposal is that, “The second schedule to the principle Act be amended to bring this betting under second schedule.” Now you are saying we move it to the second schedule.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairperson, I have the law with me here. That is the Finance Act, where we put the value added exemptions. And it is in section 4. If it is in section 4, the Ministry of Finance is saying that an Act to amend the value added tax - which is in section 4 - which reads, “Exemptions and remissions”. If the item of gambling is put in exemptions that means they will not pay tax. What I am saying is that instead of putting it in section 4 we take it back as it is in the Act in the second schedule where they can actually charge an excise  tariff -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Second schedule of which law?

MR KAKOOZA: Of the Finance Act - so that it is taxed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have to be clear which law you are talking about. If you are just talking about second schedule - apparently, the Value Added Tax Act also has a second schedule. 

MR KAKOOZA: What I am trying to say, I can quote the law -(Interjections)– yes, it is the same: “Exemptions from Import Duty and Value Added Tax conditions and exemptions: Goods imported, purchased, manufactured before paying of VAT or purchased or before clearing through anything, to be charged, it must be put in exemption. The value added tax...” -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What are you reading, honourable member? What is that thing you have just read so that the House can know? Where are you quoting from?

MR KAKOOZA: Because they are saying that -

THE DEUTY CHAIRPERSON: What Act is that, honourable member? 

MR KAKOOZA: This is the Finance Act, which is the main law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: But honourable member I saw you reading from somewhere else. Please guide the House if you have the capacity to.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, it is the same, but this one is the big Act, which is harmonised in the library. It is the same. What I am trying to say is that, URA is saying it is difficult to collect VAT on gambling. So, if it is exempted in the VAT statute, even in the Finance Act they harmonise it in the same way when they are collecting a tax. If they are collecting a tax, you put it in exemption where the Value Added Tax can be put; you exempt it, URA will not collect it. But when you put it on excise, which is composed within the Finance Act, URA will be able to collect it, like we did it in the financial year 2012. What I am trying to say is that we remain with the status quo instead of leaving it as exempt supply. This is what I am saying -(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank you honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform the Speaker that VAT is managed by the VAT Act not the Finance Act as the speaker is trying to allude. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Precisely, that is part of what I am not understanding here.

MS AKOL: In fact, I just want to add, Mr Chair, that what you are actually guiding the House is the way to go because Parliament met with URA in the mid-term review as a committee, and they expressed their difficulties in collecting these taxes because it does not have a paper trail. You go to these betting places, these people go there, put their money, play the game and if they win, they pay and they walk out. There is no paper trail which helps URA to collect this tax. When we standard rated this as Parliament in the previous financial year, that is the challenge URA got and we are now saying that we are taking it back to Schedule II to make it an exempt activity.

At the same time, to address that issue, the Ministry of Finance increased the rate of tax on Gaming and Pool Betting; Control and Taxation Act, Order 2012 increased it from 15 to 20 percent to compensate for that tax loss. Loss because we could not collect it so I do not know what the honourable member really wants to address. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I will put the question - if you are still going to insist on this - I think the explanation is clear that -

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thanks a lot Chairperson for allowing me to contribute. I am not even looking at the technicalities of collecting the tax. I am just looking at politics and I wish to appeal to the Minister of Finance to also consider that. Just a few minutes ago, the shadow minister - I think for Finance - did indicate that actually the government is in the process of exempting gaming, betting - you will not go out to the public to explain that now you moved it from this to this. 

The method is going to come out to say, the NRM Government wants to tax the poor and leave the gamblers. So, what do you lose by just deleting this (a) (j). We know it is difficult to collect the VAT; that is it. You just ignore collecting it, but increase the tax on the other hand from 15 to even 30 percent if you like, but politically, it is not good to just - in the schedule, when you go to tax exempt schedule and you find betting, lotteries and game of chance, people are even going to exploit it. When you go to every village, you find a pool table. They are going to start importing pool tables and put them everywhere and say, we are exempted. So, to avoid all those loopholes and the political miscalculation, just delete (a) (j), and continue to try to look for ways of how to collect VAT. If you cannot collect it, ignore it and just collect the tax of 15 percent, which you have increased to 20 percent. That is my proposition. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is -

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, we are trying to see how we can handle the gambling law, and we should not gamble around. We should not waste time to make laws which are not practical and which will be redundant. I was thinking, we have countries around us and I know when URA is coming up with such laws, they consult. They look around what is happening in Kenya and what is happening in Tanzania. We are not re-inventing the wheel. There are countries which are already implementing such laws. So, I was wondering whether URA with the minister did not consult because it looks like we are moving around trying to find laws that we have been informed by the operators will be difficult to implement. So, I want to hear from my colleague whether we did not look at other countries around us and how they are going about it.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The principle of taxation is that there must be compliant. If the people who are involved have told you that it is difficult to collect, it is useless to maintain that trend. It is like you are actually promoting gaming in a way by putting a tax for window dressing when in actual fact, you cannot collect it. The debate that should be in this House is whether we take 20 percent or we increase it; because we must tax them. The debate I should get from Members is whether 20 percent is adequate or we increase it. That should be the debate on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And that debate we cannot take now because it is not before us. That debate was captured by a statutory instrument already issued. So, that debate is not before us. What is before us is that since this tax - one of the principles of drafting legislation is that the law does not act in vain. So, if a law is in vain, it is not a law.

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, I need to move an amendment to the original amendment which was moved by hon. Kakooza and instead of deleting, we increase the tax from 15 to 30 percent as proposed by the ministry. That is a tax to do with the Gaming and Pool Betting (Control and Taxation)-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That one is already done.

MR SSIMBWA: No, here it is 20 percent, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But what I am saying is that, is not before us now. It is not before us in this Bill. You see, we are dealing with a matter that is in this Bill. This 15 to 20 percent is captured in the statutory instrument already; so it is not in this Bill. In other words, the compensatory action of dealing with the loss - that the failure they experienced in collecting VAT on gaming has been cured already by this instrument by making this increase from 15 percent to 20 percent. So, in other words, the VAT on gaming, betting - whatever it is being called - is no longer necessary because it is in vain. I put the question, because we have approved the amendment proposed by the committee.


MR KAKOOZA: Mr chair, through you explanation - because to me, it is not to lose revenue, but if the Ministry of Finance finds its appropriate, I have no problem. But if you carefully read an act amended as Value Added Tax Act, it provides for supply of betting, lottery and games of chance among the exempt supplies. It clearly indicates that these people who are involved are not going to be taxed and it has a political cost. I am withdrawing -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have withdrawn. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 as amended stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question – Clause 1, yes? 

MRS AKOL: Mr Chairperson, the committee proposes to substitute for Clause 1 the following: “That this Act shall come into force on 1 July 2012 except for Section 4(c) which shall come into force on 1 October 2012.” The justification is first, to avoid retrospective application of the exemption on different commencement dates. 

Two, to avoid the challenge of having Government refund the taxes already collected under the Taxes and Duties Provisional Collection Act. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that is clear. I put the question to the amendment on the commencement clause as proposed by the committee. I put the question that the amendment be approved by the House.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Amendment, agreed to.


Clause, 1 as amended

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 1, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Title, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.02
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.02
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.03
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

8.03 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A Bill for an Act entitled, “The Value Added Tax Amendment Act, 2012.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations honourable minister; congratulations chairperson. Next item.  

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EAST AFRICAN EXCISE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

8.04
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any seconder? Yes the honourable Minister for Fisheries, the Government Chief Whip and hon. Mawanda have seconded the Bill.

8.04
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): The object of the Bill is to amend the East African Excise Management Act, Cap. 28.

a)	To provide for the definition of certain words introduced by this amendment which are not currently defined in the Act.

b)	To repeal certain redundant provisions.

c)	To insert part ix(a) providing for returns and assessment, and ix(b) providing for offences and penalties. 

The East African Excise Management Act Cap. 28 is an old law passed in 1970. It lacks comprehensive provisions on how excise duty is collected and in particular, it does not provide for the filing of returns. Further, it lacks adequate provisions to facilitate the Uganda Revenue Authority to collect excise duty. 

The aim of the amendment is to provide a procedure for the filing of returns and assessments. It further provides enforcement procedures to enable the collection of excise duty.  The provisions are similar to those in other laws. 

d) 	To repeal part of (x), (xi) and (xii). These are consequential repeals as a result of inserting (ix)(a) and (ix)(b). 

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you honourable minister. Madam Chairperson?

8.06
MRS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will straight away go to the observations of the committee.  The committee makes the following observations on page 3:

Review of the East African Excise Management Act Cap. 28

While the title of the Act suggests that this is part of the East African Community legislation, this is not the case. This was originally legislation from the former East African Community. When the community was dissolved, Uganda saved and domesticated the legislation for the management of its excise duty. This means that Uganda has two laws governing excise duty, namely, The East African Excise Management Act Cap. 28 of 1970 dealing with tariff management, and the Excise Tariff Act Cap. 338 of 2000 dealing with rates of the tariff.

However, the East African Excise Management Act lacks comprehensive provisions on a number of issues including how excise duty is to be collected. 

Further still, it was observed that:

a)	The language is obsolete and makes reference to institutions in the former East African Community. For example, the Department of Customs and Excise as bodies responsible for the administration of excise duty.

b)	The administration procedures and penalty mechanisms are not sufficiently elaborate.

c)	The act lacks adequate provisions to facilitate URA to collect excise duty. 

Therefore, the amendment seeks to remedy the above situation by inserting provisions for an administrative and procedural framework similar to that in other tax laws. 

The committee observed that:
 
a)	The amendment is overdue. Since 1970, Government has had opportunity every financial year to revise tax laws and it has not done so.

b)	 The amendment should have been a total overhaul of the entire Act to consolidate the management and rate of excise duty. This will help taxpayers understand their obligations and rights in a much clearer manner.

c)	The title is clearly misleading. The committee notes Government’s undertaking to present a comprehensive law in this regard as explicitly stated in paragraph 91 of the Budget Speech. This commitment should be expedited. 

Recovering duty from third parties 

Clause 9, paragraph 90(j) provides that, “Where a person fails to pay duty on the date on which the duty is payable and the duty is not the subject of a dispute, the Commissioner General, may, by notice in writing, require any person holding or who may subsequently hold money for or on account of the person liable to pay duty, to pay that money to the Commissioner General on the date set out in the notice up to the amount of the duty due.”

URA informed the committee that despite the existence of the notice, banks deduct what the taxpayer owes them. The balance, if any, is what is remitted to the Authority. The committee observed that Government has the first call on the taxpayers’ money. However, laws regulating financial institutions are still weak. The committee in line with its earlier recommendation on a comprehensive review in this regard recommends that laws governing financial institutions should be urgently reviewed. In this regard, the committee recommends that Parliament passes the Bill as presented without amendments.

I beg to report and also beg to lay on Table the Report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2012. 

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Honourable members, our committee agrees with the Bill. The terms are clear. The explanations are very persuasive. I propose that I put the question and deal with the matter more comprehensively at the amendment stage. Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EAST AFRICAN EXCISE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 1 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 2, agreed to.)

(Clause 3, agreed to.)

(Clause 4, agreed to.)

(Clause 5, agreed to.)

(Clause 6, agreed to.)

(Clause 7, agreed to.)

(Clause 8, agreed to.)

(Clause 9, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.14
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto - 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, we have a different Bill. According to what you have read, it is different from what we have. Maybe we are discussing something different from what we have. We have “The East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2012” and I thought that is the one we are discussing. But according to the guidance, we are not moving in accordance with the clauses of this Bill. 

Clause 10

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 10 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 11, agreed to.)

(The Fifth Schedule, agreed to.)

(The Title, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.16
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.17
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2012” and has passed it without amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.17
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report Adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE EAST AFRICAN EXCISE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

8.17
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A Bill for an Act entitled, “The East African Excise Management (Amendment) Act, 2012”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations Minister, congratulations Chairperson, congratulations honourable members. We have broken a jinx. We have never been able to pass these laws and these reports before the 31st August in my recollection. This year we have broken the jinx. 

This house stands adjourned to tomorrow’s special sitting which starts by receiving the remains of Justice Mulenga at 9.00 a.m.; it will be in the central foyer and the session for paying tribute will start at 2 o’clock tomorrow. But the formal sitting of the House stands adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock.

(House rose at 8.19 p.m. and was adjourned until Friday, 31 August, 2012 at 9.00 a.m.)
