


Wednesday, 5 August 2020

Parliament met at 3.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. We do apologise for the late start. We had the statutory meeting of the Commission and had many issues to handle. I hope that we shall be able to catch up.

Honourable members, we have received information about the death of Mr Damian Kato Kyewusa, a long-time civil servant. He joined the Public Service in 1973 as an assistant secretary and he was posted to Kotido.

He rose to the rank of the level of permanent secretary. He served as Permanent Secretary in the Office the President, the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare and the Inspectorate of Government.

At the time of his death, he was Secretary to the Amnesty Commission.

Yesterday, 04 August 2020, at least 100 people were killed and 4,000 wounded in a massive explosion that shook the Lebanese capital Beirut. The cause of the explosion is not clear but it centred on the city’s spot area. 

Investigations are being carried out, focussing on an estimated 2,750 metric tonnes of explosive ammonium nitrate, which had been stored at a warehouse and could have been the cause of the explosion.

Honourable members, this is an eye opener to us. I urge the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business to direct institutions responsible for health and safety, majorly the factories and institutions which have explosive and volatile substances, to take precautionary measures to ensure we do not suffer such calamity.

The numerous petrol stations, which are all over residential areas, may cause danger to the population. We have complained a lot about licensing petrol stations in the central business district. For instance, on Plot 1 on Kampala Road, there is a petrol station near all our offices.

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I would like to invite you to stand up for a moment of silence in respect of Mr Kato and also the people of Lebanon. May their souls rest in eternal peace.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, I raised on behalf of the citizens, the issue of the traders in the non-food items. Today, I have another petition. This time, it is from operators of cinemas in this city who say that even under ordinary circumstances, they have Special Operating Procedures (SOPs),  they have not been considered for reopening. 

They have attached a list of countries that have opened up and allowed cinemas to operate. These are:

    a. Austria in May,
    b. Bosnia and Herzegovina,
    c. Bulgaria,
    d. Latvia,
    e. Luxemburg,
    f. Netherlands,
    g. Denmark, among others.

They are asking that the National Task Force considers their issue. I will be sending it to the Prime Minister so that something can be done about them.

I also ask the Government to progressively look at all the sectors, which are still closed so that our people can get some reprieve. We can have just a few matters of national concern.

3.43
MR BERNAD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to have a word in regard to your communication particularly, on the petition that has been presented to you by the operators of the video halls.

The lockdown closed schools and all children are back home. We all know that most of these video halls have been places where children are abused. They are either raped or it is a place where they are shown pornography, films or videos that are beyond their age.

Therefore –

THE SPEAKER: I did not talk about video halls. I said cinema halls.

MR ATIKU: Yes, they claim to be cinema halls but these are video hall  operators. The cinemas in Kampala and all over the country are known. The video operators hide behind cinema operators. Most of them in slums –

THE SPEAKER: Do not pre-judge. I bring their concern; let us take it to the Prime Minister. Those who have evidence against them should take it there.

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, sending it to the Prime Minister, to me, is not the right thing to do. We have a committee of Parliament that can handle that case so that we can hear or put them in the right place so that when opening cinemas, we know exactly what we are opening.

Sometimes, by sending these things to Government, you end up having a political decision that may not be in the good interest of our children.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is the Government that locked up these places. Let us pass it to them. Of course, our committee can also look at it but the main recipient should be the Government. I will give a copy to our committees.

3.45
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker, to add to your concern, I agree with you on that matter. However, I would like to also pass on a request that currently in Kampala, we have another problem of eviction of tenants. The eviction is in form of landlords putting new padlocks on tenants’ shops.

If I may recollect, His Excellency the President, during the issuance of the COVID guidelines, clearly stated that he had halted evictions of all tenants until he comes back to give any other form of directives.

Therefore, I would like you to also implore the task force to let us know whether this waiver has been lifted or it is still in place. The tenants are confused at the moment.

3.46
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, concerning your communication on the lockdown, I am speaking with a low voice because the people of Busia District and Busia Municipality are five months down the road in a lockdown. There are no markets operating and no transport or referrals from Busia.

I pray that the Government scientists, through the national task force, give us alternative SOPs so that we can also have a life. We do not have a life. In addition, while the people are suffering, there is no food at all. 

I, therefore, pray that Government gives us alternative ways on how we can live and be part of the people in Uganda and the -(Interruption)

MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the President addressed the country last time, we expected him to say something about the border districts. We expected the President to say there would be at least minimum movement of the people to and from the border districts but since the people did not hear anything, they have started moving on their own yet this poses a threat to the fight against Covid-19. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to implore you to let the President make a special communication in relation to how people in the border districts should operate. We are locked up yet our people are suffering. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I made a ruling on that very issue last week that the Government should tell us how the border districts are going to survive and how they are going operate.

MR MACHO: You have ruled on that matter several times. However, the Government has not given us any alternative; they are silent. I, therefore, request them to kindly open the food markets in Busia Municipality so that our people can stop going to Kenya. Every morning, hundreds go to Kenya because Government has continuously closed Sofia Market. Open the markets and the transport system so that taxi operators there can begin work to help, among others, the sick and save them from death. 

Madam Speaker, micro finance institutions like ASA Microfinance (Uganda) Limited are demanding money from the women because life is becoming so hard. The effect comes back onto my good party - the NRM, yet we still want to be in power. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, concerning the issue of rent, this week alone, I think I have received 10 letters from different people in Kampala, Jinja and other places asking me to help them pay their rent. 

They are telling me that they are now outside and they need help. The President talked about the issue of rent but I do not know whether there was any instrument issued to that effect or it remained on the radio.

3.50
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Madam Speaker, in addition to rent, there are traders who have arrears with Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). I remember the President said that they should not be charged interest and that at least, they should be given some grace period to recover from COVID-19.

However, as I talk, URA has gone ahead to send court brokers to confiscate properties and cars of those people who have tax arrears with it.

Madam Speaker, when I called the Commissioner-General of URA, he adamantly told me that the President has not signed the Bill. Madam Speaker, it is only this Parliament that can really enforce this; that can stop URA from confiscating traders’ property and to stop charging interest on the tax arrears that the traders have.

THE SPEAKER: But that must come from the Government. Honourable Chief Whip, we need a solution; we need an instrument and written directives.

3.51
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I kindly request that as we appreciate your intervention over the 40 locked-down districts at the borders, Government should bring a special report pertaining these districts.

Border issues in Adjumani District have now become political. Moyo District has been opened yet it shares a border with South Sudan. Our communities believe we are not assertive enough like our colleagues in Moyo. Therefore, we need that explanation. Further, Government should address the nation on why Adjumani has been left out yet the Moyo border with South Sudan is now open. We have failed to give responses, Madam Speaker.

Secondly, we made a special request on the Floor of Parliament for special intervention, since we are totally locked down. This has never happened. All our businesses are locked down especially those generating income to support people’s livelihood. The Government should give us a statement on what their specific interventions to us are. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, you have heard the outcry from the country.

3.52
MS AKELLO FRANCA (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Madam Speaker, about rent, businesses were closed for over three months. However, ever since they were opened, landlords have been demanding their money from people who have not been working due to the lockdown.

Madam Speaker, a word from His Excellency, the President would make a difference. This was a loss to all of us and no business was going on. The owners of the buildings should accept to forego the three months at least to enable businesses resume as they recover. I believe that if such a message came from the President, everybody would follow suit.

Finally, I raised a question here for an explanation from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development regarding schools, which have contracts pending payments. Money was released for the last quarter of the previous financial year but schools were stopped from using that money.

Therefore, since the minister for finance is here - you had directed them to come with an explanation the following week but now a month later, nobody has given an answer to that. Some schools have grown bushy but they cannot use the Capitation Grant money for such purposes. Therefore, since the finance minister is present, I beg that you grant him time to respond to that. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think there is a Member who had wanted to ask - let us hear from the Government Chief Whip first.

3.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want us to critically analyse the challenges that were brought by COVID-19. Some of us are both tenants and landlords. 

Imagine a situation where you went to the bank, got a loan, built your house and got tenants. You are supposed to service that loan in the bank using the money paid to you by the tenants. The banks have not forgiven you and you are supposed to pay. 

This is a house you built from your savings to get school fees for your children. Now before the President instructs landlords not to demand money from the tenants, there must be an arrangement from Government to compensate the landlords because they have loans to pay in the banks.

Therefore, the President encouraged the landlords to at least be courteous –(Interjection)– give me time please, I am developing my point. Hon. Kibalya, can you please take your seat?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. You know, when you want to speak, you just stand; you do not move. I will see you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Sincerely speaking, this point touches everybody. For us to say that the President instructs the landlord not to demand for rent is a misrepresentation. The Government has to make sure that there is an arrangement for the landlords to be at peace that the banks, probably, will not put pressure on them. Be courteous; this is like a situation for the teachers who are teaching in private schools. 

Therefore, if we put money in the banks and ensure that the interest rates are reduced, we would have helped Ugandans to borrow money, improve their businesses as the landlords are persuaded to be humane and tolerate everybody who suffered under COVID-19. 

In my opening remarks, I told you that I am both a tenant and a landlord. I am renting somewhere but I have tenants. I can tolerate but there are those who have their houses and it is their source of income. The question that has been put by the Speaker is correct; can’t Government come up with an arrangement, which can at least put the landlords at peace? That these tenants will not go away without paying - (Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much. The Government Chief Whip raises a pertinent issue that everyone nearly is both a landlord and a tenant and we are all potentially both. The question here is - and we talked about it at the beginning. We sent an advisory to the Government through a motion in April here in this august House. The motion by hon. Elijah Okupa that I and hon. Cecilia Ogwal seconded included the following:

    1. The issue of addressing credit facilities of all the people. We warned that the measures you had brought to lock down the nation shall lead to a far reaching impact that none of us would be able to get out of. 

	Therefore, we raised the issue of freezing the interest rates on the basis that the monies we would borrow, would be given partly to the banks to freeze all interest rates of people who had loans in the banks. The reason was that we were very sure that the default rate would be definitely high. What would we do as an intervention? - Immediately freeze all interest rates on mortgages and all other businesses just like the countries where we copied this lockdown, definitely did. We did not adopt that and that is something that we advised.

    2. The landlords say that they have been paying for the utilities, rightly so. We urged Government and even a motion was moved on this Floor, that Government intervenes on the matters of utilities like water and power; they did not. The Government then came up with a position of saying, it is all okay and there will be no evictions. However, even if you postponed my payment - the issue that these tenants are raising is that even if you postpone my payment whether in the bank or to the landlord, I actually did not receive that money and I have not made that money. Not that they are not willing to pay; the proposal was that they pay for storage to their landlords; that you have been good and you stored our goods, we can agree on a win-win situation. 

My question has been on evictions; none of them is not willing to even pay rescheduled payment but the President halted evictions. When you close my shop, you have potentially evicted me.
    
THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I agree with hon. Nsereko. I was actually advancing the point of making sure that we have an arrangement to have affordable credit facilities for the people to pay. What I started with is that for people who think that the President will instruct I, a landlord, not to get my money from a tenant, he cannot. What hon. Nsereko has said can help us. Even to say that we stop evictions, yes, I will not evict you but I need my money; I have to pay tuition.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what we are asking is that table this matter to the Cabinet and say, we want some solutions.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was already instructed. We need a bailout. There are so many areas, which suffered under COVID-19 and I thought that the ministry is trying to balance out. We need taxes from water and electricity but again, we are saying, let the wanainchi not pay because of the obvious problem. Therefore, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has to balance that. 

We need money for the roads but we need to bailout our people who are suffering. Let me take it upon myself, Madam Speaker, so that Government can speak on this; a credit facility that is affordable, which will help people to come out of the challenges of COVID-19. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We would also like to remind the Government about the money that came from the European Union to support COVID-19 affected nations as a grant. We want to know how that money has been spent or where it is going.

4.03
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers representative): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national concern in relation to the circular that was issued by the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 22 July 2020. 

It was instructing head teachers of Government schools to refund funds that were sent to schools in form of capitation grants to them, for the second term of the Academic Year 2020, owing to the fact that schools did not open for term II, even when a circular had been sent to these teachers to prepare for opening. 

It should be noted with concern that the said instruction issued by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not only unfair but unrealistic and it does not consider several factors on the ground or environment within which our educational institutions operate.

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to the following costs and activities that remained even when the schools closed:

    1. Salaries; these include payment of salaries for non-teaching staff on PTAs but are currently not being paid due to the fact that parents are not paying their school dues.
    2. Monitoring; this includes transport and other costs incurred by the head teachers of institutions during routine visits to the school premises. 
    3. Utilities; this involves payment of electricity, water and other related bills. 
    4. School administration; this is where school activities are run on the calendar basis. As such, they often get suppliers who supply on credit - particularly food suppliers - whom they have to pay the moment they get any money. 
    5. Maintenance; this includes repairs, fumigation, routine cleaning, to mention but a few.
    6. Security; it includes the purchase of security items such as padlocks and payment of security day and night guards, who are not on Government payroll.

Madam Speaker, based on the above concerns, it is evident that the funds for management, administration and contingency votes as part of the funds in question, have been utilised by the educational institutions on operation and maintenance costs and therefore, are not redundant on school accounts as assumed.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s communication indirectly implied that the heads of institutions should have abandoned the schools until further instructions given by His Excellency His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda to re-open them. Remember that earlier on, there was a circular that went viral and they were telling them to prepare for opening and because of this, it was impractical – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, those are things you would say when then minister comes with his statement. Let him explain to us why he is asking for the capitation grant. When he comes, then you will give those reasons - they need to pay security, they need utilities, they need to pay suppliers; otherwise, you are now answering your own question. 

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the President for the allocation of Shs 20 billion to the private teachers who have been suffering. We are hoping that the money will be given out as expected to all the beneficiaries. 

My prayer is that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come to this august House and explain how the ministry plans to clear the anomalies that have come as a result of the circular that was sent by the ministry. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of finance, you are here. Please give us an answer quickly.

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for raising this important issue. 

A few months ago, before the second term began, we released the resources for the capitation grant amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. We wrote to the schools and said that if we do not open the schools, please do not utilise the resources as we monitor the situation. That was second term. Now we have written to them to say that if these resources were not utilised, please return them -(Interjections)- that is what we have said. 

We are cognisant of the fact that the capitation grant caters for a number of things, including fixed costs but there are also other things that were not carried out because the schools were not operating. 

I request the Member to give us some little time and we get this response because we have just written. Let us get the response. In case there are some complications, we shall attend to them. That was the rationale. We had written to them before and we have written to them after the term because the term did not take place –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you. Honourable minister, I think you should be serious on this. Supposing you gave money to a school for a kid to go and participate in games and the school has not participated in the games, would such resources be used to do another activity? I do not want us to come here and say things for the sake of speaking. Where money is for electricity, remove if you have used it to pay a bill and account. You cannot go and misaporpiate money and say it is because of COVID-19. We shall not accept that. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, the secretary General, Forum for Democratic Change. We are one on that issue. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us wait for the minister of finance to give us feedback depending on the response that comes from the schools.

4.11
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding property rates in Kampala. 

Government, through URA and KCCA in Kampala continues to send demand notes for property rates arrears including for the periods when this country was placed under a complete lockdown. 

As we all know, businesses around town were closed from March and many have not re-opened up to now, meaning that property owners have suffered a multiplier effect and cannot collect rent from which to get the property rates. Some of the properties in question house schools, whose future is now very uncertain. 

My prayers are two; one is that Government should come up with a guiding statement on how to go about this. 

Secondly, in the meantime, collection of property rates in Kampala, at least, should be suspended until the environment is economically conducive for the same. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we have to ask the Government to examine how to manage the issue of property rates because it is KCCA and URA. These are now two ministries. I do not know what the minister of finance says about that. Hon. Bahati, what do you say about the issue of property rates that URA and KCCA are demanding?

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I could make a statement on that tomorrow after I have reconciled the two positions. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

4.13
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter concerning the implementation of the Access to Information Act, 2005. 

Right of access to information is not only a fundamental right but also an enabler of all other rights. It is also critical for enabling citizens to access and exercise their voice so that they can access any information concerning any agency, sector or ministry to effectively monitor and hold Government accountable.   

It has taken more than 15 years since this Act was enacted for Government to see that some of these laws are effected. Fifteen (15) years later, no ministry or agency has come to Parliament to present some of these reports in relation to what citizens demand. 

There are citizens that have forwarded their demands to some of these agencies. A case in point is Mr Elias Bainomugisha who requested to have some information from UNRA, concerning the streets in Ntungamo. In the same agency of UNRA, there was a one Paul Tashobya, who wanted to know something concerning the upgrade of the Rukungiri-Kanungu Road. 

The same UNRA had somebody called Doreen who wanted to know what was happening to the upgrade related to the project in Nebbi – Madam Speaker, I saw the Prime Minister coming in and I thought he was moving to the podium. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is welcome.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, in the same line, a document which I will lay on Table - the Africa Freedom of Information Centre -requested the Ministry of Education and Sports to avail them with a copy of teachers and how they transfer teachers and head teachers but this was not possible. 

Section 43 of the Act compels the minister and heads of these departments to make sure that if a citizen has requested for information, you allow him access the information. In case it is not possible to have him access information, give reasons as to why he cannot access the information. 

Our prayer is that the Prime Minister, as the Leader of Government Business, comes to the Floor of Parliament – because when access to information is violated, our oversight role is abused, as Parliament. 

We request that the Prime Minister comes to the Floor of Parliament to tell us what is happening to some of these agencies that have stubbornly decided to abuse the Access to Information Act 2005, which allows the citizens to access information and have not even taken effort or any step to see that information is availed. We request that the Prime Minister comes and gives us a plan in case there are errant agencies and ministries and what plan he has to either punish them or have the programmes implemented. 

I beg to lay on the Table, the document that shows the citizens who put in their requests to some of these agencies.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you may recall that in the last Session, I had a meeting with the Africa Freedom of Information Centre and they were complaining about the same thing. I, therefore, call upon the Prime Minister to respond to those requests so that we know how to implement this law. 

Let us have hon. Chekamondo for two minutes, followed by hon. Macho.

4.17
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in relation to the boundaries of Kwoti Sub-county in Kapchorwa District. On 12 June 2015, under Minute 05/2015, Kapchesombe Local Government passed a resolution and created Kochi Sub-county, together with six new parishes and 30 villages from the then mother sub-county, which was called Kapchesombe. This resolution was later communicated to Kapchorwa District Local Government.

On 27 August 2015, the Chairman of Kapchorwa District Local Government wrote a letter to the Ministry of Local Government granting the sub-division of Kwoti Sub-county from the mother Kapchesombe Sub-county, which was Kapchorwa District Local Government Resolution recommendation under Minute 28/08/2015. The minute extract was attached to the letter.

Madam Speaker, on 4 July 2017, the Ministry of Local Government wrote back to Kapchorwa District Local Government, approving the creation of Kwoti Sub-county, under Section 7(5) of the Local Government Act, showing the new six parishes and 30 villages. The letter was copied to the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission, the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of Kapchorwa District, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury (PS/ST) and the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Kapchorwa.

Madam Speaker, on 4 July 2017, the Ministry of Local Government wrote and approved this sub-county. On 22 June 2018, Kapchorwa District Local Government, again, wrote to the Ministry of Local Government requesting for the operationalisation of Kwoti Sub-county and copied the letter, again, to the Chairman of the Electoral Commission, the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to Treasury and the Resident District Commissioner for Kapchorwa. This letter was received by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 25 June 2018.

On 29 January –

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MS CHEKAMONDO: Madam Speaker, since they followed the right procedure to acquire the sub-county and the parishes are already operational, my prayer is that the Minister of Local Government comes out with a clear boundary of Kwoti Sub-county and that of Kapchorwa Municipality. Secondly, Kwoti Sub-county should be given its own code so that it can operate as required by the Local Government Act.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the papers that support this information on the Floor of Parliament. This is the letter by Kapchesombe –

THE SPEAKER: I think let us hand that over to the Minister of Local Government because that is his business. Clerk, write the issue and send it to the Minister of Local Government. That is for him, not for us.

4.22
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, with your permission, allow me to remove the mask.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, you should learn to use the masks. You are supposed to use it as long as you are in public and this is public.

MR MACHO: I have difficulties in breathing. Madam Speaker, Government had a programme to fight malaria in the districts on the shores of Lake Victoria and that programme was called the National Malaria Control Programme. It also benefitted all the districts in Eastern Uganda under Wave One and Wave Two that were rolled out to almost every district in eastern except Busia District. 

Busia is one of the districts with the highest prevalence of malaria and so, leaving it out, shocked people. That is why I brought this as a matter of national importance to understand why Busia, with the highest rate of malaria and being on the shores of Lake Victoria, was left out.

Luckily, we have the Wave Two project, which is meant to address malaria sensitisation and distribution of mosquito nets. We pray that Busia District be included on the list so that our people can be saved from this big danger of malaria.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, you saw how the Government Chief Whip dodged answering the question of the locked-down districts at the borders and it is good that the Prime Minister is here. Busia District has been in lockdown for almost five months. We need Government to help us because our people are dying – (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, as my colleague requests for mosquito nets for the people in Busia District, Kamuli District has no mosquito nets. While the colleague has requested the Prime Minister to come and update the House on his concerns, I request that the Prime Minister also updates the House on the districts that have equally not received mosquito nets. I have no nets in Kamuli yet people are dying of malaria.

THE SPEAKER: Where have the mosquito nets been distributed so that we know who has them?

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, under the Wave One project, they distributed mosquito nets to people in the entire Eastern Uganda, including Busoga and Bugisu sub-regions. However, as I talk, Busia is the only district that was left out. Imagine Tororo and Bugiri districts, which are not on the lake shores received mosquito nets. Mosquito nets have become very political, yet malaria is not a political disease.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Health should come and advise on the distribution of mosquito nets and in particular explain why Busia District has not been supported. 

MR NSEREKO: Just a comment on your ruling, Madam Speaker. There is no district that I know of in Kampala. The distribution of nets was launched and just last week, the ministry said they were distributing masks in Kampala. Let anyone in Kampala come up and say that they have received the Government masks or a mosquito net.

4.26
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, the issue of the mosquito nets is serious. In Ngora, we are waiting. I do not know what has happened to the Ministry of Health. Just direct them to distribute the nets. They told us there were four million nets but they are not there.

Madam Speaker, I raise on a matter of public concern. Of late, the telecom companies that are providing us with networks - like MTN - have had unstable network. Last weekend, in Ngora and in some parts of Teso, it took us about nine hours without network. Even in this House, sometimes when we use our iPads, we are unable to access information. 

Many subscribers of these telecom companies, especially MTN have suffered a great deal. They want to communicate to their loved ones and do business but they are unable because of the poor network, let alone the places that are not connected to these telecom networks. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that since many Ugandans cannot use their phones due to poor network, I would like to ask the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to tell us why the network is not only poor but unstable in many parts of this country including the Parliament of Uganda. Otherwise, this is an embarrassment. We have a right to access information, as my colleague stated earlier. 

Secondly, I pray that these telecom companies tell us why they are failing at this critical period, when people need to access the Internet and information since we are now going scientific. This is why - (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to my honourable colleague, regarding the lack of network in several areas. I would like to give an example of my district.

I have sub-counties such as Omiya Pachwa, Lira Kato, Geregere, Koromor, Lira Palwo and Wol. Actually, several areas in my district are not connected at all. In fact, you can’t find any area with network not even for Airtel or MTN. Now that we are going into campaigns, it is going to be very difficult for some of these areas to access electoral information. 

MR ABALA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I would like to request the concerned ministry to tell us why we have this problem now yet there is a law in place and staff are there.  Why is the network very poor? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance should come and update the House on the intermittent supply of internet services in the country, especially now that the use of telecommunications needs to be fortified for the purposes of the general elections. Come back to us in one week’s time. Let us go to item three.

BILLS
FIRST READING
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) (NO.3) BILL, 2020

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lutanywa.

4.31
MR JACK ODUR (NRM, Kibanda South County, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I present this Bill, allow me highlight a very disturbing issue that is happening within Kiryandongo District, which is also related to this Bill I am presenting.

We have over 1,000 identity cards that have been confiscated in regard to the Maragoli Community. Just because these people share names with other ethnicities in this country, their cards were confiscated since the inception of the national identity card project. Up to today, these cards have never been given out. These Ugandans cannot access social services because it is a requirement to have identity cards and so, I would like to seek your indulgence that the minister -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that evidence should fortify your proposal in the Bill. We have noted it but I think you should take it to the committee as evidence of the need to handle this Bill. We have noted your problem but go to the first reading.

MR JACK ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) (No.3) Bill, 2020” be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you have a Certificate of Financial Implication? 

MR JACK ODUR: Madam Speaker, the Bill is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implication. I, therefore, beg to lay on the Table the Bill and the Certificate of Financial Implication.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back, taking into account that the outcome may determine whether that community is able to participate in the elections or not.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $ 235.458 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) TO FINANCE THE DEVELOPMENT OF NAMAGUMBA-BUDADIRI-NALUGUGU (29.0KM), KATUNA-MUKO-KAMUGANGUZI ROAD [104.0KM] AND LAROPI-MOYO-AFOJI (SUDAN BORDER) ROAD

4.34
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Mr Speaker, I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by the Government to borrow up to $235.458 million from the African Development Bank to finance the development of Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu Road, Katuna-Muko-Kamuganguzi Road and Laropi-Moyo-Afoji Road, which connects up to the Sudan Border.

Before I present the report, Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the following documents:

    i. The Report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government borrow up to $235.458 Million from the African Development Bank (ADB) to finance Development of Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu Road, Katuna-Muko-Kamuganguzi Road and Laropi-Moyo-Afoji  Road, which connects up to Sudan Border.
    ii. A brief to Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $235.458 million by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
    iii. His Excellency the President’s approval of the project.
    iv. A Certificate of Financial Implication confirming Government’s counterpart funding.
    v. Clearance letter by the National Planning Authority.
    vi. Loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the African Development Bank on financing of the project.
    vii. Project concept note of updating Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu Road. 
    viii. Project concept note of upgrading of Muko-Katuna Road and Muko-Kachwekano-Kamuganguzi Road.
    ix. Project concept note for upgrading of Laropi-Moyo-Afoji Road and construction of Laropi Bridge.
    x. Disbursement schedule by component of the Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu Road, Katuna-Muko-Kamuganguzi Road, and Laropi-Moyo-Afoji Road.
    xi. Minutes of the meetings held to consider the proposal by Government to borrow the amount of money I have alluded to.

I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, this committee report is uploaded on our iPads and can be accessed. Therefore, I will just focus on the major issues. 

I will begin with the project description and components.

Project 1: Laropi-Moyo-Afoji (Sudan Border) Road and Construction of Laropi Bridge

The project comprises of the Laropi-Moyo-Afoji Road – Afoji is on the Sudan border - and Umi-Laropi Bridge across the River Nile. This forms part of the regional, national and international route connecting the remote north-western region of Uganda and South Sudan. 

The road traverses three districts: Amuru, Adjumani and Moyo. It has a gravel-wearing course in a fairly good condition, but requires regular maintenance due to the high rainfall in the region.

The connection across the Nile is currently made using a ferry that traverses Umi and Laropi. To the south of the Nile river is the Atiak-Umi Road, which connects the project road to the Gulu-Atiak-Nimule Road. Atiak-Umi is currently under construction using grant funding from the European Union.

Project 2: Muko-Katuna Road, Muko-Kachwekano-Kamuganguzi Road

The Katuna Border-Muko-Kamuganguzi Road is an existing national road from the Katuna border towards Muko that connects to the paved Kabale-Kisoro Road and is a critical agricultural, security and tourism road. The road starts at the Uganda/Rwanda Katuna border and traverses the international boundary in the north-westerly direction through the towns of Katuna, Ryakarimira, Rubaya, Habubaare Butanda, Kashasha Bafundi, and Muko.

Project 3: Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu Road in Mbale Sub-region

The Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu Road is an existing gravel road located in the eastern part of Uganda. This project road starts at Namagumba Trading Centre, about six kilometres from the junction along the Mbale-Sironko Road. It moves in an easterly direction up to Budadiri, where it changes to a north-westerly direction passing through Mutufu and Salalira trading centres, before ending at Nalugugu Trading Centre along the Mbale-Moroto Road. It connects Mbale and Sironko districts, characterised with rolling to hilly terrain, with some winding alignment sections and relatively steep gradients. It crosses several valleys with streams and rivers that emanate from the Mount Elgon ranges.

Madam Speaker, maybe I can read some details. The Laropi-Moyo-Afoji Road component will finance the construction of the Laropi-Moyo-Afoji (Sudan border) Road and Umi-Laropi Bridge across the River Nile. It will comprise of the following interventions:

i) 	Construction of a seven-metre carriageway and paved shoulders.
ii) 	2.5 per cent normal cross fall for carriageway and shoulders.
iii) 	Construction of a kilometre-long bridge across River Nile. 

The Muko-Katuna Road component will include the following interventions: 

i) 	Upgrading from gravel to an A class II paved two-lane standard road, including provision for non-motorised transport.

ii) 	Upgrading of road to an 11-metre-wide roadway.

iii) 	50-millimetre asphalt wearing course. 

The Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu component will comprise of the following interventions:

i) 	Upgrading from gravel to an A class II paved two-lane standard road, including provision for non-motorised transport.
ii) 	Upgrading of the road to a 10-metre-wide roadway.
iii) 	50-millimetre asphalt wearing course.

Financing Arrangements of the Project 

The African Development Bank will provide a loan of US$ 235.458 million, equivalent to 89.345 per cent of the financing cost of the project.

The Government of Uganda will put in US$ 28.081 million, equivalent to 10.655 per cent of the total project cost. 

The rest of the details can easily be read.

After thorough analysis of the project, the committee made several observations and recommendations. I can quickly point out some of them.

Performance of Externally Funded Projects 

The committee recommends that to guard these road projects from the above challenges, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) should addresses the following:

1. 	Implement all preparatory activities for these road projects, like detailed feasibility studies and designs, to ensure that the projects are technically, environmentally, socially and economically viable as well as ensuring value for money.

2. 	Implement the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), establishment of project management teams and other conditions precedent to loan disbursements.

Government Counterpart Funding to Fully Implement the RAP

This is the plan for compensating land owners. The committee recommends that funds for land acquisition be ring-fenced to enable the completion of all compensation payments prior to commencement of construction works.

In addition, Government expedites putting up of central utility corridors to avoid multiple compensations whenever public infrastructure projects are being constructed.

Slow Disbursement of Externally Borrowed Funds in the Works and Transport Sectors 

The committee recommends that UNRA addresses the challenges of low absorption of externally borrowed funds to enable the country achieve the envisaged economic returns for these projects. 

Madam Speaker, I think Members can read the rest.  

The committee looked at these as national roads and recommends the request by Government to borrow $235.458 million from the African Development Bank to finance the Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu Road, Katuna-Muko-Kamuganguzi Road, and Laropi-Moyo-Afoji Road be approved by Parliament subject to the recommendations herein. I beg to report, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chair of the Committee on National Economy and the members for your hard work. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum numbers. You can now speak to it. As I invite hon. Woboya, I wanted to know - I do not see any sanitation and sitting facilities.

4.48
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to do the obvious on behalf of the people of Budadiri East and Sironko in general; I would like to appreciate the support of the President and Government in general for allowing this loan for the construction of Namagumba-Nalugugu Road because people have waited for it for so long. 

This road will boost tourism and trade and generally improve the livelihood of the people in the mountains. Therefore, I sincerely appreciate and do urge colleagues to support this effort towards developing this long-awaited road.

Madam Speaker, I would like to make one particular remark. We have feeder roads that tourists use to go up to the mountains and coffee traders use to collect coffee. It would be very good - I can see the Minister of Works and Transport here - to note that we need what we call “low-cost seals” for those particular feeder roads because the tourists have to use them to go to the mountains. Whenever it rains, even if gravel has been put, within two days all the gravel is washed away. 

Therefore, I appeal to Government to give us a low-cost seal for those roads, particularly those going to the mountains. There is the road from Budadiri to Gombe, Busulani junction to Bunaseke to Namuserere and then there is what we refer to as Elgon Road in Butandiga. There are also other tourism roads going to the other side of Budadiri West. At one point, the President asked, I think Engineer Badru Kiggundu, to do a survey of those roads and we have been waiting for that report. Otherwise, I appreciate the support so far and I hope that this can be fast-tracked. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am also happy. Each time I go that side, I worry that they are going to ask me about that road. Now, at least I can go and say that the road is “on the way”.

4.51
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the mover of the motion because it has been long overdue. Most of the food that we consume in Mbale is got from those ends especially Mutufu and Budadiri.

Madam Speaker, the Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu Road has been in the plans for a very long time. For those of you who have never visited those areas during a rainy season, you will never want to go there when it is raining; cars get stuck and even those who want to help you push the cars will ask for money. I would like to thank God that the people of Bugisu have been remembered because this road is going to be done. We pray that it is fast-tracked so that the work does not again take a very long time. 

This road will boost development. Most for the food is got from those areas and so, when this road is done, it will boost livelihood and empower people economically. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the coffee man.

4.53
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you heard how the report has been structured, you will realise it talks about Namagumba-Budadiri-Sironko coming first. They now want to tell the public that Budadiri has got something -(Laughter)- yet when you look at it critically, these are only 29 kilometres as opposed to 104 or 120 kilometres. Considering what hon. Woboya just raised, they should have given us at least 50 or 60 kilometres to enable people go up to Mount Elgon. This business of just trying to put sweeteners is not good. 

I want to state that the coffee you are talking about, ever since the 1960s up to now, has been the leading foreign exchange earner for this country and the country has developed because of that. In addition, 70 per cent of that coffee comes from Mount Elgon, where I come from. 

Therefore, if you really wanted to give something back to the people of Bugisu, you should have tarmacked this road up to Mount Elgon. This would even attract tourists. I am not saying that the 29 kilometres in itself is a lot. What I am trying to say is that if you really wanted to pay the people who have built this country – that is the Bagisu - that road should have been done up to the mountain.

Madam Speaker, I am raising this because I have a map of roads and I want to draw your attention to this map of roads in Uganda. I need your patience. In eastern Uganda, these are the only new roads: Iganga-Tirinyi-Mbale, the next is from Soroti to Dokolo. The other one which has come up is from Nabumali Corner to Lwakhakha. However, if you total the road kilometres in eastern Uganda, they do not even add up to 150 kilometres.

Now, let me count the roads in western Uganda, after the Masaka Road, which is okay. There is the Kabale-Kisoro Road, Ibanda-Kasese Road, Bundibugyo Road, Kitagata-Isingiro Road, the bypasses and now there is the one they call Dr Besigye Road –(Interjections)- you know it. If you total the number of kilometres they have got as opposed to what we have got, it is very unfair. What they have done for us is to rehabilitate the old ones, which were built during the colonial times, in Obote’s regime and some of them during Amin’s regime. Therefore, what is our share? 

If you are talking about equity, the equity in this case is that the roads which should have been developed more should have been in eastern and northern Uganda. If I count the ones in northern Uganda, they are very few. There is the Arua-Oraba Road, the Kitgum Road and the one they are trying to construct in Karamoja from Moroto. Therefore, what have we got? All the roads are in your area and we have got nothing.

Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter and that is why they have put –(Interjection)- Order for what? Do you know what I am saying before you raise a point of order? Do not accept that point of order, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: He will come in later.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have made my case and I would like to state that this country under the Constitution –(Interruption)  

THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to give information that we are balancing the construction of roads. I would like to request that I come back here and even provide the roads, which are going to be built, region by region, for the next five years. 

However, for the record, if you look at specifically eastern Uganda, the Musita-Lumino-Busia Road, up to Tororo, is 129 kilometres; the Kapchorwa-Suam Road is 73 kilometres; Muyembe–Nakapiripirit Road is 92 kilometres; Pallisa-Kamonkoli and Pallisa-Kumi Road is 120 kilometres. These are just a few. You talked about the north; there is Olwiyo-Gulu, Gulu-Acholibur, Acholibur-Masingo, which is 170 kilometres. 

It is better that I provide all this information in writing so that people can understand how these roads are being constructed. 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I would like to speak about some of the roads. 

I know Gen. Katumba Wamala means very well but I would like to give an example of the road from Kapchorwa to Suam. If you are not aware, that road was supposed to be constructed using money from the East African Compensation Fund. It was running from Bulambuli up to there. What happened is that the money was eaten. 

The reason we were involved is because the Moi Government wanted to have that road very much. He wanted to connect the people of Sebei to the people of Kenya who were his tribesmen. So, you delayed the process and you are talking about it now. The money was given; who used that money?

Madam Speaker, I can go on and on, but I would like to tell the General that as much as I may have failed in adding up the kilometres, we have got a raw deal in this road sector. I do not know if you read the masterplan of the Ministry of Works and Transport then - how to develop the road network in this country and what they came up with. What did we get out of it? From the first US$ 10 billion you got, we got nothing. (Interruption)

MR ABALA: I would like to thank my senior brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The information I would like to give you is that when you talk about the old Mbale road, that is from Kumi via Ngora, Serere, Soroti or continue up to Agwara and cross to Soroti, as we talk now the road is very bad. 

However, when I hear Gen. Katumba Wamala saying that they are balancing, I want to know who they are balancing against. What are you balancing? For us there, there is no road. Therefore, as you talk about your balancing, I do not understand. That is the information I wanted to give you, my brother.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, what they mean by balancing is that when they give you half a kilo of meat, they take a whole cow and then they say that they have balanced. It is unfair to give us half a kilo of meat while you take the whole cow. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I looked at this loan request, I was excited about the Namagumba road. As I said, each time I go there, I worry because they ask me what has happened to their road. However, I saw that Namagumba Road is 29 kilometres, Laropi-Moyo Road is 37 kilometres - these are the sweeteners – and then the real one, Katuna-Muko-Kamuganguzi, is 104 kilometres. So, it was packaged in such a way that we cannot refuse. 

The General should tell us why there have been no new roads in north Busoga for the last 35 years. General, you will speak later; listen to what we are saying. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We appreciate the General because he came up and just from his memory, he gave information. He has some of these roads at his fingertips and it is very great of the minister. 

There are several roads that the head of state promised. He said that even before the next elections, these roads would have been constructed. One of these roads is the road that comes from Kamuli through Luuka to Iganga. The President even came for Independence Day celebrations and he assured those voters that before the next elections, that road would be constructed. We are now going for campaigns.

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be right, before we even discuss this loan request, for the minister to come up with the list of all the roads that he has in plan - those for this year and next year? He said that he has a plan for five years; let him come with the plan for the five years so that as we discuss, we do it knowing that as 110 kilometres are planned for Katuna, there is another 110 kilometres in Moyo and another 120 kilometres in Mbale. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to allow us first receive that list before we discuss the loan request, Madam Speaker?

5.04
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, we passed a loan request and I am happy that today, the request has been balanced in terms of the type of roads being targeted. Yesterday, we looked at tourism roads and today, we are looking at border roads as well as roads that lead to areas that are agriculturally productive. I support this request. 

In the case of the road in Sironko District, for us who come from Karamoja, during drought much of our food comes from Sironko. Even when we have food, there are other types of food that we do not grow but we get from Sironko; for example, nowadays, we are able to eat matooke. Like hon. Nandala-Mafabi presented, I think there is need to extend this road to the mountains, where there is also tourism activity.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Government for the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road. Sometime back, the Minister of Works and Transport presented the criteria for identifying an area for a tarmac road. We were told that they look areas that have minerals, those that are agriculturally productive as well as those that are at the border. Amudat District has been left out completely. Yesterday, we were told there is a road going from Kitgum to Kidepo but Amudat has been left out, yet it is just 34 kilometres off the Nakapiripirit-Moroto Road. We qualify for a tarmac road; we are at the border with Kenya and right now, the Kenyans are constructing their road towards the border with Amudat. We have the minerals, the limestone, the cattle and the game reserve. So, we really qualify for a tarmac road. 

As Members have said, the minister should come with a plan for the country and Amudat District should be included in that plan. It is just 34 kilometres off the Nakapiripirit-Moroto Road. Thank you.

5.07
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We recognise the non-development in some of the parts of this country. However, I am of the view that we should approve this report with all the recommendations it has because the roads that are going to be constructed are going to impact positively on the livelihoods of our people. Therefore, I support the motion and recommendations in the committee report and I also support the recommendations proposed by Members, that Minister of Works and Transport should update Parliament on the entire plan for the next five years.

Laropi-Afogi Road is part of Atiak-Afogi Road. Therefore, this funding is going to make our road from Atiak to Afogi complete. Therefore, I request that this part be approved with the rest of the components under the request.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Government for having considered our bridge on Omi-Laropi Road. Three weeks ago, we were totally cut off because Sinyanya Ferry and Laropi Ferry could not be used because of flooding. I, therefore, also request that since usage of the ferry is not a sustainable way of enhancing movement, Government and the Ministry of Works and Transport should consider having a bridge on Sinyanya Road so that we shall have swift movement. 

I would like to comment on compensation. On Atiak-Adjumani Road, the compensation process is so slow. There are a lot of questions which have not been answered and this is going to delay the construction of the road from Atiak to Laropi. I request that the ministry intervenes. As we prepare for Laropi-Afogi Road, we should handle the issues of compensations swiftly so that we are not delayed any further. 

I support the committee and Government on this request. Thank you.  

5.09
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I stand to support the motion. 

I would like to thank the Government for the efforts they have put in to upgrade our roads to tarmac. I note that of late, they have started on the expressway between Busega and Mpigi. Work has started and that is a very good thing. 

I also note that you have approved so many loan requests for upgrading our roads. I also agree with my colleagues that we should get a full report on all the roads that you have approved. We should also be told the status of the work on these roads. I fear that we have passed some loan requests to upgrade roads but work has not started. One advantage with these road projects that we approve is that our people are offered jobs. This will reduce on the unemployment that we are having in this country. If all these projects can take off, I am sure many Ugandans will be able to get some employment. 

I also want to commend the Ministry of Works and Transport. At least things are moving. If we maintain this rate, I am sure this country will soon become a middle-income country because roads are very essential for development.

Lastly, I would like to still request the ministry to keep the same pace. I am sure if we keep this pace, in the five years that the minister has talked about, many of the roads in our country will be tarmacked. With those few remarks, I support. Thank you.

5.12
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

I would like to, first of all, thank you because last week, the Woman Member of Parliament of Namisindwa brought up an issue here about the burial of the first COVID-19 victim in Namisindwa. The victim was not buried very well. In our place, if there are signs that the rain is going to start, people start taking cover in safe areas. When those people were burying the body, they saw signs of rain coming, and once it rains, roads will be completely impassable. 

The roads from Kufu, Bukhaweka, Namboola up to the headquarters of Namisindwa and Magale are completely impassable when it rains. Our area is rich and produces a lot of coffee, carrots, Irish potatoes and so many other items but the lorries get stuck on the road with produce and it gets rotten. Even up to now, when I try to go home, I cannot reach. 

I appeal to the Minister of Works and Transport to at least make sure that they open the roads, even tomorrow, so that our people can pass. If they use the other route through Lwakhakha, to Bubutu and then to Mbale, the cost of transporting things increases almost three times. 

I really request the minister to do something so that I can also go home. When the people who were burying the victim left the body halfway buried, the dogs went and exhumed the body. However, people are now happy because they have started coming back after they had run away. 

Apart from that, the people who are in the quarantine centre have no food and the number has risen to almost 300. They keep bringing in more suspected cases every day and they have not even been separated. Those who are just brought in do not know whether they are going to be infected by the suspected cases who are already inside. It is very serious. We do not have masks at all. I am even scared of going home because if I go and then come back, perhaps Members of Parliament will fear me. I really request for your intervention. Thank you very much.

5.15
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to commend Government for securing this money to construct the various roads that are in the report. 

Yesterday, the committee chairperson informed us about the delay in the implementation. We have borrowed money and the loans remain unutilised and we are paying interest on them. The minister should confirm to this Parliament that this money that we are going to borrow is going to be utilised immediately. When are they going to start the implementation of these projects that we are going to pass today?

I remember we passed a loan request for constructing Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Kitgum Road. We passed that loan request in 2016 but up to now, there is no implementation. I believe this one is not going to face the same fate. Therefore, the minister should actually assure Parliament that after us passing this request, the implementation will start immediately. This is because when you do not utilise this money, it continues accruing interest.

Madam Speaker, yesterday we also informed Parliament that the distribution of these roads is not fair at all. I would like to appeal to this Parliament, especially the Committee on Equal Opportunities, to actually investigate this matter and report to Parliament. How many kilometres of tarmac roads are in the east, how many are in the north, how many are in the central and how many are in western Uganda? That report must come to this Parliament to help us asses what we are doing. 

You have seen from this report that we have 27 kilometres, 29 kilometres, 37 kilometres and then there is 104 kilometres. That is just to cushion; otherwise, the major part of it is going to the same direction, which is not fair. The Constitution is very clear about equal distribution of our resources. They should not continue going to just one direction. I am a nationalist; I am not saying they should not go to the west but I am saying there must be fairness because these Ugandans pay taxes as well, so resources should not just be going to one direction.

Honourable minister, I think this must be corrected because the NRM Government is a mass movement government that believes in equity and equitable distribution of resources. So, I appeal to the minister and Government that every loan request that we approve must pass the criteria of equity. If it does not pass it, Parliament should not approve it.

Madam Speaker, before we even approve this loan request, can we task the Committee on Equal Opportunities to go very fast and compile the distribution of these tarmac roads and the planned ones and see how fairly they are distributed, so that we stop debating as if we are sectarian? Once this is addressed, then we shall debate as nationalists. Otherwise, when we see things not going the right way, we need to correct them.

Madam Speaker, we passed a loan request to expand the road from Malaba to Kamdini about seven years ago. The money is there but that project cannot start. You cannot now drive on Lira-Kamdini Road; it is the worst road in the country, yet it is a major road, running from Mombasa Port up to Juba and Cairo. It is a major road but nothing is happening there. 

Madam Speaker, even in Lango - yesterday I said this – my good President promised our people that roads would be done, but we have only received 50 kilometres in the last 30 years; that is the road from Dokolo to Lira Town. We have only one tarmac road in Lango, the Dokolo-Lira-Kamdini Road. You can imagine; one road for Lango, with a population of three million people. This is very unfair. The Government should address this. 

We are not going to sit in this Parliament as resources are going elsewhere and not to our people. We pay tax. We are Ugandans. We believe in the Movement Government. We have supported the President for long and we shall continue supporting him but we want equitable distribution of resources. (Member timed out) 

5.20
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Madam Speaker, before I say anything, I would like to thank Government for doing the first road through Manafwa District - the Bumbobi-Lwakhakha Road. It is about to be completed and we thank the Government for that.

Madam Speaker, I do not support the idea of tagging the Nalugugu Road to the programme or plan for the Ministry of Works and Transport. We have powers to instruct the minister to bring us his programme on the roads in Uganda. The English say, “a bird in hand is better than two in the bush.” I would rather have this road approved by supporting the committee’s report so that works on this road can get started. Let us stop this issue of saying, “they must bring the plan first”.

Madam Speaker, people who come from the mountains suffer a lot. You would rather encounter potholes when you are on flat land; the potholes on roads in the mountains are very dangerous, and that is what is happening in Bugisu region. 

To make things worse, I do not know what happened to the maintenance of district roads. For many years, the districts have not been given money to maintain murram roads. Every time graders go through the road, they remove the little that there is and leave the roads “naked” so that soon after the rains come, potholes develop. That has been the routine for several years. I do not know what happened. Maybe the minister will tell us what happened.

Madam Speaker, I remember when we passed the loan request for the Bumbobi-Lwakhakha Road, there was a component in that project on bicycles to be given to women to help them improve their livelihood; I do not know what happened to it. I do not know whether the bicycles are coming. 

What is going to happen to this road from Namagumba to Budadiri and Nalugugu? Are we going to have anything to help the women along that road improve their livelihood? I have not seen the stalls that we suggested for the Lwakhakha Road. We had suggested that instead of providing bicycles, they construct market stalls, because women in the mountains do not ride bicycles; it is even a taboo. We ask those paving the roads to construct market stalls along the road in order to help the women. However, I have not seen anything going on along Lwakhakha Road.

Madam Speaker, I would like to make another request. As they work on this road, we still have Bududa-Bubulo or Manafwa-Bududa circular road. I would like to request the Minister of Works and Transport to hasten the process because that road is impassable whenever it rains. We also have the road that hon. Apollo Masika mentioned - Kufu Road - that originates from Manafwa District. It is also a circular road going to Bubwabwala, Bupoto-Lwakhakha Road that they are paving. 

We would like the Ministry of Works and Transport to help us because mountains are not easy. It is when you live there that you will experience the trouble that people go through in order to move in the mountainous areas –(Interruption)

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, this is just to add that among the roads mentioned, I think the honourable minister is aware of this road called Wanale – the one from Mbale to Wanale Hill. I think it was last tarmacked many years ago. There is no single stone on that road now, yet it is a very vital road. It is a tourism road and a lot of produce comes from up in Wanale. It would be good to put it into consideration as well.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, for your information. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

5.25
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, District Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. As I support this loan request, I would like to join colleagues who have talked about balanced development. 

I would like to confirm that Budadiri and Moyo needed these roads yesterday. When we were going for the thanksgiving function for hon. Nambozo, we got stuck on the way and we almost missed the function because the road was bad. It would, therefore, be fair for the ministry to reconsider and give them more kilometres in terms of coverage. That area is very difficult. In fact, we were lucky that we had an alternative to pass via another route; otherwise, we were going to sleep there for two days.

As I join colleagues to ask for balanced development, I would like to urge the ministry, in next shift of loan requests, to come up with requests that balance all the regions, especially focused on areas that have never had tarmacked roads at all. In this case, I would like to talk on behalf of the people I represent in this House. Most of the people in Agago District have not seen what a tarmac road looks like. It would therefore be fair to have something for us in the next round.

I remember the Gulu-Moroto Road, which passes via Agago District; it passes Corner Kilak through Adilang to Abim and then Moroto. That road has been on the programme for a long time. It would be mentioned in the budget speech of the President from 2008, when I had just joined this Parliament, but up to now this road has never appeared anywhere. I would be glad if this road appears –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to give hon. Franca Akello information. A couple of years ago, through Uganda Development Bank, a loan was obtained from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA). The funds were to be used to connect tarmac roads from Masindi Port, passing through Akokoro up to Kwania, Dokolo and then Kitgum. That road would have opened the way to connect northern Uganda with the central region and made the journey shorter.

I would like to request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to clarify to us what happened to the BADEA loan. If you have no idea about it, I am willing to dig out the documents and lay them on the Table. Someone should be able to explain to us what happened. This road would have connected the central region with northern Uganda and made it even better.

Madam Speaker, let us also save the face of Uganda. It is simpler for us, when going to Kapchorwa, to first go to Kenya, get our documents endorsed and then come back to Uganda. This should not be happening during this time when you are saying NRM has brought many changes. The only good change they should have brought is connectivity. Thank you.

MS AKELLO FRANCA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for the information.

As I conclude on this matter, I would like to beg that the ministry, in the next shift, comes with a comprehensive request and we will bless such a request. A request that balances all regions would be embraced by the whole House.  

East Acholi, Lango and Karamoja subregions need to be considered with special care - Omoro, Pader, Lamwo, Kitgum, Agago, Abim and then the districts of eastern Lango. I would like to thank the ministry but urge them embrace everyone in the next shift. Thank you. 

5.31
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me add my voice to that of colleagues to appreciate the ministry and Government for this loan request to finance the tarmacking of Namagumba–Budadiri Road. However, this is a mere semblance of attention to a subregion that has been grappling with the challenge of roads that are in a deplorable state.

This particular road goes up to Mount Elgon National Park. As you are aware, Madam Speaker, this subregion is greatly gifted by natured and so, it would definitely be a tourism attraction and destination in this country. However, I am baffled because the minister is aware that this road and the Bubulo-Bududa Circular Road were earmarked for tarmacking at the same time; they were captured at the same time. Now that Bubulo-Bududa Circular Road has disappeared mysteriously, it leaves me completely baffled and disturbed.

Madam Speaker, implementation is also an issue. This request comes at a sensitive time because 2021 is around the corner. I hope, honourable minister, this is not about hoodwinking the voters of the subregion that this road is going to be fixed between now and then, when in actual fact it may again donkey’s years. The Bubulo-Bududa Circular Road was captured in the national budgets of 2011 up to 2015, but as we talk, it is no longer among those roads that are being earmarked for tarmacking.

Madam Speaker, Kenyan traders come to buy bogoya in Bududa. It has been proven that this is the sweetest bogoya world over.  However, recently, over 10 trucks got stuck on that road. It is a death trap! It has potholes as big and deep as graves. Traders counted losses for almost four days on that road. Actually, one of the trucks had a good portion of their bogoya getting ripe, and that was a loss.

Madam Speaker, Bududa as –(Member timed out.)

5.34
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, 	Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion. When you look at areas like Sironko, they are needy areas that deserve more mileage. I, therefore, support the loan request and recommend that the works starts immediately.

Last week, I was in Soroti. We had gone for a burial. Madam Speaker, you cannot imagine the suffering those people go through. I am grateful and I know if this is implemented, they will be saved.  

I do not agree that we should halt the process. I think the project should start as we claim for more from the Government. I would like to therefore request the Committee on Presidential Affairs to be more vigilant. 

Madam Speaker, today I came from Buikwe; I had gone for the burial of the mother of our colleague, hon. Mutebi. The road is very dusty, yet His Excellency promised to work on that road some time back. I would like to therefore request the committee to come up with all the pledges concerning the Ministry of Works and Transport so that we can see what can be done to make those roads better. Otherwise, all the vehicles that went there - and I guess that it came from Buikwe, from the way it looked.

Therefore, I support the Government and implore the concerned ministries to make sure that they look into those pledges. Many roads, even here in the central are not yet tarmacked. 

However, we are grateful for Katosi Road. The minister was not here yesterday but I have whispered to him. They handed over that road in December last year but already, potholes have started coming up.

Secondly, there are some areas like Namayuba, which need humps to reduce on the many accidents because the upcoming towns are very many on that road. Otherwise, I am very grateful and I support the motion.

5.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the report of the committee.

However, I would like to ask the honourable minister to tell us – you may not have the answer right now but as you bring a comprehensive report on regional roads, the miles or kilometres that we have in western, central, eastern and northern regions. 

How many years does it take for a road that has been worked on to get potholes if it is well done? You must know that these loans we get will be a burden even to our own children in future.

When we get loans, they must do credible work. We need the roads to stay. This shoddy work must stop. I told people that Gulu-Atiak Road was built recently. The potholes on that road are terrible. Why should we have patches?

I would also like to say that if you are building roads, sections should be designed where the roads are connected to villages and homes. We should not have very deep trenches with no way of connecting to people’s homes.

Thirdly, honourable minister, you should also explain to us properly. May be, you should put in writing the cost of a kilometre of roads. If it is costly, then the work should be well done.

I would like to tell you that the third biggest item on our budget is interest on loans. It takes more than Shs 4 trillion. Therefore, if we are going to be overburdened by these loans, we must make sure that the issue of equitability is addressed properly; shoddy work should also be addressed and our roads should not be more expensive than other countries around us.

Honourable minister, they talked about Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), which is under your supervision. If UNRA does shoddy work, we look at the minister and not UNRA because you supervise the Authority directly. Please, help us supervise these roads so that when we pay interest, we pay for something, which is going to last long and help our people for some time. Thank you. 

5.40
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I rise to say that I support the committee report and the request for the loan.
However, allow me to raise a few issues that I have observed. 

First, there is the issue of value for money that the Leader of the Opposition has just raised. She mentioned the Gulu-Atiak-Elegu Road. She is right in saying that most parts of this road have developed potholes and have become death traps for many of our people. We know that very heavy trucks use that road.

Secondly, on the issue of accessibility, when plans are made in regard to building these roads - I still want to make reference to the Gulu- Atiak-Elegu Road. I have always raised issues about this road especially on accessibility for the people with disabilities. I have always given an example of a lady who lives across the road and the mother stays the other side. She is unable to visit her mother simply because the road is very high and there is no accessibility for her. I have raised this issue with UNRA several times but nothing has been done.

Another issue is about the construction of the Laropi-Atiak Road, which has been on the budget for quite some time. When I hear it, I am a little relieved and I hope that they are going to put all this into consideration.

Madam Speaker, it would also interest you to know that we have very many women out-growers who come from Adjumani but because of the bad road between Atiak and Adjumani, it has been a very big challenge. These are sugarcane growers who are supposed to supply Atiak Sugar Factory. 

Therefore, the coming of this road will make their lives easy.

Finally, I would like to make a request to the Minister of Works and Transport. We have the Awer-Lakang Road, which is supposed to accommodate Madhivani Sugar Factory at Lakang. 

Unfortunately, the road is inaccessible because Apaa Bridge has given way. This road connects very many big farmers. These are not only residents of Amuru. We have people coming all the way - some from Agago, Lamwo or Kampala going to farm in Lakang and Bana. Unfortunately, this bridge has given way. 

Even the rice and ground nuts, which have been harvested cannot be transported to Gulu and Kampala because this bridge has broken down.

I request the Minister for Works and Transport to look into this issue because it is making the life of people in Lakang very difficult.

With this, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I thank the committee for urging that we should have more equal distribution of roads across the country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House approves the proposal to borrow $235.458 million from the African Development Bank (ADB) to finance development of Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu Road, Katuna-Muko-Kamuganguzi Road and Laropi-Moyo-Afoji Road.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not expect you to bring any other loan request for roads until you have satisfied us that there is equity in this country and those, which have been pledged for 30 years will be done. I would like the minister to tell us when he is coming.

Honourable minister, when will you come?

5.45
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba): Madam Speaker, I request that I am given up to Tuesday, next week and I bring a detailed report on all the issues, which have been raised by the Members.

THE SPEAKER: That is a Government assurance. We expect an answer from you on Tuesday. Thank you. Let us go to the next item.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

Clause 32

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we adjourned to allow you do some harmonisation.

5.47
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Chairperson, I would like to state that we have done some harmonisation. I want to also thank our legal department, which came up with something. We have worked with the minister to improve what the Department of Legal and Legislative Services gave us.

Madam Chairperson, we now move to introduce a new clause 3 and the amendment reads: “Insert a new sub clause (3) to read as follows: 

“i. 	The staff of the Authority shall perform their work following principles of selflessness, integrity, objectivity, accountability, openness, honesty and leadership. The justification is that we are picking this from the Rules of Procedure, which talk about disclosure of interest;
    ii. An employee shall not participate in the making of any decision of the Authority and in any matter in the coffee value chain where he or she has personal interest;
    iii. The staff shall fulfill conscientiously in respect of the declaration of interest and shall always draw attention to any relevant interest in any proceedings of the Authority, if any, in the conduct of their work;
    iv. Before an employee deals in any matter in course of his or her duty, in which he or she has a personal interest, the employee shall inform his or her superior of the nature and extent of his or her interest;
    v. Personal interest in this section in relation to an employee includes the personal interest of a spouse, a child, a dependant, agent or business associate of which the employee has knowledge or would have knowledge if she or he had exercised due diligence having regarded all circumstances; and
    vi. An employee who contravenes this section shall be subjected to disciplinary action.

Madam Chairperson, our legal department has put for us disciplinary procedures and they are as follows:

    a) The Authority shall, by statutory instrument, make regulations providing for:
    b) Disciplinary offenses and penalties for breach of such offenses;
    c) The right to a fair hearing when an officer or employee is being prosecuted against for disciplinary offense; and
    d) A person aggrieved by the decision of the Authority shall seek redress in competent courts.”

Madam Chairperson, that came out of our working with the legal department. I have discussed all these proposals with the minister and he is in agreement. Under the definition section, we shall define “selfishness”, “integrity”, “objectivity”, “accountability”, “openness”, “honesty” and “leadership.”

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification on leadership. The way it is pronounced here is vague because anybody can qualify to be a leader. 

We need to qualify it that somebody should have held a position of leadership to a certain category and for specified years, for example, five years at a top-level kind of leadership. That would display the kind of leadership we are looking for. However, when you simply talk about leadership, then even LC I chairmen can qualify to become leaders.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, listening to hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I notice that the proposals appear to be in the Leadership Code. So, I do not know whether the Leadership Code cannot be sufficient.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, I shared these proposals with hon. Nandala-Mafabi but later on, of course, the lawyers did some more work. As everybody knows, and as you mentioned, conflict of interest is extensively provided for under the different provisions of the laws, which include the Leadership Code Act, 2002; The Leadership Code (Amendment) Act, 2017 and the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act, 2014. I request hon. Nandala-Mafabi - we cannot pack the Coffee Bill with what is already taken care of by other Acts.
I just want to say that we can refer to them to avoid repeating ourselves, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can’t we cross-reference and say that part of what is in the Leadership Code shall apply here?

MR EITUNGANANE: Madam Chairperson, I am the acting Chairperson. In line with what the honourable minister has provided, there is also the Anti-Corruption Act. Therefore, all these are catered for and we would like to plead with our colleague - Section 9 of the Anti-Corruption Act clearly discusses issues to do with conflict of interest. 

Therefore, we really do not need to bring all these into the law because there are other provisions already, which are provided like you have said; the Anti-Corruption Act and IGG Act cover these issues. 

I would like to plead with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that you concede on that one.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is unfortunate that colleagues do not understand the sector we are dealing in. If it was any other crop, then we should have made one law for cash crops. The reason you have brought coffee Bill is that you want to ensure that coffee is properly regulated. 

The reason the Government brought it is because it knew that it would be a problem if coffee is not well regulated. This is the reason we are bringing all these provisions. I would like to state this again for information. Madam Chairperson, if you are a coffee farmer and you process your coffee and it is rejected, which I want to repeat, there will be somebody to come and buy it. The person buying it will have the knowledge of the one who came to inspect your coffee and he will export it. In most cases, if coffee was sold at Shs 9,000, he will buy it at Shs 6,000. 

This means that a profit of Shs 3,000 has been made on that kilogramme of coffee and if it is Shs 100,000, with just his or her decision, Shs 300 million has been made. Honourable committee Chairperson, that is what we want to tell you. You are saying the Leadership Code is there but the Rules of Procedure are here. Why do we put it here if there is Leadership Code and you are aware we fill forms every two years? For emphasis, because of coffee, there must be a reason we should put it here for regulating the staff of the Authority. 

Madam Chairperson, the street opposite the Uganda Coffee Development Authority belonged to a certain staff and he has six of them. The reason the sector went down was because of that staff member who was involved in the value chain. I shared with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and I told him, “get a pen and let us divide the current debt of coffee.” He divided Shs 300 billion by Shs 300 per seedling and he got Shs 1 billion. He shook his head. What does it mean? People who said the coffee seedlings were supplied are the very players in the field and the people of Uganda are going to pay a lot of money because of a UCDA staff. 

Why do members of Parliament fight for them? They should be here to answer. Chairperson of the committee, I would like to plead with you; how much money is in the coffee sector? If not well managed, we are in danger. Much as we are talking of cross referencing, we should state it in an affirmative way.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I have two issues. I support the point of the staff of the Authority not to be involved in the value chain. In most cases, the people who do this business are Ugandans. It should be a choice of whether to do business or do the work. When that is done clearly, this will help us in sorting out many problems that we have in some other sectors.

Secondly, the point that hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised concerning – I would propose that the only staff who are doing their job in the UCDA should be professional instead of us having the whole long story talking about integrity and accountability, which is covered under professionalism. I thank you.

MR AOGON: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think it is very pertinent as a House that is deciding on a very critical matter, for us to take a decision that will help this country once and for all. What perturbs me is that it is the people who are working in the Authority. When you go to the health sector, we also have human beings there. If we are going to make a specific law for coffee, more so dealing with the staff, are we going to be specific with the medical field, Education and the soldiers? Are we going to do it? 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I am sure you want to emphasise the point but shall we emphasise that point for all sectors? I would buy the idea of cross-referencing these laws or else we go and contradict what is already in existence. Therefore, which laws will you apply in which case? We should try to be consistent so that we move together in one boat, which is balancing –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Aogon. The Leadership Code you are talking about even defines who the leaders are. Not everybody falls under the Leadership Code. However, here you will get staff of the Authority not falling under the Leadership Code and this is what we are talking about.
Therefore, the information I would like to give to hon. Aogon  is that these laws you are talking about can be picking a specific person. When you mention the clear one that the Authority shall deal with, you have covered them very well.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think we have a problem because the earlier amendment by hon. Nandala-Mafabi was to the effect that no staff of the Authority shall be involved in the value chain except as a farmer. This runs into trouble with the Constitution. Objective No. 9, the right to development. Article 21(1) states: “All persons are equal before and under the law and in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life.” 

I can go further to Article 26 of the Constitution; protection from deprivation of property. There is also Article 40(2) of the Constitution, which states, “Every person has a right to practice his or her profession to carry out any lawful occupation, trade or business.”

Madam Chairperson, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is going around and around to create many words that should not necessarily be put in the law because the Leadership Code and other laws that were cited by the minister address these issues. The fact that you are the Chairperson here and as a lawyer, does not stop you from practicing law. However, if you do it outside or in conflict of interest, then the other laws will apply. 

Therefore, I would like to request that if there are any sanctions, they should come in the regulations. However, in this law, there is no need for amending this clause as given by the minister. I thank you very much.          

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Brig. Byekwaso, on behalf of all of us, congratulations upon your appointment. (Applause)

BRIG. GEN. BYEKWASO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I can recall when this debate started and the amendment hon. Nandala-Mafabi brought in. We all argued that if it was not there, it was bound to cause conflict of interest and some sections were saying “no, you do not need it because there are other laws.” Then, they are quoting that same Article from the Constitution the minister has just cited. 

It is giving me an observation that if that is the case that the Constitution gives every Ugandan equal opportunity, then those earlier laws become irrelevant. The fact that they were enacted and the Constitution is still there – if they were put, then those who made it knew that there is always a tendency of human beings to put self-interest above public interest. That is very obvious. 

We can cross-reference but we should emphasise it in the law. It must be categorically stated. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, instead of creating all these, why don’t we just pass the one of saying that the staff will not do something and then we say that the Leadership Code will apply instead of running through all these.

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to interest the House in what hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, that in some circumstances, coffee is rejected under the pretext that it does not meet the minimum standards for export. After that rejection, some other persons or entities come and buy that same coffee and it ends up going out of the country as an export. What could have happened in between there? Who is that who approves coffee that had earlier been rejected? 

This implies that there could be insider dealings, which could even bring a society down. If you have lost the price of what could have been Shs 8000 and finally, you sell coffee that had been rejected at Shs 5000, losing Shs 3000 could bring not only farmers but also the whole society down. 

I think there is need to understand that some people who participate in decision making could be compromised. We need to strengthen and enhance that law such that we make people get the price they deserve and also for business to be favourable to all. I beg to submit.

MR EITUNGANANE: Madam Chairperson, the minister has ably explained our position as a committee, that there is no need to have this because there are general principles of corporate governance. We also have issues of disclosure of interest. 

I would like to read verbatim, the Statutory Instrument No.3 on issues of the evaluation committee. It says, “A member of an evaluation committee shall declare that he or she has read the Code of Ethical Conduct in business and does not have a conflict of interest in the procurement or disposal requirement by signing Form XIII in the schedule to these regulations.” That is a good example, Madam Chairperson. 

We have issues of inheritance. There are people who could inherit factories and they are in this sector. We have people who could be practicing as hurlers and also coffee shops. We are not going to deny these people the opportunity by including what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is bringing on the Floor. 

The position is very clear. Let us maintain the status quo. The laws are already provided for. 

Even in the contracts committee where a member of contracts committee has any other pecuniary or other interests that may conflict with the performance of the functions of the member, the member is required to disclose this interest in the meeting and where the member has or discloses an interest in either matter before the contracts committee, that member should not take part in the proceedings or exercise of any other powers by the committee relating to the item or matter in which the member has interest. 

On all these things, Madam Chairperson, we are just going round in circles.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to propose that for now, we leave that one and go to the others.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, you had guided on cross-referencing.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, simply state there that the Leadership Code shall apply to this law. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes. That covers it. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I am trying to understand what the vice chairperson is explaining. One thing the vice chairperson has forgotten is that you are the champion of ensuring that the principle of corporate governance must now be incorporated in all management at all sectors. 

How can you ignore involving the principle of corporate governance? This is why I am insisting that we must specify what nature of leadership we want. The nature of leadership we want must be in compliance with corporate governance. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, are they not contained in the leadership code? Let us state that the Leadership Code shall apply to this law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have read the Leadership Code and it says that anybody who is in a parastatal has a limit of principal officers and above. This means that those below the level of principal officers are not affected by the Leadership Code. 

Even if we looked at the Leadership Code, it leaves some levels of officers out. You will discover but the one who does more might be just an officer or an assistant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us leave that and go to clause 35.

LT COL RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, as you have guided, it covers whatever concerns Members were bringing up. Let us pronounce ourselves and pass this clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, corporate governance is included in the Leadership Code. Let us agree that the Leadership Code will apply to this law. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree with you for the reason that even if you say that you are very strict in the law, people can still bypass. Even when we talked about OTT, people ran to VPN. People always have a way to bypass laws and there is always a formula.

This is about people’s integrity. We cannot make a law for every nitty-gritty of issues. There is already cross-referencing. Otherwise, we can even take a whole year without reaching a consensus.

MR EITUNGANANE: Madam Chairperson, I also would like to interest the House in the fact that we have the Anti-corruption Act, where all this is captured. We do not need to read it verbatim. The position should be clear, hon. Nandala-Mafabi because at the end of the day, if we continue going round – we need to conclude on this Bill. The level we have reached is actually good enough for us to proceed so that we consider other clauses.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us agree that we include the application of the Leadership Code Act in this law.

I now put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am happy that hon. Rwamirama is saying, “Again.” The day we shall bring the one for cows, you will say, “Again.” (Laughter)

Madam Chairperson, clause 35 deals with licences. I would like to put two issues there. One, under clause 35(1), I would like to add, after sub-clause (1) (j), the following: “A nursery operator licence.” because you need a licence to operate a nursery.

Under sub clause (3), I would like to create another paragraph to require Tax Identification Number (TIN) for all players in the coffee value chain. The justification here is that coffee is a very lucrative business. If we do not have tax identification numbers, we may encourage laundering. That is why I am moving that we add sub clause 3(b) to require TINs for all persons involved in the value chain of coffee. 

The TIN will do the following:

    1. It will identify those who are there;
    2. If they are subject to tax, they will pay taxes; and
    3. If there is any trade opportunity, because you are identified, you will do good business instead of money laundering.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Let me start with the nursery operators. At some stage, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we agreed that nursery operators are also farmers. How are we going to tax farmers by assessing them – remember the public outcry about licensing farmers? We need a popular law. Although the law must be – the nursery operators are farmers –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Also, when one is going to do business, they will require a licence and that can be done by URA. We do not have to put that in this law.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Exactly. Our law should not really go into the business of taxing. The proposed clause 35(b) on having a TIN is a URA role. It is not our role. We cannot really pack our laws with responsibilities, which are administrative in nature.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Minister, I agree and withdraw my amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Let us go to clause 37

Clause 37

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 37 was for hon. Niwagaba but he has given us what he wanted to propose, which is about the aggrieved party appealing to the minister and it says:

    1. Replace the phrase, “within 60 days” with the words, “within 30 days.” The justification is that there should not be delays in agriculture because produce could rot. 
    2. The minister shall make a decision on the complaint from any aggrieved person within 15 days.
    3. Failure to respond within 15 days, the minister or his representative –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you know the committee had brought an amendment that “the minister shall respond to the appeal within 30 days from the date of receipt of the appeal.” 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes but there were two additions, where they never told us when the minister is supposed to respond. That is why we are saying that the minister should make a decision on the complaint within 15 days. Failure to do so, it will be assumed that he has agreed with the complaint and the prayers therein.

Should the minister make a decision and the aggrieved party is still aggrieved, the aggrieved party shall have a right to apply for a judicial review in the Chief Magistrates’ Court within 30 days. The justification for the 30 days is because farmers and these operators live in villages. We had thought of the High Court but we said Chief Magistrates’ Courts are nearer to the farmers than the High Court. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you say about the proposals?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, let us make it move smoothly. They should all be 30 days. Let us say 30 days for the minister and 30 days for the appeal. The justification is that we should be consistent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 37 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR EITUNGANANE: Madam Chairperson, on clause 43, the suggestion was that we add the words “in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015” at the end of paragraph (a). That means we rephrase it to read:

“The funds of the Authority shall consist of – 

    a. Money appropriated by Parliament for purposes of the Authority in accordance with Public Finance Management Act, 2015.” The justification is that this is for avoidance of repetition and also to be consistent with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 as well as to guide in the implementation process.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 43 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go to clause 54.

Clause 54

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I raised clause 44.

THE CHAIRPERSON: On levy?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. Madam Chairperson, on the levy, they had put two per cent. Two per cent is on a high side and I am going to explain –(Interjections)– it was recommitted. The two per cent you are talking about would be taken back and they would charge the farmers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, that part was not recommitted. Let us go to clause 54.

Clause 54

MR EITUNGANANE: Madam Chairperson, I remember we had a lengthy discussion on sub clause (1) on the penalty from “not exceeding 48 currency points” to “not exceeding 200 currency points.” The committee proposes that the House recommits sub clause (1) and amends sub clauses (2) and (3) consecutively. The proposal in sub clause (1) is that the penalty should be replaced with “not exceeding 100 currency points” and “the term of imprisonment not exceeding four years”.

In sub-clause (2), the penalty should be replaced with “not exceeding 200 currency points and the term of imprisonment not exceeding eight years”.

In sub-clause (3) the penalty should be replaced with “not exceeding 360 currency points and the term of imprisonment not exceeding 15 years”.

The justification is to align with the Law Revision (Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act, 2008.

Note that the amendment in sub-clause (1) was to be maintained the way it was adopted by the House. The terms of imprisonment would be unrealistic; eight years in sub clause (1), 15 years in sub clause (2) and 25 years in (3) consecutively would have been too much. 

Madam Chairperson, this gives us a flow that at different levels, the levels of imprisonment correspond accordingly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 54, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 57

MR EITUNGANANE: Madam Chairperson, in clause 57, the committee proposes to amend the provision by inserting paragraph (x) to include the procedure for appeal, including the right of a farmer to appeal through any other person recommended by the minister.

The justification is to provide for procedure of appeal arising out of section 37 of the law. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new sub clause (x) be added to clause 57 as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill, 2018” and passed it with amendment of clauses 32, 37, 43, 54, 55 and 57. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Remove clause 55 because it was not there.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill, 2018” and passed it with amendments of clauses 32, 37, 43, 54, and 57. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

6.30
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The National Coffee Bill, 2018” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill, 2018” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL COFFEE ACT, 2020”.

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. I would like to thank Members for the hard work relating to the National Coffee Bill, 2018. I believe that we have done a good job and given farmers a good law.

Honourable members, last week, I indicated that we would adjourn today but this was in expectation of certain events. However, I would like to confirm that we shall continue sitting.  

6.32
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Madam Speaker, before you adjourn, allow me on behalf of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to thank you and Members for the this tiresome work.

I would like to thank the Minister of State for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, hon. Bagiire, who has been here all the time for the work well done. I would like to also thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Cabinet for the support on the National Coffee Bill, 2018.

I would like to also thank the UCDA team, led by the Managing Director and the legal departments that have helped us to go through all this. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have given us a lot of time, supported and even guided us very well. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I hope you will tell us where to meet. Honourable minister, where do we go after here? (Laughter)

6.33
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, allow me to also add my voice to thank you for the support you gave to the committee.

This is one of the laws that made us traverse the country, especially the coffee growing areas. There was a lot of enthusiasm, excitement and others had worries, especially the farmers. However, due to the good, able and strong team that you sent on the ground, we were able to ally all those fears. Here, we are now celebrating this success. I am sure this item, which is called “black gold”, second traded item in the world, will put our country to another level.

I would like to also thank the technical team who participated and moved with us to ensure that everything was in place.

To the honourable members, bravo. We have done a good job. Once again, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for what you did for the committee. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, although it is not my duty, I would like to inform the NRM members that there will not be elections this weekend, as we had planned. That is why I said we can continue doing our work. Other enouncements will be made but definitely, not this weekend. You can organise in other ways. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.34 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 6 August 2020, at 2.00 p.m.)

