


Thursday, 3 August 2017

Parliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this special sitting, the purpose for which I communicated yesterday; to debate a tribute motion for Maj. Edward Rurangaranga, a distinguished leader in this country. He has served his time, his country and his people. He has also served his party diligently up to the time of his death. Today, his body is coming here and I thank you for coming back for this debate. Thank you.

(Entrance of the late Maj. Edward Rurangaranga)

National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

Laying of wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE MAJOR EDWARD RURANGARANGA, FORMER MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND CHAIRPERSON OF UGANDA PEOPLE’S CONGRESS (UPC)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Before the Rt Hon. Prime Minister moves the motion, let me recognise the dignitaries who are here. The family is seated behind me on the technical bench. Today, the demise of Maj. Edward Rurangaranga has pulled out some very important people from hidden places because I have not seen them in a long time. However, they are all here today and I welcome them to Parliament. 

I see Mama Miria Obote. (Applause) As you are aware, she was the First Lady in this country, former presidential candidate in this country, former President-General of the UPC and the mother of the current President of UPC. (Applause) 

Seated next to her is hon. Chris Rwakasisi, former Minister of Security. Next to him is Dr Opiote, who was the personal physician to the late His Excellency Dr Apollo Milton Obote, and he has kept with the family. Next to him is the man who today is not in white, surprisingly. He used to wear white suits; former Minister of Commerce, hon. Joel Aliro Omara. (Applause) 

Next to him is the former Minister of Supplies, which ministry does not exist anymore, Dr Apiliga. We have the former Minister of Labour, hon. Anthony Butele. We have the former Member of Parliament representing Kole, hon. Fred Ebil. We have hon. John Livingstone Okello, former Member of Parliament for Chua and former Vice-President of UPC and next to him is Eng. Katwiremu, former Member for Sheema County.

2.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to hon. Maj. Edward Rurangaranga. I move this motion under Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure:

“WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda notes with deep sorrow the sad news of the demise of Maj. Edward Rurangaranga, a former minister, which occurred on Tuesday, 1 August 2017, at his country home in Rukondo Parish, Kitagata Town Council in Sheema District;

AWARE that Maj. Edward Rurangaranga served as a deputy minister in 1979, Minister of State for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister and later as the Minister of State for Local Government;

RECOGNISING FURTHER that in his political life, Maj. Rurangaranga was a member of the Uganda Peoples Congress and served as its national chairman;

NOTING that Maj. Rurangaranga served as a Deputy Speaker and later Speaker of the Ishengero (Parliament) of Ankole in 1960s during which he spearheaded the establishment of educational institutions in Ankole region;

APPRECIATING that Maj. Rurangaranga was a diligent leader who participated in shaping the destiny of Uganda and served Uganda with dedication and patriotism;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

    1. That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the people of Kitagata and Sheema District and indeed, to the people of Uganda at large on the demise of Maj. Edward Rurangaranga.
    2. That Parliament takes cognisance of the distinguished services and contributions made by Maj. Edward Rurangaranga to Uganda.
    3. That this Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant our departed elder and friend, Maj. Edward Rurangaranga, eternal peace.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded by hon. Mugume, hon. Muruli Mukasa, hon. Atiku, hon. Akena, hon. Magyezi, hon. Alyek and hon. Atuhaire. Would you like to speak to your motion?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to extend our condolences to the family, especially the widow Winifred Rurangaranga and the children, friends, relatives, the fraternity of the Uganda Peoples Congress, the community from greater Bushenyi and Ankole region and the country at large upon the demise of our brother and elder, hon. Edward Rurangaranga.

Rurangaranga belonged to the generation of brave and patriotic Ugandans who played a significant role in the pre-independence and post-independence struggles for the liberation of our country from ignorance, poverty, disease, tyranny and dictatorship.

Mr Speaker, after training as a Grade II teacher from Nyakasura and Kakoba Teachers Training Colleges in the late 1950s, Rurangaranga spent most of his early years teaching at various schools in Ankole region, starting with Kitagata Primary School where he had studied from.

When Uganda attained independence in 1962, Rurangaranga left the teaching profession and joined the Ishengero of Ankole as its Deputy Speaker and later as Speaker. This was an important and influential position, which he held until 1967 when kingdoms were abolished.

During the period he was in the Ishengero, Rurangaranga championed the establishment of schools and health centres in the Ankole region. 

Rurangaranga was a courageous man who could not sit by and watch our country descend into anarchy and dictatorship without a fight. Therefore, in 1971, after the overthrow of President Milton Obote by Idi Amin, Rurangaranga was among those who resisted the new regime. In the process of his resistance, he was arrested and detained at Makindye Military Barracks. He managed to escape but still faced the wrath of the Amin regime because in 1972, he was shot at and left for dead by River Rwizi in Mbarara. A good samaritan rescued and smuggled him out of Uganda into exile in Kenya.

In Kenya, he was received and joined a number of other Ugandans who were in exile. As an example, our brother Yona Kanyomozi played a significant role in Rurangaranga’s escape from Uganda and his settling down in Kenya. 

While in Kenya, Rurangaranga taught in various Nairobi schools but also kept in touch with patriotic forces that were mobilising to get rid of Idi Amin. Indeed, in 1978-1979, he joined Kikosi Maalum, a liberation force, which came from Tanzania through Masaka. This was actually the force led by the late Paulo Muwanga and Milton Obote whereas Yoweri Museveni and FRONASA were on the western axis.

When areas of western Uganda were liberated, Rurangaranga was one of the few people who were appointed district commissioners to oversee operations in the region. 

Mr Speaker, many of you may remember the famous day of 27 May 1980 when former President Milton Obote returned from exile and arrived in the country. His first stop was Bushenyi and Rurangaranga was instrumental in the organisation of the events that turned into an annual pilgrimage. 

Mr Speaker, when the elections of 1980 were organised, Rurangaranga contested and won the seat for Bushenyi West Constituency in Parliament. He was subsequently appointed Minister of State for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister. In that election, quite a number of people, including hon. Otafiire, myself and many others who you know, participated. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you win? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I propose that we do not open that chapter. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, Mzee Rurangaranga has been a champion of very many developmental projects for the people of Bushenyi, Ankole and Uganda. For instance, it was Rurangaranga who gave the land on which Kitagata Hospital was built. This is definitely a great example, which contemporary Ugandans as a whole should emulate. This is because one of the problems we have is that many Government projects are delayed because even the right of way alone becomes a problem.

Mr Speaker, he played a key role in the establishment of many schools and was one of the key stakeholders that pushed for the establishment of Ankole Western University. He helped to secure many study opportunities and scholarships for underprivileged children. He served the church as the member of the synod for many years. He cared deeply about Uganda and his political party; the Uganda Peoples Congress (UPC), which he served as the national chairman. 

Mzee Rurangaranga was a principled man, a friend of many and his death has robbed the country of a man of many good and indeed great attributes.

Mr Speaker, His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni heard about the passing of Mzee Rurangaranga and expressed his condolences. He authorised that an official burial be organised for our elder, Rurangaranga. 

I would like to thank the Government team, the family, the Uganda Peoples Congress leadership and friends of Rurangaranga with whom we are working to give Mzee Rurangaranga a befitting send off.

Cause of death 
Many people were with our departed elder in Ntungamo at a send-off of another colleague, Bulinga, and only heard hours later of the passing on of Rurangaranga. The cause of death of our elder Rurangaranga is attributed to complications of diabetes and kidney failure and he had been treated for diabetes for quite some time. A post-mortem was done at Mbarara University Teaching Hospital and these were the findings that led to this conclusion.

May the Almighty God rest our departed elder, Edward Rurangaranga, in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Right Honourable.

2.37
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to an elder, both in politics and age, an accomplished nationalist, a distinguished people-servant, a staunch Christian, a wise, fit and fearless personality and a leader across generations and that is hon. Maj. Edward Rurangaranga. 

Mr Speaker, I extend my sympathies and continued prayers to his wife and children upon the loss of a great man, husband and father. May the good Lord stand in the gap and guide you to fully emulate the works he accomplished and build on his legacy. I can confidently say that you are way beyond the level of falling back for he raised you into great men and women.

Edward was a self-made man who was raised in a humble background and who was almost unable to proceed beyond primary education, the point at which he opted for the more economically viable teacher education. He never felt held back by his modest education levels and this propelled him to join politics, an area in which he excelled and rose to the high rank of a minister. He was always a high flyer.

On one of the campaign meetings in Sheema, where he was up against well-read candidates, Edward is quoted as saying, “What is English without Kitagata Hospital? What is English without Kanyigoro Bridge? What is English without Kitagata and Bugongi secondary schools?” This was in reference to social infrastructure projects he had initiated and facilitated despite his modest level of education. He thus was challenging those who were toting education prowess to link it with real service delivery.

Major Rurangaranga built political clout not out of curiosity but astuteness, humility, resolve, love for the country with tangible service delivery programmes: bridges, hospitals, schools, worship centres, roads, electricity extensions, school trucks, name them. He was never tribalistic, as many leaders have turned out to be. Reason: he made Dr Obote find a second home in Bushenyi, away from his Lango roots. During his time, it was hard to speak his mother language to any of those you found around him for chances were that they spoke different languages. 

With a desire to serve his people, Edward lowered his stature of a Government minister that he had been before and contested as a district councillor, a position he used to secure the upgrade of Kitagata Hospital as a district hospital and thus lobby for adding Kasana health centre IV as a constituency health centre. 

Humility for service to community 

It is now a set standard in the current Sheema South Constituency that a political survivor is dependent on real delivery; also from the value he specifically attached to education. All the three honourable members that have represented Sheema South Constituency, at different times after him, are either professors and/or doctorate holders. Hon. Engineer Katwiremu is up there.

Mr Speaker, Edward was unshakable in his belief in the ideals and principles of the Uganda Peoples Congress. He proudly dressed in red, the UPC party official waving an open palm at every opportunity and he never stopped urging people to join the congress. 

Mr Speaker, today I observed something; hon. Chris Rwakasisi is dressed in white with a white pocket hankie. Therefore, right now we cannot tell whether he is in UPC, FDC or NRM. That means that hon. Dr Rwakasisi is now retired and may no longer be in politics.

This is contrary to Prof. Kamuntu who has a yellow tie but the pocket hankie is red. Therefore, you can see that one leg is still there; he still believes in UPC. I would like to thank you, hon. Prof. Kamuntu. 

Mr Speaker, even at a point of need for worldly provision, he could not sell his conscience like many have, to fall for the perks dangled by the regime in exchange for his political face. Self-enrichment with physical materials never defined him.

Mr Speaker, the hottest political story today is the proposed amendment to Article 26(b) on land acquisition. The late Maj. Rurangaranga gave his mind to this as early as the 1994 Constituent Assembly campaigns, where in reference to the proposal for Government to acquire rights over land acquisition he said, “If someone proposes to look after your wife in the morning, in the afternoon and at night, do you still regard her as your wife?” We are 23 years later still tinkering with the same thoughts.

Maj. Rurangaranga had a strong message for every politician; always be on the ready to move. This, he illustrated, using the car. His counsel was that whenever you move as a leader, keep one set of the car keys with you and another with the driver and always park in a ready to go position. If anything happens, don’t fidget looking for the driver but jump into the car and speed off.

Mr Speaker, as we mourn the late Maj. Rurangaranga and pay tribute, may I re-echo our call for Government to recognise its people who have shaped the past and present when they are still alive. Probably, we need a policy on this; surely for the President all the time to decide - people have served in their capacities as individuals. We need Government to bring a person here because the person has contributed to this country but not for one person to decide. For example, right now I am serving my people of Rukungiri Municipality; therefore, it should be the Government to decide. Members, we should put laws to ensure that they protect us. However, sometimes, you can be left out.

The late Maj. Rurangaranga probably never even received an invite to any function or a state dinner, let alone the infamous independence medals and others regularly dished out to people we can hardly write a page of tribute to. His contemporaries have instead been frustrated with efforts to secure international jobs on account of them having served a different regime from the current. I guess we are waiting for them to pass on and we again declare official funerals.

Maj. Rurangaranga leaves behind one of his daughters – this is a concern, honourable members - she is battling with the dreaded throat cancer in a Germany hospital. Few weeks ago, the daughter was in the corridors of this Parliament seeking for help and financial support to travel for treatment. 

May this Government do the least in honour of Edward Rurangaranga and meet the medical bills inclusive of other expenses for Ms Jennifer Rurangaranga’s treatment such that she can stay in Germany for her condition as lately it had kept the old man restless and worried. 

Fare thee well, Maj. Rurangaranga. For God and my country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.           

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a tribute motion and we had a procedure here, which we had adopted that the second seconder would be from the Independents. But I see on my document on the motion that hon. Cecilia Ogwal is the second seconder.  

2.48
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for making it possible for me to not only support the motion but to also be one of the seconders.

Mr Speaker, allow me pass my condolences on behalf of the people of Dokolo to the family of the late Maj. Rurangaranga and also to the bigger family of the Uganda Peoples Congress for the loss of this great son of Uganda. 

I would like to applaud the leadership of Parliament, Government and more specifically the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Government Chief Whip, the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the strong support they have given the family in organising the burial of our brother and son. Also, they agreed to the request we made that the UPC be given space to pay tribute to the late Maj. Rurangaranga. This indeed has helped to defuse any pressure that anybody would have.

I would like to further thank the UPC family for being united at this time; I would have expected Ambassador Olara Otunnu, Mzee Joseph Bbosa and the entire team of UPC to be together because when death strikes, all the children must come together. This is what our father is telling us, as the chairman of UPC for a long time; he is telling us to come together and serve our country as the founder fathers and mothers did. That is a strong message from Edward Rurangaranga.

I would like to further thank God that he died knowing very well that I had left UPC, and he knew that there was no way that I would go back to work in UPC in any capacity. Therefore, I would like to thank God that the late released me and he was aware that I would never go back again and that is also good for us. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, people who do not know, I am very fortunate apart from the clan that I have acquired from Lango, God gave me another clan in Ankole called Abatiizi clan and this is a big clan. In case you doubt, the late Maj. Rurangaranga comes from that clan, the late Adonia Tiberondwa was of that clan and our comrade Kaijuka is of that clan and now you know, Atat Cecilia Ogwal comes from that clan.

Mr Speaker, this is not a joke; whenever there is a marriage in that family I am always there. I made several trips to give our children away in marriages and the people of Bushenyi who are here particularly my sister-in-law, Winnie, knows that I have been very close to the family. There is something very emotional to me; that although Edward Rurangaranga had very close relatives, children and grandchildren in Kampala, the late chose to always live in my house. Even when my husband and I were not around, Maj. Rurangaranga would stay in my house like the owner of the home. I think that is commendable and I would like to thank him for being a dedicated friend and a brother. I will really miss him and you do not know how I feel. 

I would like to say a few things about the late Maj. Rurangaranga. First and foremost, I would like to thank God because the late Maj. Rurangaranga never at any one time in his political career disgraced himself, his family or the party. He was a very outstanding man, with high sounding integrity and very strong principles. All I can say is that he was dedicated to his first wife, Mama Bushenyi, and the second wife Winnie. 

He really cared for his children. I think that is one thing that should go on the record of the Hansard of Parliament, of who Edward Rurangaranga was. Edward Rurangaranga made it difficult for some of us to know the name of his wife because he always called her Mama Bushenyi; so we never got to know her real name and that shows you how strong he was in as far as his family affairs were concerned. 

I also would like to say that even when he married his second wife, Winnie, all of us were involved. My brother seated on the NRM side, Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu, Yona Kanyomozi and Kaijuka were involved in ensuring that Edward got a wife. Winnie took over the role of Mama Bushenyi and actually became the second chapter of Mama Bushenyi and I want to record our gratitude to you, Winnie, for taking care of my brother and his health. I also want to record that Winnie happens to be a medical personnel; so, she played a double role and I want to thank her for that.

The second thing I want to remember my brother for is that he was a master of everything. Wherever Edward put his hand, he became the master of it. He chose to join politics and he was elected a district councillor of the greater Ankole - not these ones which are now split into 10 districts – (Laughter) - he was the district councillor of the greater Ankole Kingdom and that is how high Rurangaranga was in the politics of Ankole. 

He also became the Deputy Speaker of the Council. When he became Deputy Speaker of the Council, something we came to know about Rurangaranga is that he became a pro-people leader. He ensured that he consciously promoted education among the children of Ankole and one of those who benefited from his generosity and support is Yona Kanyomozi. He took a scholarship to study economics and today he is a renowned economist by virtue of my brother’s support to him and we really want to thank him for that. 

I would also like to remember my brother that in pursuit of politics, he was tireless in defence of the rights of the ordinary people. He focused his attention mainly on education and health to the extent of giving his personal property to help in the development of education and health. 

The Prime Minister has already told us that he gave away his land for the building of Kitagata Health Centre, which is still there up to now. There are so many children he has supported, not only by giving them scholarships but by also being a leader in the community. This is what Edward Rurangaranga was able to do. 

However, more importantly, Edward Rurangaranga through the cooperative society, was able to mobilise the people of Ankole into a cash economy. Later on, Ankole Cooperative Society became the Bushenyi Cooperative Society because of the emotional attachment that Rurangaranga had in driving that cooperative society. 

I want to tell you, Mr Speaker, that Rurangaranga, in pursuit of his political career, was a pro-people leader. I was looking through the Hansard and I stumbled upon a statement he made in the House. Allow me to read it verbatim because it will challenge some of us who are modern day members of Parliament. 

In June 1984, he rose up. At that time, if you remember, he was the Minister of State in the Prime Minister’s Office before he became the Minister of Local Government. He rose on a point of information and he said, “Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member from Rukungiri East that although he claims to have the support, about a week ago, we were in his constituency in his absence though. When we were visiting the constituency together with the Prime Minister and the Minister of Culture and Community Development, hon. Rwanyarare, the people he represents said that they have never seen him. I do not know whether he knows that they have never seen him since he was elected. Now how does he record his support on this matter, when he has never seen his voters since he was voted on 11 December 1980?” 

A Member of Parliament challenged his colleague that he could not stand on the Floor of Parliament and defend a motion when he had not consulted his people. That was in June. What I am trying to say is that this teaches us a lesson. We, who are modern day politicians, can stand here and speak about many issues but have we consulted our people? That is the message I would like to learn from my dear brother, Edward Rurangaranga. 

I do not want to say much about the liberation struggle because I am not a military person and I do not think I should pretend to be one. However, all I know is that he played his role in the team of the Kikosi Maalum Military Group to over throw Idi Amin. That is the little I know. 

However, what I want to remember him for today is that when Edward Rurangaranga was appointed the District Administrator of Bushenyi after the overthrow of Idi Amin, he used that position to do two fundamental things. One of them was to mobilise the party for the return of Dr Milton Obote and he did it meticulously. 

The Prime Minister has said it became a pilgrimage and it set a record. It was a mobilisation that attracted people from all over Uganda. That is the character of Edward Rurangaranga, of course supported by the late Adonia Tiberondwa, Chris Rwakasisi, Yona Kanyomozi and those brothers of mine that I have already told you about. They worked as a team and that is why you can talk about any party in Bushenyi but it will be very difficult to uproot the spirit of UPC from the minds and hearts of the people of Bushenyi. Let us not pretend about that one. You can wear yellow but that black and red will remain there. 

Mr Speaker, that is not the issue of debate at this moment but the other thing he did is that when he realised that there were different voices coming from parts of Uganda advocating for electing other persons other than Dr Milton Obote as the President of UPC, Edward Rurangaranga used his wit. It is as if Rurangaranga and Rwakasisi were born of the same mother but since I am a member of the clan, I know they are not born of the same mother. However, they had very similar wits. They went and mobilised the people of Bushenyi to declare sole candidature for Milton Obote. Therefore, when you people are advertising your sole candidature, it started in the UPC days, a long time ago. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, that declaration, which was made on that day by the people of Bushenyi, sent a message throughout the country and at that time, the name of Otema Alimadi was coming up from Acholi; Adonia Tiberondwa was coming up from Ankole. The next thing that happened was that a delegation led by Adonia Tiberondwa, came and said that he was part of that declaration so that it would take away any doubts that anybody would have that Obote was the sole candidate to the presidency of UPC.

Mr Speaker, history is very rich and it very important that we reflect on our history so that we know our bearing because they say that when you get lost on the way, you go back to where you started. 

The final thing I would like to remember my brother for is the role he played in the revival of multiparty democracy in Uganda. There is no doubt that Edward Rurangaranga gave us his home, hotel and resources to make sure that the people of western region and the whole of Uganda were mobilised to accept the return of multiparty democracy in this country. He sacrificed a lot and he was a strong hand behind that movement. I would like to thank him very much for that because without him and his wisdom, there is no way some of us would have gone as far as we have.

I would like to conclude by saying that Edward was a Christian. There are many churches that he got me personally involved by raising money for them. He has built many churches and I recall that some of you that have been with us here in Parliament, in 2015 when I lost my mother, Edward Rurangaranga should have been with the family but he could not make it because he was very sick. He actually collapsed and was air-lifted and brought to Agha Khan Hospital for treatment. The Government took care of him and paid for his bills, for which we have remained grateful, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

It was on that day that he communicated to his family - and his family has asked me to mention this – that he had forgiven everyone that ever wronged him. That is very important; in the struggle of our politics, he could have stepped on anybody’s toe and there are many people who hurt him, there are many people that robbed him, there are those that shot him and those that made him suffer. On that day, after he was discharged from Agha Khan Hospital, he declared by his own words that he had forgiven everyone and he also asked people to forgive him. I think that is the statement I got from my brother, Edward Rurangaranga.

I also would like to say that when he lost Mama Bushenyi, His Excellency the President paid a visit to his house and saw how dilapidated his home was and pledged to help with the rehabilitation. The family is aware of this – unfortunately, maybe it is our fault that we have not brought this to the attention of His Excellency the President and so, that pledge has not been fulfilled. It is important that this matter is brought to your attention. It is not a very serious matter but we thought that now that he is gone, the President should be reminded.

I also, in memory of Edward Rurangaranga, urge the Government to rehabilitate Kitagata Hospital because it is something that will make him feel very good. He gave his own land for the sake of his people and it is important that the hospital is rehabilitated to continue benefitting people even after Edward Rurangaranga is gone. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you once again for allowing me to second this motion. May God bless you the family, may God bless the UPC family and may the spirit of strength and the spirit of leadership never depart from the home of Edward Rurangaranga. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion has been seconded. The motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to collectively convey its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Kitagata in Sheema District and the country at large upon the demise of hon. Edward Rurangaranga; that Parliament takes cognisance of the distinguished services and contributions rendered by hon. Edward Rurangaranga to the country; that this Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant our departed elder and friend, hon. Edward Rurangaranga, eternal peace. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now. 

However, let me say this; I was with the honourable member for Rukungiri Municipality and hon. Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu in the VIP room in Parliament. Hon. Ephraim Kamuntu said that he had forgotten his red necktie and asked the honourable member for Rukungiri to help him with his pocket chief. I am, therefore, very surprised that the honourable member for Rukungiri would come and make that an issue in the House –(Laughter)

Secondly, decency would have demanded that he now respected that privacy. (Laughter) 

3.10
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in support of the motion. From the onset, I would like to give my sincere appreciation, on behalf of Uganda Peoples Congress, to the cooperation we have received from the Government and from the family to be able to be here today to pay tribute to a gallant son of Uganda, Maj. Edward Rurangaranga.  

It is one of these rare moments, where, however much history may have been distorted, the truth comes shining through. I am deeply touched when I hear that not only did Edward Rurangaranga talk about fighting disease - I will start with disease. He was willing to go that extra step; Kitagata Hospital is one of the hospitals that we, in the UPC, love to talk about - the 24,100-bed hospitals spread out all over this country.

In the person of Edward Rurangaranga, it was not enough to talk about it, not enough to support it but to provide their own land to have that hospital to stand and to continue to give services. That hospital was built in 1969. To this day and I think for future generations, it will continue serving the purpose for which it was built and on this basis, I would like to support hon. Cecilia Ogwal; let us make sure that that hospital is worthy of its name and worthy of those who believed in the dream of providing decent health services to the citizens of Uganda. 

Clearly, listening to the stories about Edward Rurangaranga, again on education, it was not lip-service. It was something he was actively involved in promoting and working towards and I think that the products of his efforts in the field of education are many. In the last few days, I have been able to come across many, including a former Member of Parliament for Sheema South, who narrated how Edward Rurangaranga was his teacher, when he was in primary five.

As congress men and especially that generation of congress men, God created man male and female He created them. I do not want to go and start preaching but “man” can be male or female, according to the Bible in the Book of Genesis. 

The generation of congressmen who defined the public services in this country, he is one of them. They were uncompromising and they knew task; simply to improve the livelihoods of the citizens of Uganda.

For health, we have covered, as well as education. The issue of the cooperatives to make sure that the citizens had money in their pockets to manage their own affairs. As a congressman standing here today, we have a lot to live up to. We have a great mountain to climb to bring out that message and the massage of unity across this country.

Personally, I came to know Maj. Edward Rurangaranga on 27 May 1980. Many can talk about that day but being there, you would never escape the atmosphere and what actually happened on that day. I knew all the congress songs; we sang them in exile in small groups. The elders talked about this Uganda, which many of us were too young to know but arriving in Bushenyi on the 27 May 1980 as far as the eye could see I could see people. When the songs started and seeing the whole crowd joining into this song and even the public address and the band could not be heard. Quite literally, the ground was shaking, a cloud of dust started rising; that was the atmosphere, that was the day I said I want to be part of this congress.

Therefore, if the other presidential candidates got intimidated by that sight, it is understandable. I do not think it was more of a declaration but you had to have been there to see the atmosphere, to see thousands upon thousands of people singing one song, dancing to one beat, even those who could not move, the sounds of congress generally started getting them to shake. This is something, which no other political party in the history of Uganda has ever been able to do to compete with the Uganda Peoples Congress (UPC). (Laughter) I do not know songs, I see my brothers across; we do not have songs. You find people even in the sporting gathering wanting to show their passion; you start hearing “eeee mama-” (Laughter)

Recently, in the Kyadondo East bye-election, I heard the same tune permeating; I heard the same during Africa Cup of Nations; in this House, when we were electing members of East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) that was the tune.

Our fore fathers, apart from giving us a clear mission in the service of the people of Uganda, gave us also the love, the passion. As congressman, I support the message hon. Cecelia Ogwal raised; we must be united. We must be focused and we must realise that much of what our fore fathers stood for is yet to be fulfilled.

Therefore, we cannot rest on the roils of what they achieved but we must set a mark in the future, to stand by what they stood for and what they believed in and to make sure that our efforts yield an improvement in the lives of the citizens of Uganda.

Therefore, on behalf of UPC, I would also like to thank the establishment of Parliament, again the Government and the family for granting us this opportunity to be able to pay tribute to a great son of Uganda, a great son of UPC. May his soul rest in eternal peace.  

3.19
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I have every reason to thank you very much indeed. First, for giving me an opportunity to pay tribute to a great leader, a teacher, a nationalist and indeed a parent but also for maintaining high standards of decency; rebuking Members who bring private matters and make them public. That standard of decency is quite appreciated.

I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister Ruhakana Rugunda for the motion to pay tribute to our brother. We must also thank him for the sympathy and the solidarity he has shown during this period of difficulty; it has been comforting.

In a special way, I must thank H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for according hon. Maj. Edward Rurangaranga an official burial. We are entirely grateful to him. In the Bible, it is said “Blessed are those who are merciful to others, God will be merciful to them.” Additionally, for those who have been very kind, sympathetic to the demise of our parent, educator, liberator, I am sure God will be merciful. Friends, comrades, Members of Parliament, we have lost one of the greatest figures in the political history in this country; the country is mourning. 

I have had the privilege of knowing hon. Maj. Edward Rurangaranga since the days of my childhood. I represent part of the constituency he represented in Parliament as Bushenyi West in 1980s. The way we know him, first, as a parent. Colleagues, Edward was a great parent, dedicated and accomplished educationist, he loved his wife Joy; the first wife. He loved his children, they are here: Jeninah, Jenipher, Petwa, Matsiko and the rest. They would know to the extent that Edward would not even mention the name of his wife; hon. Cecilia Ogwal has already referred to that. He would call her mama Bushenyi. If Bushenyi had been a nation, Joy would have been the mother of the nation, Bushenyi. That is the respect Edward gave his wife.

For us who literally grew in his house, Joy was very charming, jolly and warm and the children really loved their father. When Joy passed on and Edward married his second wife, Winnie who is here - I am sure Winnie, it must be a shock to you to lose Edward at this time. It must be very difficult.

I pray that the honour the nation has given Maj. Edward Rurangaranga today will soften the sting of death and the grief that the family has in the knowledge that their father and husband did not die in vain. The nation has honoured him. 

We can say many things about Maj. Edward Rurangaranga but I will single out just a couple, starting with the struggle for independence. For us who were young at the time the struggle for independence started, we know vividly the role these people played in making Uganda independent in 1962. 

Maj. Rurangaranga was one of the founding members of political parties in this country. He was a member of the Uganda National Congress (UNC). When UNC became UPC, he was a founding member of UPC. I can mention names of people who became household names in our times: Milton Obote, Ben Kiwanuka, C.B. Katiti, W.W. Rwesiba, Basil Bataringaya and many others. Maj. Rurangaranga was with them. 

Those at his level who are still living include Yowasi Makaru and Chris Rwakasisi. I can tell you Chris Rwakasisi would sing. He was very famous. He is said to have sung and even a lady who had reached her menopause conceived because the excitement that was generated during that time was very classic. (Laughter)

Maj. Rurangaranga will go in history as one of the greatest communicators and mobilisers. They mobilised the population and there is no way the British imperialism would have survived under the mobilisation these people had done and we thank them. We are Members of Parliament as a result of their efforts and we shall for ever be grateful to them.

The second thing, which I should single out is that as a leader Maj. Rurangaranga was visionary and very fearless. The positions he held demonstrate this clearly. There is a science now of “deliverology” (to deliver). “Deliverology” is a science of effective service delivery to those that people serve. (Laughter)

You can count Maj. Rurangaranga as one of those people that you could never accuse of lack of service because he delivered and the evidence is there. The evidence has been mentioned and I do not need to repeat. Whether it was hospitals or health centres, Maj. Rurangaranga had the marks. Whether it was education, bridges or roads, Maj. Rurangaranga had the marks. If it was empowering women and youth, Maj. Rurangaranga was there. He believed very vividly in education as the foundation of any nation. For him education was the destiny: it was the instrument of making equal opportunity for many. He really believed in it. You can mention primary schools, secondary schools and now Ankole Western University and I am sure they are going to honour him for the contributions he has made.

The nature of Maj. Rurangaranga’s death is in a way something God had ordained. Maj. Rurangaranga died peacefully in his home and in the hands of his wife, at the age of 84. There are many types of death: violent death, murder, earthquake and thunder. If I reflect on the experience of Maj. Rurangaranga’s life, this was a decent death. Look at this, in 1971 – it has already been mentioned – he resisted the military coup together with others and he was detained in Makindye, which is a military prison. The man was brutalised. I went there to see him together with Yona Kanyomozi; he can bear me witness. Those who were imprisoned with him who are still alive are Chris Rwakasisi and Yowasi Makaru. The rest: Nekemia, Bananuka or Katundu are all dead. They were really brutalised but the man survived. As you can see, he could have died. In 1972, he collaborated the failed invasion of Tanzanian and Ugandan forces and they shot him. He was regarded dead and dumped in River Rwizi, which the Prime Minister has made reference to. This man survived. 

He was smuggled into Kenya under a pseudo name of Fabiano Bamwanga. Again, Yona Kanyomozi can bear me witness. He was smuggled to Kenya where Kanyomozi was the general manager for the East African Telecoms and he was treated and he recovered. He became a teacher in Kenya and he was loved as a teacher of all those Kenyans. He joined “Kikosi Maalum” as a soldier. He came with the Tanzanian-Ugandan forces in the war of liberation in 1979. He survived in the war. 

In 1983, he survived a helicopter crash. The helicopter crashed in Bwebajja in a potato plantation just on the way to Entebbe. Why am I am narrating all these? For this man to have survived violent deaths and he dies quietly without brutality, I regard this type of death as the death he himself would have wished for – without suffering and being brutalised. This death also gave us a chance. 

If he had died during the time I have narrated, we would never have had a chance to pay tribute to this man. I am grateful to God that Maj. Rurangaranga lived up to the age of 84 and died peacefully in his home in the hands of his wife. The whole nation has been given a chance to pay tribute for his dedication and commitment in serving this country. We pray God will give him eternal peace.

Finally, Mr Speaker, hon. Edward Rurangaranga was a formidable opponent. Those who ever opposed or competed against him, they would know it too well. Members of the Democratic Party would know Edward Rurangaranga was a formidable opponent. I am sure my brother, hon. Kahinda Otafiire, would add to this because he tested it. (Laughter) 

I should also add that I competed with Rurangaranga in the primary elections in 1980. At that time, he was the Minister of State for Local Government and I was a full Minister of Tourism and Wildlife. Edward went to a huge rally and said: “Kamuntu is a minister…” If I say it in vernacular, it is even more dramatic. “He is a Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and something else. I am a Minister of State in charge of Local Government. Do you know what ‘Minister of Tourism’ means?” People listened attentively. “It means he is a minister of crocodiles, snakes…” –(Laughter)- If I say it in vernacular, it is more dramatic -( “Akaba ari minister wembura mukoro, we bishegyesi, we binyabwoya, we binyantinda” and people clapped. He was a minister of porcupines, of snails. The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities - embura mukoro in vernacular is a terrible name; it means an idler. I looked at Edward and said, “My goodness, I am in a wrong place.” and I left him alone. Fortunately, Bushenyi North Constituency was a neighbour to games parks, which appreciated wildlife and for those reasons, they were able to elect me as the Member of Parliament, representing Bushenyi. What I am saying is that he was a formidable competitor and very fearless. There is no question about it and he has left a mark. 

Even in the church, Rurangaranga had been elected time and again as a member of synod. Until influential members in the church – because he was very critical in the church - said, “How can we deal with Rurangaranga?” What they did was to amend the provision of electing members of the synod and imposed an age limit. (Laughter) Because they feared to compete with him, the only way they could eliminate him was to impose age limit. Without age limit, they were sure Rurangaranga was going to win. In doing so, they disfranchised those who would have elected him and as a result of this, there is tension and anxiety in the diocese. This is Rurangaranga we are saying farewell to. He was extremely loved by the community he served.

In conclusion, Rurangaranga has been a great mentor and I am really pleased and grateful that he has been given a decent send off. His body is molding in that coffin but his soul and the ideas he stood for will live forever. May God rest his soul in eternal peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion but I also want to say like hon. Ephraim Kamuntu hinted on, Maj. Rurangaranga was a formidable opponent and to also mention the other side of Edward Rurangaranga; he was a very understanding gentleman. He was compassionate and when you convinced him, he would not let you down. That is one thing I can say about Edward. He was very tenacious in his beliefs and he held onto what he believed in. However, when you convinced him to your side, he was very reliable. No wonder, he stood by UPC to his very last. I commend him.

The lesson we learn from the late Edward Rurangaranga is that we ought to have boundaries in the practice of democracy. There has been a slur and reference to hon. Rwakasisi’s dress, which is okay an innuendo therein. It is a bit discomforting. Not that it is not part of democracy but because hon. Rwakasisi does not have a chance to come to the Floor of Parliament and defend his dress mode. Decency demands that while we treat those who paid service to this country with dignity, those in retirement deserve special respect. (Applause) 

In addition, as we get to the evening of our lives, we should learn to tolerate each other. Gone are the days when we resolved our differences by force of arms. I would like to call upon Members of Parliament and every Ugandan that those days have gone. The style of combat for political ideas is gone. Let us sit down, discuss and agree to disagree. Finish what we can in our time and what we cannot, we leave it to our successors.

Mr Speaker, I am perturbed by the attempt to gag democratic debate. No one should gag democratic debate because gaging democratic debate leads to violence and no one has monopoly of violence. That should be understood by all that this country cannot be built by every other turn point of disagreement you breakdown the building blocks. Otherwise, we shall never have a country because if we start a foundation and then uproot it, I do not know how we shall be described in the family of nations. 

What hon. Kamuntu has said about Rurangranga’s restriction as far as age limit is concerned is very pertinent and very pointing; that we should not be afraid of competition. I competed with Maj. Edward Rurangaranga and I did not find him a very formidable opponent because as far as ideas and philosophies were concerned, we had no contact. He was UPC and believed in the common man and all those things. I believed in a way of living that I still uphold and cherish. However, I also appreciate democratic ideals and the wishes of the majority prevail even when I am not in agreement with those views.

Therefore, countrymen, if we cherish democratic debate and deviating the boundaries of interface, we will live in this world. Like I told you, I lived with the late Maj. Edward Rurangaranga. We disagreed and agreed. We build the country because it belongs to all of us; which direction you are taking as far as building Uganda is concerned is immaterial, as long as we all arrive at the same destiny. There is sufficient room in this country for everyone to make a contribution and exert their effort, capacity and ability.

Let us allow a thousand flowers to blossom and let us allow people to talk; the wise, the unwise, the clever, the pleasant and the unpleasant. Let us leave it to the population to determine which direction we should go. Uganda was here before us, it is here with us and it will be here long after we are gone. Amen. 

3.43
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join UPC family to pay tribute to the late Maj. Rurangaranga. I am the only Member of Parliament from the greater Luweero Triangle.

Mr Speaker, by 1980s to 2000, the word UPC in Nakaseke, formerly Luweero District was equated to evil. However, 31 years down the road, I discovered that these were the great patriots of this country. (Applause) 

I stand here to give facts. By the time UPC Government was in charge, we had Uganda Airlines and our planes were flying. We had Uganda Railways and a functional Mulago National Referral Hospital. Bank of Uganda was for Uganda and not ATM of some few individuals as it is today. The UPC Government did not sugar-coat issues. If they said they would build a hospital, it would be a real hospital. It was not like today whereby Government puts up a small building and they call it a hospital, costing billions of money. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I used to hear of the name Rwakasisi and there was one who was hanged by the same Government in power; his name was Sebirumbi. They could tell us these were terrible people who killed others. When you go to Nakaseke today and you talk about those two names, the question that comes from the people of Luweero Triangle is why this Government hurriedly hanged Sebirumbi and left Rwakasisi alive? I came to know that there is still injustice in this country.

I am here to apologise to UPC members who are here today. We used to think you never had a heart for this country but looking 31 years down the road, especially from my constituency, the only asset we have is Nakaseke Main Hospital built by UPC Government. (Applause) I think we last had money during UPC Government. We used to export coffee; people used to get a lot of money from coffee and cotton and whenever Government announced any project, it would work for the ordinary Ugandans. Today, I hear of “Bonna Bagagawale” but it is the opposite. People are becoming poorer. There are very many projects they have hatched but you can hardly see any impact on the ordinary Ugandans. 

Obote’s Government preserved our ordinary bank, Uganda Commercial Bank. Today, when you look around, you hear billions of shillings were taken to Crane Bank. After a certain time, they sold it. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, when asked if they were aware, they said they were not. NSSF also says they were not aware such a bank existed. 

Therefore, gallant Ugandans from UPC, take it from my heart, I am the only Member of Parliament from the greater Luweero Triangle thanking you for the great deeds you did for this country, more especially, the late Rurangaranga and colleagues who are still alive. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.48
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I rise up to support the motion to pay tribute to the former UPC National Chairperson, Maj. Rurangaranga, who passed away on Tuesday morning at his home in Sheema District. Maj. Rurangaranga was a UPC stalwart. He was a politician, a soldier, a church leader, an educationist, a father, a grandfather and best of all, a statesman. The gentleman lying here in the coffin was a former politician in the early 1960s and 1970s who fought Idi Amin’s dictatorship and was also a Minister of State for Local Government in the Milton Obote’s II Government.

Mr Speaker, the nation, the people of Ankole region, my entire family and the people of Kashongi County extend their sincere condolences to the family, friends and relatives of the late Maj. Rurangaranga who passed away as a liberator and a statesman. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bintu, you had a wreath; could you lay it and speak? I think you were omitted from the list and yet, you had prepared it already. 

3.50
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to the late Maj. Edward Rurangaranga Akiiki who passed on yesterday.

On behalf of the people of Masindi District and my family, I extend our sincere condolences to the family of the late Maj. Rurangaranga and to my sister Winnie. I got to know Maj. Rurangaranga in 1983 when he officiated at a fundraising function in Masindi at Kangora Teachers College and we sang at that function. We used to refer to him as “Major”.

Mr Speaker, the next time I got to meet him was in 1999 when he graced my wedding ceremony in Masindi and he contributed to my family a heifer, which still has some offsprings.

The late Maj. Rurangaranga was a politician, an educationist, a political advisor and a role model in farming. He accomplished all the tasks he laid his hands on. When he officiated at the fundraising in Masindi in 1983, in 1996 he realised that the dormitory which he had contributed to was incomplete. By then, he was the chairperson of the Education Committee of Bushenyi and he sent a message asking for what is required to complete that dormitory. Indeed, he sent money and that dormitory was completed. That is Maj. Rurangaranga.

The late Maj. Rurangaranga loved all the people he worked with. He worked with my husband who was the District Education Officer in Bushenyi and he was the Chairman Education Committee of the district. One time, the late Maj. Rurangaranga knocked at our main entrance at around 3.00a.m. because the next day, they were going to have a council meeting. He wanted to get advice from a technical person. When we opened the gate, I saw Maj. Rurangaranga and I welcomed him to the sitting room. Of course, I could not talk to him because he used to refer to me as his daughter. However, I went and called my husband who sat with him up to 7.00a.m. and the next day when they were in the council meeting, they indeed passed a resolution in support of education of the girl child. He loved, promoted and supported education of the girl child.

Mr Speaker, the late Edward Rurangaranga was a crowd mover. Whenever he stood to speak, he moved the crowd. I remember listening to his presentation during the national conference on girl child education in Kampala. When he spoke, every one supported his views. 

He started that campaign of promoting education of the girl child in Bushenyi. It is no wonder during his regime, when he was the chairperson of the education committee, around six girls’ secondary schools were constructed in Bushenyi. 

I would refer to Maj. Edward Rurangaranga as a political advisor. The rest have talked about his participation in politics. When he attended my wedding, I declared to stand for the district woman seat. When we went to Bushenyi after the wedding, he invited me to his home. He advised me as a daughter, saying although I was now a politician, I was a young politician. 

He said that since he had been in politics, he was advising that –
 
    1. never detach yourself from your voters;
    2. always be at their level and down to earth;
    3. assist as much as you can but do not over stretch yourself; and 
    4. always be on the side of your voters whenever there is an issue.

Mr Speaker, two months ago I went back to see late Maj. Rurangaranga and when I was interacting with him, he was weak. However, he asked me, “My daughter, the Member of Parliament for Masindi, do you have any personal project in your constituency?” I told him that I was into maize and sugarcane commercial farming.

He told me again, “Make sure you have a personal project because the voters at one time can decide to do away with you. You must have a fall-back position for yourself.” This is Maj. Edward Rurangaranga. He was not selfish. He would advise you whenever you would seek advice. 

I one time asked Maj. Edward Rurangaranga why he did not join the NRM and he told me these words, like hon. Cecilia Ogwal also said: “My daughter, I am a founder member of UPC. How would you expect me to abandon what I started? However, I support all those programmes which are geared toward helping my community and that is why, I support UPE.” Around that time, Government had introduced the UPE programme.

I took this as an important aspect in late Maj. Rurangaranga’s history because you might be in the Opposition but you do not need to oppose everything. What benefits your community, you support because all of us are here to build our country. And this was Maj. Rurangaranga.

Mr Speaker, Maj. Rurangaranga has been a model farmer. I visited his banana plantation, heifer and goat farm. I once took my supporters to visit the farm and he took them through how he got the idea of beginning the farm up to where he was. This was a lesson I learnt from him as a leader. Very many people would visit his farm to learn from him. 

We shall miss Maj. Rurangaranga. To my sister Winnie, you have been with Akiiki and nursed him. To the children, you know Maj. Rurangaranga loved you; he loved children. He would associate with you whoever was next to him, be it from any political party or otherwise.

I would like to request you to take heart. The family should carry on with the projects that Maj. Rurangaranga put in place, make sure you keep his candle lighting because that is how people will get to know and keep Major’s name lighting. Allow me to rest my case. May his soul rest in peace.

3.59
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the motion by the Prime Minister to pay tribute to the fallen gallant son of Uganda. 

I recall very well that in 1982, I was among the NUSU (National Union of Students of Uganda) presidents who attended a symposium that had been organised by the then Government at a school in Lugala in Namayingo. The late Maj. Rurangaranga had come to close the symposium and I recall his words when he was advising people with the slogan, “Go back to the land.” 

Mr Speaker, Uganda has people and I pay tribute especially also to the UPC Government because my father being one of them at that time used to talk about very bright people of Uganda and he would recall for me the names of Dr Ruhakana Rugunda and Prof Ephraim Kamuntu.

My father told me, “My son, at one time you should also be like those people.” They were people of substance when they talked that even as of now, you hear that they are men of substance.

I join the people of Uganda in mourning this gallant son and also asking God to comfort the family that he has left behind. 

There is a lesson that we learn from these gallant sons of Uganda. UPC was a good Government but betrayed by the ruthless soldiers. That is why as Ugandans, we should learn why the current Government will continue being in power because the army is disciplined. The discipline of the army will make those in Government to continue being in Government. A site was destroyed by its own army. 

The lesson that we also learn is that it is not a mistake for us to grow old. These old people are libraries. What we are learning from these Ugandans who are dying at this older age is that they must have taught us history on where Uganda was, is and wants to go. 

With those few words, allow me to pay tribute to this fallen son. Thank you very much.

4.02
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Prime Minister for this motion paying tribute to the legendary educationist and a parent who has been a role model in very many ways. 

I bring condolences from the Bugungu in Buliisa and also from my own family of the late Safurefi Mukitale who was his colleague in Canon Apollo Primary Teachers College in Toro when he joined the teaching profession. The late Rurangaranga resisted the habit of bullying and teasing as a young man, which had almost caused him to lose out on his teaching career. 

My father told us about the day of Nyamurunga, when Bushenyi was celebrated the return of the leader of the UPC. When the late Maj. Rurangaranga and another educationist called Mzee Mukaira of Bushenyi, Mateke and others joined Canon Apollo Primary Teachers College, there was a lot of bullying. Water was even poured on Rurangaranga’s bed and he almost quit the school. However, he resisted and because my father was a prefect, he shifted Rurangaranga to the prefect’s room. The late resisted bullying and we too must condemn bullying. If he had given in to that, we would not be talking about him today. 

In 1977 when the late Maj. Rurangaranga was in Kikosi Maalum, he had a network of people who were recruiting, including my father. Unfortunately, this document came into the hands of the State Research Bureau. As young men, we saw members of the State Research Bureau come to pick up my father. Fortunately, he had stepped out of the church and was also not at the school. The State Research Bureau had received information to the effect that my father was a contact in recruiting people for Kikosi Maalum. 

I am here to mourn a father, an uncle and an educationist like my father. When the NRM Government introduced Universal Primary Education (UPE), the then education minister was looking for an education officer - Hon. Jalia Bintu has already talked about this. My brother, who is now the Prime Minister of the Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom, was the new District Education Officer (DEO) of Bushenyi and the Government policy at that time was against Parents Teachers Associations (PTA). However, the late Maj. Rurangaranga as an educationist resisted the removal of PTA and Bushenyi continued with PTA even with UPE. He insisted on the role of a parent. 

Whereas there were quality issues in schools elsewhere, Bushenyi never suffered that problem because of his foresight. Bushenyi remained with PTA because the late Maj. Rurangaranga was the chairman of the education committee that resisted the politics of resisting PTA.

For us as children of the UPC family, even when we are in NRM, we should be mindful that yesterday’s majority can become today’s minority. I remember in 1980 I was a sympathiser of Uganda Patriotic Movement (UPM) and we would hear about the numbers of UPC and yet UPM had no support. I even remember, later in the days of the Government when the NRM were being referred to as gangsters and guerrillas. That was the language then. I would like to implore those of us who now have the numbers not to think that numbers are permanent. You may have the numbers today and tomorrow you may not have them.

It is not true to say that there are parties which do not have brilliant people. We have been hearing people demonising the UPC but to the best of my recollection, I can even see that the presenter of the motion from the Government side is a cadre who was brought up by UPC. (Applause) I can see the strong minister – I remember the term was Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary - Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu. He was also from UPC. I have heard hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who still speaks out today; she is a product of UPC. When I was in Makerere University, my guild president, who is now the Deputy Speaker, was also a UPC member. (Laughter) Therefore, I do not understand when we start demonising -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall not bring the history of the Speaker into debate. (Laughter)

MR MUKITALE: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I am only stating a fact of history and that it is important that we learn to tolerate each other and coexist because I am talking about cadre development. We are yet to see the cadres of NRM because it seems that up to now, we have been depending on the cadres of these very parties we have done so well to demonise.

As I mourn my uncle, I would like to remember something. I got the message when I was in Buliisa and I remember that Bugungu Secondary School was started by the late Maj. Rurangaranga, who was mobilised by my uncle, the late Yosam Mugenyi, the former Minister of Transport. When they came to an area and said they wanted a school in that area, the school would be started. If they said they wanted a college of commerce in Aduku, it would be started, and if they gave a Tata lorry, it would be real. 

I remember Mzee Philemon Mateke came to Buliisa and I was a young man at the time. I am wondering what went wrong with today’s ministers. What pledge can you give and you keep your word? In the days of Minister Luwiriza Kirunda and the late Maj. Rurangaranga, whatever they said was real. A ministerial pledge would be honoured in the next budget. Therefore, we need to think about that time when these old men would keep their word. I am talking mostly about the lessons we learn from this leadership. 

Another thing I remember about UPC was that they were republicans who would do everything for the country. Concerning the problem in Kibaale, for example, the UPC was against the injustice of absentee landlords caused by colonialists against the ancestral rights of people in Bunyoro. Much as it caused UPC problems, today in Bunyoro we still appreciate the decision of UPC. Much as we never got back the land, we still respect that vote on return of counties.

Furthermore, I never remembered the politics of none issues during the days of our parents. I remember in UPC, they always fought against poverty, ignorance and disease. However, we have deteriorated so much that we no longer talk about the common good and fighting issues of common interest like fighting against poverty.

Mr Speaker, as I mourn my uncle and friend of the family who has really left a legacy in this country, we as leaders of this generation have a challenge to ensure that we have functional political parties which have cadre development, identification and deployment. Most importantly, these cadres should look out for the national cause, fight poverty, ignorance and disease so that the country can move forward. May the soul of Mzee rest in eternal peace. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we now try and reduce on the time so that we can share the time.

4.12
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, allow me at this juncture to first of all say that I am heavily disturbed in my heart when I see my father lie here. As a people from Kapelebyong County, we are in deep sorrow today. Without this father, I would not be in this Parliament. Every step I took in politics, this father was at the forefront together with Mama Cecilia Ogwal 

The day I was arrested and locked up by the police in Soroti, my cell was opened at midnight and I was sprayed with a chemical. When I was pulled out and taken to the Bukedea police cells, the late Maj. Rurangaranga was the first person who called me and asked whether I was alive.

Furthermore, when I had complications with my marriage, the late the late Maj. Rurangaranga travelled from Bushenyi to donate a cow for me to marry a woman –(Interjections)- With the first one, I had complications because some people in Government were involved and I can produce evidence. 

Mr Speaker, it is on those grounds that I stand here to say today that the Government of Uganda has taken a firm position to accord our father a decent burial. For the first time, I thank the Government. 

However, I must also say here that in memory of what has been done today by Government, I ask the Government of the Republic of Uganda to remove the police from Uganda House. As we send off Maj. Rurangaranga to rest, we should have Uganda House headquarters free because it belongs to the members of that party. We should not have a situation where the police have turned the headquarters into a police detach. It is very humiliating. We demand that Government gives a statement on why they have chosen to deploy the police at Uganda House. What security threat is there? 

Mr Speaker, the old man we are sending off today is a true patriot. This man did not select which regions he would go to to guide and mentor the young upcoming leaders of this country. I saw the late Rurangaranga go to Soroti in a Rav 4, driven by his cousin, doing nothing but mobilising the people. He said that this country has problems and we need to mobilise the people so that we go into the direction where people will get the right services. 

It is the reason why Mzee has been persistent with UPC up to the time God has called him. He never gave up playing his role of being a mentor and advising citizens across the country. When he saw the humiliating poverty, the late Rurangaranga arrived in Teso and advised us to go back to the cooperative movements so that we take charge of what we produced ourselves. He told us that if we remained with the programmes that they call “Abala Kere”, meaning “Bona Bagagawale”, we would never get out of poverty - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were you still speaking English with those words? 

MR JULIUS OCHEN: I am reciting the names of programmes that have been advanced by Government in this country. I do not know whether they are in English or which language - (Laughter)- I think the Prime Minister will be the right person to explain them. 

Mr Speaker, we took the advice of the late Mzee and we were able to start our cooperative movement in the region as the Teso community. Indeed, the old man invited us to go to Mbarara where we paid a visit to the Banyankore Kweterena Cooperative Union. We even went to the factory that is being built by the people of Ankole. Today, I am proud to say that we have resurrected not less than four cooperative unions in Teso with his guidance and advice. 

We feel this is a good thing for this country. He is the reason as to why we appeal to Government on this. Although the Government has done what it has done today, I think this Government needs to go the extra mile and see how best we can address the issue of governance in this country. This Government should not think that they have been in power for 30 years and everything is sorted out; no. We want this country to be given total freedom without several restrictions which gag the progress of political development in Uganda. That is the reason you see a senior expert and elder persisting in the political party he belonged to up to today. 

Mr Speaker, finally, we beg Government to commit itself on some of the hospitals and school projects that Mzee has been supporting, as it has been alluded to by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Since he has been a fighter in the area of education, we should have a school built in memory of Maj. Rurangaranga in Bushenyi. It would make the entire country applaud the effort of Government in that direction. 

Mr Speaker, I am very grateful, as your Member of Parliament, because I know to arrive at what we arrived at today was not done by one person; it must have been done by a number of other people. I would like to reiterate what my honourable colleague said about Government coming up with a clear policy on some of these decisions so that we move as a country. 

With those words, may the Lord take the soul of my father to the place He has prepared for him. 

4.21
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking you for giving me this opportunity to support this motion. 

Mr Speaker, I first want to convey condolences from the people of Erute County South in Lira District, the constituency I represent in this Parliament. Also, for the information of the House, it is the heartbeat of UPC in Uganda.

I cannot speak extensively about the late Maj. Rurangaranga because I did not have the opportunity to meet him personally and be close to him, though we spoke on phone a number of times. I may also not have the energy, like my brother, to speak at length. However, I would like to pay tribute to him first for founding our party, the Uganda People’s Congress, and even remaining in the party until his death. 

Mr Speaker, we have heard from Members here about very many wonderful works, sacrifices and the efforts that he made towards building this country. Listening here as a young politician, I then wonder what is wrong with our country because all these nice tributes were hidden. If you are a young man and you have not heard this, you will still think that UPC has been the worst party ever, but when you look across the bench, you see former members of UPC –(Interjections)- Yes, our motto is, “Everywhere UPC and Everybody UPC”. 

However, the point I am making is that you can see the fruits of the UPC party across. I think that it is time that the Government, especially our colleagues from NRM, tone down a bit so that the young people are not misled and the works of people who built this country can also be appreciated. The ideas that made UPC a great party - you have heard the testimony here about cooperatives, hospitals and other things – are still with UPC. The Government cannot just get them by borrowing one or two people; it is about allowing UPC to be in charge. These ideas are with us, with my President here, with me; you cannot pick only her. 

I, therefore, would like to speak to Ugandans and also to this House and tell you that it is possible that governments can change and new governments can bring good ideas to build on the blocks that hon. Otafiire mentioned. If we show mercy to each other and we are grateful by recognising the contribution made by others, by giving burials that are deserving of our fallen comrades, then we are sure that even beyond 2021 – for those who are worried – President Museveni will retire and another leader will come and the leader will also recognise him.  Therefore, we do not need to live in Uganda as if there is no tomorrow, as if there are no younger people who have the capacity to take the country forward.

Lastly, I would like to say that as we send the late Maj. Rurangaranga off, we must also take note of some of the things that he cherished. We have talked about education, health and cooperatives. I also think that there is something that we missed out, which he did. In 1986, when the new government came in place, he was in exile and he knew very well that he was wanted. He did not hide but he came back and subjected himself to criminal proceedings and the courts set him free. That means that our system is now strong enough to hear, try and let those who are innocent also go free. 

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity and I say that on behalf of my people of Erute South, may his soul rest in peace.

4.26
DR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira East County, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for introducing this very important motion. It concerns a rare man who was one of a kind. 

Mr Speaker, I do acknowledge the fact that our country is increasingly having a shortage of men and women of integrity, men and women who do not use their positions to enrich themselves at the expense of the nation. Maj. Rurangaranga was in that category of men who simply used the positions God gave them to serve this nation. The testimony to that is what you have listened to across the board from colleagues from the northern part of our nation, southern, eastern – It is very rare that you get that broad-based support when you are a leader.

Mr Speaker, that is something we must strive for. The question I keep asking myself is: The day the Lord says that this is the end of me on planet earth, what will people say about me? I do believe that this is something each of us must constantly ask themselves. What will people say that I did? What will people say that I achieved? What will people say about your character?

I do believe that this nation, which God has made our own, is a home for all of us and we have got to nurture it. No one has a right to discriminate against any other person on whatever basis. The fallen friend was in that category of men and women who saw each one of us in the best way possible.

Maj. Rurangaranga was passionate about Bushenyi. First of all, he was my minister - let me say this - and I would from time to time interact with him on matters of policy and politics at that time. The passion and depth of commitment and love he had for this nation was unmatched. May I remind colleagues that are here that as long as God keeps you here, your primary duty is to serve His people; it is not to serve yourself, for God’s sake! It is to serve His people and the nation. Maj. Rurangaranga was in that category. I do not think that if one looked at his possessions, they would clearly be indicative of so much that has gone wrong today.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, Maj. Rurangaranga was passionate about his party, I remember very well, but he was passionate about Uganda more. This is central to what we all must be able to do – that Uganda must come first and ourselves next. 

I would like to join colleagues that have spoken about this fallen comrade and thank God for his service and his life. I think that it is our duty to pray passionately for the family so that God gives them the grace to withstand this loss. I say so well aware that each one of us will have their time and when that time comes, what will be said about you in connection with what you did for this nation?

Maj. Rurangaranga was a very special man. We had quite a number of men and women who were special during his time and we still have some who fairly continue to put Uganda before their personal interest. May God give us those men and women, may He promote that category of man and woman that this nation very much deserves. Thank you.

4.31
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to the late Edward Rurangaranga. On behalf of the people of Koboko and on my own behalf, I would like to send my sincere condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the fraternity of UPC and Uganda at large after the demise of our beloved father, uncle and grandfather, Edward Rurangaranga.

Mr Speaker, Edward Rurangaranga was a teacher and he became a teacher by choice and not as a last resort. He taught very many young children who today are now leaders because of his good foundation. We thank you for nurturing these children at an early age. 

Mr Rurangaranga was a leader, a very strong UPC leader. He mobilised and nurtured UPC members and as a result, UPC members have particular characteristics; they are very proud of themselves, they are very proud of their party and they are very eloquent when they debate. These are the characteristics of UPC members and that is because he gave them very good leadership. 

It is very difficult to change someone from UPC to another party, though a few have done it. (Laughter)  Because of his conviction, he – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does that include you, honourable member? 

MS BABA DIRI: That includes you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) Thank you very much. 

He was developmental and he did not restrict development to his constituency alone. He ensured that if there was a hospital in Bushenyi, there must be also be a hospital in Arua, Tororo and everywhere. There was universal development. If UPC wanted hospitals, they put hospitals everywhere. If they wanted hotels, they were everywhere. That was the development in UPC we are very proud of and we shall never forget. We would especially like to thank the Government of UPC for Pakwach Bridge, which connected West Nile to Uganda. (Interjection)- Yes, it was done during UPC time.

Mr Speaker, Mr Rurangaranga was a very faithful loving father to his family; he gave his children all the possible education they could have. I would like to urge the family to keep his legacy and do what he advised them to do so that we can remember him through the family members and the children.

4.33
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I rise on behalf of the people of Ajuri County, Alebtong District in Lango sub-region, which currently houses all the Members of Parliament of Uganda People’s Congress in the Tenth Parliament, to pay my tribute to the late Maj. Rurangaranga, as he was commonly known.

Mr Speaker, for the peaceful co-existence of the people of Uganda under the current political arrangement between the UPC, under the leadership of hon. Jimmy Akena, and the National Resistance Movement (NRM) - I would want to say that I got to know the late Maj. Rurangaranga as a UPC strong person in the mid-90s and mid-2000s, especially during the campaign rallies of the then Iron Lady of UPC, now in FDC, the honourable Atat Cecilia Ogwal. I recall vividly, hon. Cecilia Ogwal had a political tactic and strategy. After nominations, she would be off Lira Municipality and come back after one or two weeks but with a big bang, politically. 

I remember vividly five names that hon. Ogwal would not forget to talk about during her political rallies within Lira Municipality. She is here and she will confirm this with me. These were the people she was using or the people who were fighting for the restoration of a multiparty political dispensation. She would mention the names of James Rwanyarare, Maj. Rurangaranga, Adonia Tiberondwa, Yona Kanyomozi, Peter Walubiri, and all these were strong stalwarts of UPC. Hon. Ogwal is here and she can bear witness that I am saying the truth.

We got inspired as youth and student leaders then because we had people who could inspire us. I remember Lira Municipality under hon. Cecilia Ogwal, Gulu Municipality under hon. Norbert Mao, Mbarara Municipality under hon. Winnie Byanyima, Mbale Municipality under hon. James Wapakhabulo and as young leaders, we could get inspired. I am happy that today, although I did not meet him in person but through hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I got to know that there was one great man who lived, sacrificed and worked for this country by the name of Maj. Rurangaranga.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we in this Tenth Parliament have paid tribute to senior citizens who have passed on but I want to specifically talk about UPC. Let me put a disclaimer because I have never been a member of UPC. However, looking at the history of UPC, I can confidently say without any fear of contradiction that UPC is one political party that was predictable in leadership. In UPC, you would know who was in the queue –(Laughter)

Our generation has been told, and history has it, that the late Apollo Milton Obote, before he passed on in Zambia, confirmed when he was interviewed that the person he was grooming as a candidate for UPC to take over leadership from him was none other than the current Prime Minister of Uganda, Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda. History has it that this was so. Therefore, you would predict UPC. It had a deliberate policy of grooming, mentoring and nurturing leaders and placing them where their talent, skills and knowledge apply. I think this is something that for us in leadership now under NRM must learn.

There are good things that you must learn from your friends and leave out the bad ones. Many things are said about UPC – good and bad. However, I think as a political party that is now in charge of the country, let us learn from the good side of UPC and put that into action so that we are seen to be practising what we are preaching, to be walking our talk. 

Maj. Rurangaranga, I heard about you from hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I never had the opportunity to interact with you but you were a great man. May the good Lord rest your soul in eternal peace.

4.40
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to our gallant son of the soil, Maj. Rurangaranga. These are the people who made Bushenyi a model district. In Uganda, you have been benchmarking Bushenyi because it is a model district. Bushenyi did not become a model district because of NRM but it has been so ever since the time of UPC.

Mr Speaker, UPC ministers would be felt; they were super ministers. They would work and supervise even using motorcycles. However, currently, despite the fact that our ministers even drive VX cars, you cannot feel their impact in any of the towns or villages and many do not even supervise. (Applause) Mr Speaker, if I am to substantiate, recently a point of order was raised against one of the ministers thinking that he was a stranger in the House. (Laughter)

During UPC time, we used to have only one television station – Uganda Television (UTV) - for the country and not everyone had television sets in the villages. However, ministers could be identified by name and by their deeds. However, if you told Members here that in order for us to enter this House, we should mention at least five ministers by name and their portfolios, many of us would fail to enter this House. (Laughter) I am trying to show you the impact of these people and what they did for this country.

Mr Speaker, we saw our gallant son, Maj. Rurangaranga, after he had even reached the level of a minister, later come and contest as a councillor – very simple, humble and not proud. We have met ministers today who can hardly say “hi” to a colleague or fellow MP, but this was a man who reduced himself to the ground. 

The lesson that we can learn from the late is that all of us who are here, including our ministers, one time you might even be reduced to the level of an LCI chairperson, so let us be good colleagues and comrades. Let us work together. 

Major, may your soul rest in eternal peace. For God and my country. (Applause)

4.44
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Gulu Municipality as well as members of the Uganda People’s Congress, I pay our tribute to our great father, Maj. Edward Rurangaranga. 

Many have spoken but one thing which I learnt from history, which he told us in 1996, was that he was at the core of founding an institution called Uganda National Congress. Also, they worked very hard to ensure that Uganda People’s Union merged with Uganda National Congress to form what we now call Uganda People’s Congress. I think that was very solid work of Maj. Edward Rurangaranga. 

One other statement he made in 1996, before launching the presidential campaign of Ssemogerere where they were at the core of the formation of the Inter-Political Forces Co-operation (IPFC), was, “Young men and women, be courageous”. He told us that before he ran into exile, he was beaten by Idi Amin soldiers and thrown into River Rwizi. They actually thought that he was dead but the next thing they heard was that he was in exile in Tanzania. Therefore, he told us, “be courageous; do not fear the struggle.” 

This is a man who was very courageous but also humble. For those who talked about the ministers of the 1980s, he lowered himself to accept the appointment of the then President to become the Deputy Minister of Local Government and yet he was senior in age to his Cabinet minister by then, hon. Mwondha. Hon. Mwondha was very young, at 36 years of age, but Rurangaranga accepted this with humility. This tells us about how important humility is in politics and I think this is a great lesson we should learn. 

As hon. Mbwatekamwa said, what we do must always be seen in terms of our outcomes. I remember sitting for my Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) and one of the questions asked by the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) was, “Who is the Minister of Cooperatives and Marketing?” I answered, “Yona Kanyomozi”. I did not even know him but we were taught. (Laughter) I have noticed that Yona Kanyomozi is right there seated in the gallery. 

I also remember the song Uganda People’s Congress members used to sing called Nyamurunga. I asked why it was Nyamurunga. They asked me, “Do you know that bird with a red chest?” I remembered that those birds are all over northern Uganda. They are called weaver birds and the male weaver birds in Runyankole are called Nyamurunga. That is why they say that Nyamurunga is everywhere. That is how I learnt about this song. When they sing today, I always reflect on that bird, which is called Nyamurunga in Runyankole. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.48
MR MAXWELL AKORA (UPC, Maruzi County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen elder statesman, the late Maj. Edward Rurangaranga. On behalf of the people of Maruzi, Lango sub-region, and on my own behalf, I extend my heartfelt condolences and appreciation as we celebrate the role that the late Maj. Edward Rurangaranga played in the history of this country, not just in UPC. 

I wish to express the appreciation of the people of Maruzi and Lango for the role that the late Maj. Edward Rurangaranga played in ensuring that the late father of the nation, Dr Apollo Milton Obote, returned to Uganda in 1980 after leading the fight to defeat the misrule of the 1970s under Gen. Idi Amin Dada. Most Members of Parliament might not know the role that our founding fathers played because the average age in Parliament today is probably below 45 years. 

Today, part of that role has been revealed to the House. Unfortunately, it has been revealed by our elders and those of us of the younger generation who were there, who constitute the majority in this House, are not here. However, I stand here with a sense of pride that today, through the death of Maj. Edward Rurangaranga, the tributes that have been paid reveal the true history of this country. 

Maj. Edward Rurangaranga belonged to a generation of Ugandans who lit the torch to fight for independence from the 1950s when UPC and DP were formed. After independence, they fought to build this nation; Uganda was a collection of kingdoms and stateless tribes and they fought to craft a nation that came into being in 1967. After the coup of 1971, they led the fight to restore democracy and the will of the people of Uganda from exile. 

After that victory, there were attempts to stop Dr Apollo Milton Obote from returning to Uganda, not as a leader but as a Ugandan. However, the late Maj. Edward Rurangaranga ensured that Obote returned. I think one of the proudest moments he talked about in the UPC fora was the role he played in ensuring that Dr Obote returned in 1980. It was not by accident that that event took place in Bushenyi because Maj. Edward Rurangaranga was a district commissioner there. 

As a junior politician then, he ensured that arrangements were made and Dr Obote landed in Bushenyi. For that reason, he put Bushenyi on the map of Uganda; from a small township to the annals of our history. It was then that the term “Heroes Day” was invented and from 1980 to 1985, there was an annual pilgrimage of national leaders of Uganda to Bushenyi to renew their vision and commitment to the service of the people of Uganda. This was the brainchild of the late Maj. Edward Rurangaranga. 

Today, we have a different date for heroes. Today, we do not have a specific venue for Heroes Day. Today, we have Prof. Yusuf Lule lying alone at the grounds in Kololo as a hero. Maj. Edward Rurangaranga was a hero, the late Dr Milton Obote was a hero and there are many other heroes; some are living but most have passed on. However, we have not taken the effort to recognise the role that these people played, so that the younger generation understands that these are the founding fathers of this country and that this country started way before 1986. We must craft a common future as we have a common past. We must reflect on the history of our country and ensure that we build for the future. 

I would like to thank Government for according Maj. Edward Rurangaranga this honour of an official burial so that the body was brought here and such glowing tributes have been paid. I wish Government could come up with a policy that would help our young generation to understand the true history of this country. We know that history is often written by the victors but the victors are not always on the right side. We can have disagreements but we must forge forward together as a common nation. I pray to the Almighty to rest his soul in eternal peace.

5.54
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad to see some of the people who were in the UPC trenches with my uncles many years ago. I belong to a different party today but one that says that we are one Uganda and one people.

I would like to thank God especially for today because I did not know I would be here. When I saw the casket coming in with those colours - red, black and blue - I remembered not long ago that we had green and white here. I also recalled that we have had all sorts of colours coming in here. We are truly one Uganda now.

I would like to thank God for Government’s position of recognizing heroes of this country. One among them is the gentleman lying in the casket before us. I got to know Maj. Rurangaranga through a very interesting relationship. My wife comes from western Uganda and my father-in-law was the secretary of one of the UPC constituencies in the 1970s. I met Maj. Rurangaranga in the early 1980s when he came to meet my father-in-law.

Mr Speaker, these men built this country. A lot has been said and when you speak at the end, you cannot say it all. Therefore, on behalf of the people of Kabweri Constituency, I convey my condolences to the family and to UPC. Like one of us said here, when you are in the majority, remember one day you will be in the minority and you could as well disappear. We have seen it happen in Kenya; there is no more Kenya African National Union (KANU) out there but today we have National Super Alliance (NASA) and Jubilee Coalition. So, let us love one other. When you are in the leadership, do not demonise other people.

I recall members of UPC – I see some of them up there - demonised the National Resistance Army (NRA) but the NRM today is different. Let us love one another and let us build this country because we are together in this. Like Gen. Otafiire said, Uganda was here before us and Uganda will be here long after us. May the soul of deceased rest in peace. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now have the members for Kinkizi West, Maracha, Bufumbira and Youth Central in that order. Honourable members, we were supposed to stop now but let me extend a bit because I still see Members want to contribute. I request that we use little time now.

4.56
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf people of Kinkizi West and Kanungu District at large, I convey sincere condolences to the family of the late Maj. Rurangaranga, the UPC fraternity and Uganda at large.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to speak about this great man who has fallen like every one of us will. Allow me to also thank the Government, especially the Leader of Government Business, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, who was mentored by UPC, for having organised with UPC and the entire Government to have an official send-off for this great man.

Mr Speaker, I met the late Maj. Rurangaranga on 7 March 2013 at Lake View Hotel in Mbarara, where we had a three-day meeting, which brought many people from across the country. We had Mzee Muliika and others telling us about the background of the country and where we came from. I remember he challenged the youth to reclaim their potential and rights. 

I also recall when one of us, Rt Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, was presenting a paper at Kyankwanzi on the role of the youth in the development of Uganda. They were trying to say that as the youth, they were standing in good positions. However, I asked whether those intentions of the youth ended with them. The youth still exist and youth enthusiasm still exists and we need to respect it as country. We need to respect the potential of youth, groom and mentor them to be good leaders in future as the UPC Government did. 

I am not a good Christian but I know that Jesus died long time ago but today, even a child in primary 1 talks about Jesus Christ. I know that in the books of Uganda, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, as the Chairperson of National Union of Students of Uganda (NUSU), was a vibrant youth recognised by the then Government. So, can we reclaim that and try to mentor the youth of Uganda? 

I recall when Maj. Rurangaranga and his colleagues returned from exile, I was not there but I know that President Amin had transferred the headquarters of Kanungu to Kihihi. When Rurangaranga became the Minister of Local Government, he said that could not happen and he took the headquarters of Kanungu District from Kihihi back to Kanungu. This is what I told the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that it is time to resurrect Kihihi Municipality as we eulogise the fallen hero

Mr Speaker, many people have spoken good things about the UPC Government, which championed the revival and strengthening of the common man. The Common Man’s Charter still moves in Ugandans’ marrow. It is at this point that I request the Government, which I belong to, to appreciate the good things that we have side-lined because they were championed by the UPC Government. They mean a lot to us. We need to revise the issue of cooperatives, for example, because we have lamented here about it time and again but lip service no longer counts. We need to have real issues that matter as we remember the life of the late Rurangaranga. 

I pray that God Almighty rests his soul in eternal peace.

5.03
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to pay tribute to this fallen statesman. I join my colleagues, on behalf of the people of Maracha and all the UPC stalwarts in my constituency, to pay tribute.

Our grandfather – I call him grandfather because he believed in values that transcended beyond religion, tribalism and colour as many have portrayed today. Due to age and other factors of privilege, I might not have had the opportunity to physically interact with the late Maj. Rurangaranga but my recollection of history tells me that our grandfather was, as many have submitted, a courageous and very resilient man. 

Even when there were glaring signs of cracks in the UPC Government and there were indications that they no longer served the aspirations of the people, he held onto the Government dearly. For that, he paid a heavy price as many did in so many parts of this country. Therefore, what lessons do we learn from this? We learn that whenever we are in government, we should read people’s aspirations and serve them whenever called upon. 

I could not pay tribute to Maj. Rurangaranga without correcting a statement that was made earlier by hon. Luttamaguzi. He said that Uganda Airlines was established in Obote’s regime. For the record, I would like to say that the airline was started in 1976 and became operational in 1977 under the Government of Idi Amin. (Laughter) 

From this session, we have learned a lot of things. I know a number of people have tried to rewrite the history of Uganda but this particular session to pay tribute has given us the opportunity to learn the history of Uganda. I am sure from today onwards we will not only try to rewrite history in an unfactual way but based on the realities and things that happened. 

I know we have lost an icon and a beacon of hope in our country but I would like to say his legacy will live on. Death has ended his life but I believe it will never end our relationship with him. On behalf of my people, I wish to convey my sincere condolences to the family and we pray God comforts you during this trying moment. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.06
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I would like, on behalf of the people of Bufumbira South and indeed on behalf of the Bafumbira, to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of the late Maj. Edward Rurangaranga. I would like to thank Government for according the late Maj. Edward Rurangaranga a fitting farewell. 

In 1979, Ugandans had lost hope. We were under the yoke of dictatorship of Gen. Idi Amin but Maj. Rurangaranga and other gallant sons like President Museveni and others, sacrificed their lives, fought hard, and liberated Uganda. I would like today to be on record to say, “thank you” to all those people who liberated Uganda, including Maj. Rurangaranga. (Applause)

In 1981, I was at Makerere University’s Law School and whenever I had an opportunity, I would come to the gallery and watch these gallant sons debate here - the late Kafumbe Mukasa, Rurangaranga, Prof. Kamuntu and others. I can assure you that they formed the basis on which I started thinking about becoming a Member of Parliament. They were role models for me and today I am a Member of Parliament because of the debates I used to watch in this House. They were the alumni of 1979. 

Mr Speaker, we should learn to recognise and give credit where it’s due, irrespective of where one comes from. Whether you are wearing red, blue, green or yellow, you can make a contribution. Jewellery will shine no matter where it is. A pearl will light even in darkness. 

Maj. Rurangaranga was a nationalist. I never worked with or talked to him but I used to read and hear about what he would say. I read in yesterday’s New Vision what he did. He built schools, churches and he was a model farmer and exemplary. For that, I would like to pay tribute to him and thank God for his contribution to this country. May God rest the late Maj. Rurangaranga in eternal peace. Thank you.

5.10
MS SARAH BABIRYE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Mr Speaker, on behalf of myself and the young people of this region, I also rise to pay tribute to our grandfather who was a senior citizen. I do not know much about him because I was not around those days when he was a leader, although I have heard so many people saying different things about UPC. However, I have learnt a lesson even at this point that I would like to share. 

I would, first of all, like to say that as the young people of this country, we need to learn something about the senior citizens we have. Just recently, a colleague here was almost beaten at a function simply because some people thought he supports the lifting of the presidential age limit. 

We need to learn a very big lesson from these senior people. When you look at the Prime Minister today, at hon. Kahinda Otafiire, His Excellency the President and the entire team, including hon. Cecilia Ogwal and the late Maj. Rurangaranga and others, they seem not to be enemies. They seem to be friends and colleagues with different ideologies but the same mission, only that they would wish to develop this country differently. They respect each other’s views and ideas. 

However, we the young people these days, if you are an NRM person and somebody invites you to a party or a wedding and this person is from UPC or DP, different people will always advise you not to go because of that person’s political party. I think that is wrong because today we are in NRM or DP or FDC but tomorrow we may end up elsewhere. 

I would, therefore, like to request the leaders and senior citizens to always talk to the young people on different fora so that they learn that we may differ ideologically but we are all Ugandans who may need each other tomorrow and have a lot to offer to our country. Just like I said earlier, I did not know him so much but because of what I have heard different people from different political parties say about him, I am really glad and I have learnt a lot. 

I would like to say that on my behalf and the people I represent, we pray that his soul rests in eternal peace. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to impose a timeframe now. I have already exceeded the time and I apologise to the family.

5.14
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I happen to have stayed in Kitagata Hospital because my parents were working there. At the time my parents worked there, the late Rurangaranga was a district councillor and I was still in school. When they were carrying out their campaigns, we used to converge at the roundabout in Kitagata trading centre and we would sit on stones and listen to them campaign.

One of the things that I learnt from him is that he asked for a vote on principle. He would not be intimidated while looking for the votes. He would say, “You know what I have done and what I can do” and it was on that principle that he asked for votes and he won overwhelmingly.

Mr Speaker, I did not also stop there. When I had just gone to Kitagata, I asked one of my closest friends whom I studied with, Davo Rovelo, to take me to the home of the late Rurangaranga. This was because while we were in Kasese, we would hear a lot of stories about the late Rurangaranga and especially how the UPC Government was well organised on principles. On my first day in Kitagata, I walked to his home. My friend showed me the home and we stopped there without entering the house. However, I felt relieved because I had reached the home of one of the people cherished by the people of Kasese.

Mr Speaker, why did I bother to visit his home although I did not enter the house? While UPC was still in power, Kilembe Mines, Hima Cement and Katwe Salt Factory were operational, and the best schools in Kasese, one of them being Rwenzori High School, was very well organised. While they were in power, they took our king, His Majesty Charles Wesley Mumbere, to study on a Government scholarship.

However, when NRM came to power, NRM became cagey and they did not know what they were supposed to do after taking over from the UPC Government. Of course, I understand the dynamics. The dynamics which I see here is that the Government of the late Rurangaranga was overthrown by the National Resistance Army rebels and he has died when the former rebels are still in charge of this country.

The other key issue that I also know about is that the UPC Government was not a Government that agitated for war. They wanted to go through elections and that is why in the 1960s and 1980s, they participated in elections and won. That is why you can see that they served our country with one heart because whoever won, actually won without wishing to go to the bush. It is only NRA, which destabilised the UPC Government. 

Mr Speaker, when you look the record of the individuals in our country like the Rt Hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, the honourable Prof. Kamuntu and the key figures - the products of UPC - they are the ones who are not dented with the element of corruption. Despite having crossed to NRM, they still remain clean. I have not heard that the Rt Hon. Rugunda, for example, has taken any single coin from the country’s treasury neither have I heard that Prof. Kamuntu has stolen anything. 

However, the mafia team which NRM came with have stolen from this country. I can tell you that if God could help us; I have always asked my colleague, the President of UPC, hon. Jimmy Akena, the Member of Parliament for Lira Municipality, that the day Dr Apollo Milton Obote will resurrect, will he find UPC still alive? What will he say if he saw that UPC vanished? In the Ninth Parliament, I reminded my colleague more than five times and I would like to take this opportunity to put it on record that it would be fair for the cadres of UPC to make sure UPC remains intact until Jesus Christ comes back. This is the legacy that Obote and the UPC’s Rurangaranga have left, and you would see sense in what they did.

I would like to quote another example. The Obote or UPC Government constructed the Kasese-Kabarole Road in the 1960s and around 2004-2006, the NRM regime fumbled to upgrade that road but it was even difficult for them to remove the tarmac which the Obote regime put in the 1960s. Just less than 10 years after the road was reconstructed, they are again talking of reconstructing the road and yet Obote worked on it in the 1960s and they struggled to remove the tarmac.

Therefore, it would be fair for us as a country and as a nation to realise that UPC did wonders. I recall very well in the 1980s that UPC was very supportive of orphans, primary school children and widows. We used to get books and other scholastic materials, which were supplied to school children by the UPC Government. Whenever your exercise book would get finished, you would just go to the head teacher and they would give you a book written on “Property of the Government of Uganda”. However, in 30 years - even when in a manner that was disjointed they took over a legitimate Government - they have not moved even an inch to equate themselves to the works done by UPC.

Finally, Mr Speaker, hon. Rurangaranga has left one of his daughters called Jennifer hospitalised. You will recall that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister put it on record that the late Maj. Rurangaranga offered his land for Kitagata Hospital and he supported health services in our country. In the circumstances where the daughter of the late is hospitalised abroad in Germany, it would be fair for the Prime Minister to commit himself on the Floor of this House to tell us what they will do to handle the sickness of Ms Jennifer Rurangaranga. 

This will help the family of the late Maj. Rurangaranga to know that their father, friend and relative did work for this country and that the money, which will be used to pay for the bills of Ms Jennifer Rurangaranga, will be got from the taxpayers’ money. Furthermore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you know the foundation on which you are standing, will you do it and commit yourself here on the Floor of the House? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me recognise hon. Yona Kanyomozi; he taught me to wear the bowtie. (Applause) I have also noticed that Mr Kingo is around. 

Honourable members, I granted you the authority to use the time properly and you have not done it to my expectations, so I am going to impose a two minutes’ rule; two minutes only.

5.02
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two minutes are even too much for me now because the late Maj. Rurangaranga was a great man, hero, mentor and one of my greatest friends. 

Whenever he came to the home of hon. Cecilia Ogwal, he would demand to meet me and hon. Ogwal would call me immediately saying, “Your friend has come and would like to meet you”. Whenever we met, we would discuss a lot. I would tell him that I am a mathematician and that UPC plus DP equalled to NRM and he would laugh. That is the composition of NRM. However, one day I told him it may melt back from NRM to DP and then to UPC, and again it may melt back further to NRM plus DP is equals to UPC. 

Those were the kinds of things we used to discuss and he would be happy. This is because the late was interested in knowing why hon. Cecilia Ogwal, hon. Gutomoi, hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Ben Wacha, hon. Ojok B’Leo, who is up there, and others, decided to leave UPC and became independents. When we explained to the late Maj. Rurangaranga what took place, he was satisfied and he said, “We shall keep on struggling, but I wish you well there because what has happened is that this UPC, which I really laboured for, is almost coming to a family level and I wonder what will happen in future.” 

Today, the great man lying here is not only Maj. Rurangaranga, but it is also UPC lying down, and it is a serious matter. If the UPC –(Member timed out.) 

5.27
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, I rise to pay tribute, on behalf of the people of Padyere from where about 13 people are organising to come to be part of the burial, and on my own behalf, being a son of a Congressman. My father just died about a month ago and he was buried in very colourful colours of UPC. I may not be a UPC member myself but I have been mentored by such a family with a very loving heart for the whole country.

Mr Speaker, because of the time limit, I will just give the summary of what Maj. Rurangaranga, who we are eulogising here today, hated most. One is that he hated power vacuums. He kept on referring to the 1983 event when Maj. Gen. Oyite Ojok was killed and Brig. Smith Opon Acak took over. The late said that although this man was an accomplished soldier, I think he failed to assert himself as the Chief of Staff then. Therefore, that vacuum kept on until it gave opportunity to Tito Okello in 1985 to overthrow the Government that Maj. Rurangaranga was serving in. 

This was after he came back from Kenya when he survived death here twice. Once was in 1971, when his house was attacked and another time was in 1972 when there was an opportunity to dump him in River Rwizi, as my brother was saying. He almost got killed because they fired bullets at him and left him in River Rwizi for two days, but he was taken to Kenya and later came back as a liberator.

Mr Speaker, the same NRM Government put him in prison until 1991 –(Member timed out.) 

5.29
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to the late Maj. Rurangaranga. On behalf of the people from Rukungiri District and on my own behalf as well, I would like to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family and also say something that the people of Rukungiri would like to hear me talk about. 

As a neighbour to Bushenyi District, there are some things that the elders in Bushenyi have done, which are different from many districts, and these include, among others, the promotion and passion for education. They have worked very hard and promoted education. You find nearly every household has got well educated and skilled children and that is not by accident; it came as a result of such focused elders like the late Maj. Rurangaranga and his group, who worked tirelessly and put a lot of effort in promoting education.

Mr Speaker, the late Maj. Rurangaranga would be considered as a community development practitioner. Many people like to talk to the gallery and want to be heard, but you find that they have nothing in common with the communities. We knew the late Maj. Rurangaranga as somebody who was always in the community working very hard to promote the developments that the area deserves. Therefore, as leaders, I would like us to learn from that. Let us not just talk to the gallery or divide people but look at how we can improve our communities and districts so that when we pass on, we leave a lasting impression in the communities that we lead. 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I respect your time. However, I hope next time Members of Parliament will be considerate and know that we need to be fair so that other Members can also give their contributions. We would have had so much to talk about this gallant son of Uganda but because sometimes we lack discipline, we have not allowed people to say what they would have said. I hope, Mr Speaker, in our rules we shall state that clearly so that we respect it. 

I would also like to thank the late Maj. Rurangaranga’s wife, Winnie, for the great work she has done. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the record, there is no indiscipline in this House except that Members like to speak for too long even when the Speaker asks them to speak for a short time. That is not indiscipline; it is just the love for speaking for long.

5.33
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. On behalf of Ngora County and Ngora District, I would like to convey condolences from the people there, especially the few UPC members who are in Ngora – they are very few. I also bring greetings from them. I am sure they will be happy because they called me and told me to go to the House. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the name “Edward” has a very nice meaning. It means wealth protector. That means Edward is such a kind, gentle, selfless, loving, very passionate and amazing lover. That is why up to now, he still has a serious family at home and I am sure his wife is around. 

As a Parliament, we must always remember one thing - all of us shall die one day but what is important here is that we must put our trust in God. I am sure one day all of us are going to die but before we die, let us believe in God and I am sure when we die, we shall go to heaven and be with Him. 

Finally, allow me to advise UPC. Since this was a very liberal man in UPC, he was a chairman and a minister, I would like to advise UPC publically to go and clean up its house, be united and democratic for the good of its party and this country. Thank you so much. God bless you. 

5.35
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join this House in paying tribute to our elder. 

In the last few months, we have lost great leaders of this country. Unfortunately, for us young people, we only stand to talk about them or we hear tributes being paid in this House and then learn what they have been doing. It would have been good for this country or Government to find ways of tapping the information these great people have. If there are books that were written by them, when they pass on those books should be brought so that some Members of Parliament can buy and read as we wait to eulogise them when they are here.

Mr Speaker, I know that by 1985, UPC had lost the management of the country. I was a bit young but I can still remember and I concluded that time is a very good keeper of history. You can try to rub in whatever you want to but time will always tell. With the little I know about that time or by learning and reading, UPC also had very good institutions. Right now, we are still lamenting about those created by UPC because they united people. 

Uganda Revenue Authority always tries to inform the country of how much money we have now but I cannot see the money. However little the money was then, it was enough to serve this country. Even the civil servants used to serve the country with dignity and they loved it. It means that by the time our gallant elder was in leadership, there was minimal corruption, if any. Therefore, the common people did not experience the impact of that –(Member timed out.) 

5.37
MR MOSES KIZIGE (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had given up, but I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to my father. 

I call Maj. Edward Rurangaranga my father for several reasons. He met my late father in 1953 in the Uganda National Congress and my father was very close to the late Sir William Wilberforce Kadhumbula Nadiope, and together they pushed for the formation of the UPC. In 1971, he shared the same cell with my father in the notorious Singapore House at Makindye. They were rescued by the same person, Maj. Muyindike, who was a soldier in the army. I was lucky to see Maj. Rurangaranga several times with people like Oyite Ojok in our home in the 1970s as we were growing up, but we did not know them. However, in 1979, we realised who they were. 

On a personal level, I had a high profile meeting in the Office of the Secretary General of the UPC and the Minister of Internal Affairs, Dr Luwiriza Kirunda, in 1983. I was a first-year student at Makerere University and Government was trying to streamline the leadership of the National Union of Students of Uganda. 

I was not a leader in any of those organisations but I had the privilege of coming from Namasagali College, which had the highest number of students in all the institutions of higher learning at that time. The meeting, chaired by the Secretary General, Dr Luwiriza Kirunda, included Dr Philemon Mateke, Maj. Edward Rurangaranga, Capt. Robert Rwamiti who was the director of legal affairs and a Member of Parliament who represented UNLA. On the students’ side, we had people like- (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up. 

MR KIZIGE: David Mafabi, Okao Orech, Ogenga Otunnu and others. So, I knew him. Last year, my father died, and when he visited Kampala he took time to come and visit us.

Nevertheless, I can tell you about one of his biggest disappointments - just to sum up. One time we met him with hon. Abdu Katuntu, who unfortunately is not here. He said, “You, the children of UPC, how can you leave UPC? However, if you leave UPC, at least you should join NRM because it is focussed. How can you, Katuntu, join FDC?” I wanted that to go on record, Mr Speaker. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have reserved a Member who is now going to speak last. She is going to speak and also tell us what the programme is. That is the Member for Sheema District. She will not use two minutes; she will use the time she needs to sum up these things.

5.41
MS JACKLET ATUHAIRE (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Sheema District, the greater Ankole and on my own behalf, allow me to express my deep-felt sadness on this Floor of Parliament in honour of the demise of my papa, because that is what I called him, the honourable Maj. Edward Rurangaranga. 

The late Major was such a gift, not only to us in Sheema and the greater Ankole, but to the whole country. Everybody mourned his passing in the entire district of Sheema. Yesterday, I was at the late’s place and saw how people were so downcast knowing that a great eagle had fallen. 

I would like to take this opportunity also to condole with the family and the children - Mama Winnie, Petua, Jenina, Jennifer, Charles and even the ones who are not here and are in the UK. We are with you in spirit. 

Mr Speaker, the late Edward Rurangaranga was a very hardworking man, especially in the field of health and education and everybody here said it. He singlehandedly started many schools in Sheema. Some of them no longer have the vigour they started with but they are still in existence - schools like Masheruka S.S.S, Kyeizoba, Ruyonza, Ruhinda, Rugarama, Rubale and Kasana.  He did all this with Bishop Bamunoba.

He was also the brain behind Kitagata Hospital, like you have heard, and 17 other institutions. He aided the construction of a lot of infrastructure. There is a bridge which is now called Rurangaranga Bridge. At the time he started constructing it, the people of Kitagata thought that theft was going to be rampant because nobody could cross through that place. He told them that he had not brought theft but development in your place. The people of Kitagata can now testify to that.

Mr Speaker, at a personal level, I would not be in this Parliament if it were not for the late. I joined the campaigns very late. He called me and said – he used to call me little girl – “Little girl, I do not support NRM, but I am going to support you for one reason; you came under the banner of support to education, which is the key and the backbone of what I support”. That was after I bought a number of computers that I gave to schools and he was so happy. I gave 20 computers to West Ankole University and that was the mark that created our friendship. He always advised me. 

Kitagata is a subcounty, which is very huge. I can see very many people from Kitagata up there in the gallery. Kitagata is very difficult; you can even ask hon. Ephraim Kamuntu. These people are very educated and they know what they want and it is very difficult to give them a message and they receive it easily. However, what Maj. Rurangaranga did for me was unspeakable. He sat down and called the whole subcounty to his home and told his wife, Winnie, to cook for all the people. He wanted to tell them what I was able to do for them. He convinced the people of Kitagata to support me and they supported me overwhelmingly.

As I was seated here listening to everyone that was eulogising, I was thinking that these shoes are so big; they are so big for us as leaders in Sheema. They are so huge for the children. Who can be able to fill them? I know that the good Lord who has called him to rest is also preparing other strong leaders that will take Sheema to the level that he would have wanted.

We talked about Bushenyi being a model district. I think that it was a model district when Sheema was still part of it. When they brought Sheema where it is today, Sheema is the one that is now holding that light of being a model district. This is because of leaders like Maj. Rurangaranga. 

The last meeting that we had with him was when he called opinion leaders to his home, and this was two weeks ago. He sat from 10.00 a.m. in his house – Mama Winnie can testify to that - and we ate our dinner at 4.00 a.m. in the morning. The young men and women were all dozing, including me, but whenever you would wake up, he would be awake and talking strongly; he was very energetic. He was principled and a charismatic leader. I know that the good Lord will help us to raise such leaders, because as far as I can see, many of our strong elders are now leaving us.

I started a project in Sheema of soya bean growing and he liked farming. He came and told me that in order for him to support me and my project, he had to become a model farmer in that place. He was supposed to keep cows on that land, but he called and said that he was going to put that project on hold. He said, “I will put aside eight acres of land and I will personally plant this soya bean. If you lie to the people of Sheema, you would also have lied to me.” 

He then planted the soya beans and he harvested. He told me that the only thing that was remaining was for us to go and register a cooperative for this project so that it does not die off. I did as he advised and at the time of his death, he was one of the executive members of that cooperative; it is called Sheema Growers Cooperative Society. 

I am saddened to see a man like that leaving us. At the end of the day, he has left at the right age and what made me feel good about his death is that he died honourably, he died as a hero. He has left the way heroes are supposed to leave.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Government of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and hon. Katwiremu, who is seated in the gallery. When the late was not feeling okay, his wife Winnie called the Chairman LC V and told him that they needed an ambulance. I was chatting with the chairman at that time and he told me of the same. I asked him to send people from Kitagata to go and see what was happening. 

I told the chairman to calm down because the Major had just come from a burial – that day he was in Ntungamo; he had gone for the burial of his friend. After a few minutes, the chairman called me and said, “The ambulance is about to reach but Maama has told me that your friend has left to be with the Lord.” I was so shocked. He is a real hero and has left as a hero.  

I would also like to take this opportunity to tell the family - like I have already told you that his shoes are so big - we need you and you need to be strong and make sure you fill those shoes. However, we still have a future; we have people like Prof Kamuntu, hon. Katwiremu and Yowasi Makaru that are there and that we will still be looking up to. 

When the chairman told me, I immediately started calling people not knowing that it was 2 o’clock in the morning. I called the Speaker - I did not know that you sleep that late – at 3.00 a.m. and you were able to pick my call. I thank you. 

I also would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal; you are a legend and you are very blessed. You have a good heart. It is hon. Katuramu who advised me that if you want a proper scheduling of everything, you call that little girl, as he calls you. We still need you and we know that you are very energetic. Sometimes I wonder how you climb those stairs, as if you are 17 years old. May God give you more energy. We started coordinating with her and at 4.00 a.m., I called State House and told the Principle Private Secretary, who told me “In an hour’s time, I will be with the President and I will let him know”.

I was so happy that actually, after calling them, I knelt down and said to God, “I would like you to grant one thing for me; I want Major to be buried officially and accorded a state funeral”. I would like to thank God for that. That is what I told you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, that if God does that for me, I would be so glad and He really did it for me. I am very happy also on behalf of the people of Sheema that are seated in the gallery. If this official burial was not accorded, we would not have been here to say the many good stories that were said about our honourable member. I, therefore, would like to thank the Government and everybody that played any role in all this to make it a success.

Finally, tomorrow we shall be having service in Nakesero, from 9.00 a.m. up to midday. I would like to call upon honourable members to come and show the spirit that you have shown today and be there for us. Please, tell other colleagues as well. Let us go in big numbers and show love to the people of Sheema, greater Ankole and to the people of the family in church.

From there, we shall travel to Kitagata for a night vigil. I also call upon you to come and support us, especially the Ankole Members of Parliament; that solidarity that we have, please come and be there for us in Sheema.

On Saturday 5th at 10.00 a.m., we shall have a funeral service and burial will be at his home in Kitagata as we shall be saying our farewell to this gallant son of the soil, honourable Member of Parliament and honourable minister. May your soul rest in peace and may the good Lord give us energy and wisdom to try and fill those shoes so that we can be able to serve our people diligently like you did.

Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish the people of Kitagata and Sheema a safe journey as they go back and mourn together. May God bless you, honourable members, for taking time to come; it is recess and you could have been in your homes. I also call upon you tomorrow to come and support us. Mr Speaker, thank you for all this time and for not cutting me off. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. We have a condolence message from the National Resistance Movement (NRM) National Secretariat, signed by Richard Todwong, Chairperson Interparty Organization for Dialogue (IPOD) and Deputy Secretary General, NRM.

Honourable members, it is now time for me to put the question for your decision. I put the question to this motion:

1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Kitagata in Sheema District and the country at large upon the demise of hon. Edward Rurangaranga;

2. 	That Parliament takes cognizance of the distinguished services and contribution made by hon. Edward Rurangaranga to the country;

3. 	That this Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant our departed elder and friend, hon. Edward Rurangaranga, eternal peace;

That is the motion. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

East African Community Anthem.

National Anthem

(Exit of the late Maj. Edward Rurangaranga)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you very deeply and sincerely for making the time. I do not think it is because I called you but I think it is because of the character of the person we are paying tribute to that you are here. I would not have been able to summon you using any force to come but you respect the history he has been part of in this country and the contribution he made.

Honourable members, as we have these debates about these heroes that are leaving us, I think there is something we should really learn. If you listen to the speeches that are made, it goes to demonstrate just one thing - that each and every one of us can make a contribution –(Applause)– and no contribution should be dismissed whether by history or by people, because they are all parts of the building blocks that have brought Uganda to where it is today.

Therefore, as we lose our heroes, eras also pass. We do not judge eras by people leaving office but by generations beginning to leave us. However, what lessons do we learn from these debates as we debate about the people who were here before us and who started this country? At independence, the oldest member of the Cabinet, who was the Prime Minister, was I think 28 years old. The rest of them were around 24, 25 and 26 years old. They took over governance of this country. Maybe they were not prepared but they did what they could. 

Here we are - I still repeat that we should embrace the Rotary’s Four-Way Test in our debates in this Parliament. It will help this House. It will help us regenerate. Uganda has its way of recovering from even the worst situations. We should build on that spirit and that natural impetus in our people to rebuild from completely destroyed things. 

Our history should support us and help us in our way of looking forward, never to go back to where we have been. Those of us who still think that chaos can help, please save us that. Let us build on what we have. We can only improve on what we have. We should never think of bringing it down. I say this because of the speeches that were made. 

I remember when H.E Wacha Olwol was here and I had the privilege to sit here, I almost shed tears. People from all areas gave testimony about a country called Uganda, through that opportunity in giving tribute. We have a great country and we are a great people. Let us build it together, from the north, east, west, central and wherever. We have a country called Uganda and it is our responsibility to hold it together and give it some progress. (Applause) I thank you, honourable members. May the good Lord bless you. 

We started recess yesterday and I am very happy that you were able to come today. Honourable members, this House is now adjourned.

(The House rose at 6.05 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)







