

Wednesday, 8 August 2018

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

    1. Mr Patrick Ocan

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I welcome you to this Parliament. I am sure you know what this Parliament does. You will not be new. This Parliament acts on behalf of the people of this country. It enacts laws, passes resolutions and so many other things, including processing the budget for service delivery to the people of this country. 

You have now joined this House where you will be doing exactly that. I will give you two books: one is the Constitution which is what gives us the authority to do what we do on this Floor. I am sure you have also looked at this document. Please internalise it and see how you can use it. 

In this House, the only way you can articulate your views properly in your representative role is when you understand the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. So get time and get to understand this. We transact business using the procedures contained in these rules. You are very welcome; all the best. (Applause)

2.	Tarsis Rwaburindore Bishanga

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Welcome, honourable member. I welcome you on behalf of your colleagues, the Members of Parliament and also inform you that this is where the big things happen: matters of law making, budget and several other things take place in this particular Chamber. Now, you are a Member. 

For you to be able to do that properly, it will need you to look at this book – the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda – with a new meaning. Yes, you used to read it but now you read it purposefully knowing that whatever you do here must fit within the four corners of what is contained in this book. Therefore, this is your copy of the Constitution. 

To help you process your business in this House, you need to understand the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament. I also give you a copy. I wish you all the best in representing your people. May God bless you. (Applause)

3. 	Suleiman Hasim

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I welcome you to this Parliament, on behalf of your colleagues. This is the Chamber where most of the decisions that affect the lives of the people of this country are taken. They are decisions that affect their businesses and way of life. You are now part of the team that should be doing the best to make that happen in their favour. 

To help you do that, I will give you a copy of the Constitution. The laws you will pass here must conform to the provisions of this law. That is your copy. 

To help you process your business in the House, you need to understand our Rules of Procedure. This is what will help you. When you want to debate, this will guide you. When you want to interrupt debate, this is what will guide you. When you want to prepare and present a motion this will also guide you. Please, receive a copy. May Allah bless you. (Applause)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. We have a lot of work to do. There are elections that are due in some places in this country. There is also a motion that has been proposed by the Minister of Local Government which is urgent. 

I, therefore, use my prerogative to bring that matter forward to be handled first to clear the way for the registration and preparation for the elections that will be taking place in that part of the county – in the district of Mubende and other places surrounding it. That item will be brought forward to enable us finalise with that. Otherwise, the rest of the Order Paper will remain and we will deal with matters as such.

Honourable members, we have a communication from the Ministry of Health to the effect that the World Health Organisation in collaboration with the Ministry of Health is organising a two-day stakeholders’ meeting from the 7th to 8th of this month at the Golf Course Hotel. The main objective of this meeting is to formulate a robust national viral hepatitis roadmap using findings of situational assessments and outputs from the stakeholder consultations conducted with the World Health Organisation Mission. 

I am, therefore, requested to inform you that this meeting will be taking place on those two days and in that venue. Please, attend. Particularly, the Chairperson of the Committee on Health is informed to mobilise members of the committee to be part of this meeting so that we know what is happening with this particular aspect of disease control.

Honourable members, on 6 August 2018, the Office of the Speaker received a communication signed by the Secretary General of the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) Party, notifying the Speaker of changes made to the leadership of the Opposition in Parliament and I will address as follows:

In accordance with Article 82A of the Constitution and Section 6A and B of the Administration of Parliament Act, Cap 257, of the laws of Uganda, I have formally received notification from the FDC Party, being the party of the Opposition having the greatest numerical strength in Parliament, of the election of a new Leader of the Opposition in Parliament.

Therefore, in accordance with Section 6(B)(3) of the Administration of Parliament Act, I hereby notify you that hon. Betty Aol Ocan, Woman Representative for Gulu District, has been elected as the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament.(Applause)

Congratulations honourable member, for this new appointment. I will give you chance to speak.
	
In the same letter, I received communication that hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda, Member of Parliament representing Kira Municipality, has been reappointed as the Chief Opposition Whip, in accordance with the provisions of the Administration of Parliament Act.

Thirdly, hon. Tonny Harold Muhindo, Member of Parliament representing Bukonzo County East has also been appointed as the Deputy Chief Opposition Whip. This particular office is established by their party but our laws do not make specific provisions for it.

Fourthly, hon. Jack Wamanga Wamai, Member of Parliament representing Mbale Municipality has been appointed as the representative to African Caribbean and Pacific and European Union. Again, this is not specifically required by our laws.
	
Further, hon. Betty Nambooze, Member of Parliament representing Mukono Municipality has been appointed as the representative to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. This is just for information purposes but further steps cannot be taken on them.

Additionally, the same communication informed the Office of the Speaker of the following proposed changes:

    1. To the backbench commissioner representing the Opposition

Honourable members, you are aware of Section (2c) of the Administration of Parliament Act - these changes will be taking place in accordance with the provisions of those laws. We know when it should happen and you will be notified accordingly.

    2. To the Member of the Pan-African Parliament representing the Opposition on the Uganda delegation to the Pan-African Parliament. Under our rules, particularly Appendix D makes provisions on how these changes should be made.

Therefore, I would like to urge the people concerned to do the necessary, if they want those changes to be effected. Otherwise, those two individuals will continue to occupy the offices until the procedures are effectively followed to make those proposed changes, specifically the backbench commissioner, representing the Opposition and representation to the Pan-African Parliament.

A communication in relation to those two proposals above shall be made to this House by the Office of the Speaker in due course. For avoidance of doubt, the status quo in relation to those linked to the representation is maintained until this House is advised otherwise by the Office of the Speaker. Thank you very much. 

I am sure the new Leader of the Opposition is desirable to make a statement at this moment. (Applause)

2.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol Ocan): Mr Speaker, to God be the glory, for the great things He has done. I would like to say, “Thank you Lord, for granting me the opportunity to serve your people as the Leader of the Opposition in this Parliament.” (Applause)

I take this moment to thank all the Members of Parliament who have diligently served their people in this august House. I pray that the Lord increasingly be with their conscience in every decision they take for the greater good of this nation.

In a special way, I thank my appointing authority for entrusting me with the responsibility of leading the Opposition in Parliament. I humbly accept this opportunity with the highest sense of responsibility. I say “One Uganda, One people”.

I am the fifth Leader of the Opposition in Uganda’s Parliament since 2006. Allow me, therefore, to commend all the leaders of the Opposition who came before me, for the courageous service they rendered in leading the watch on Government.

I would like to also commend my predecessor for gallantly leading us, more especially at a very trying moment of democracy when we experienced fight on the Floor of Parliament; she demonstrated an act of valour. (Applause) 

No matter the size, a democratically elected Opposition is critical to the affairs of Parliament. It goes without saying that our voters expect us to be active in Parliament as the Opposition, more so, greater burden develops on us for scrutiny and oversight over the Government.

Our key role, which we should continue to effectively execute, is ensuring accountability within Government, presenting and discussing alternative policies and pushing the Opposition’s agenda at large. 

To achieve this, we will need a united front. I, therefore, call for unity among all parties in Parliament that do not constituent the ruling party, as this will give us credibility in order to form a more formidable and respectable force in pushing for alternative development policies before Parliament and the people.

As a country, our problems are largely socio-economic in nature.  However, the processes that create and solve them are largely political. 

Therefore, as the Opposition, the burden is on us to ensure that Government services adequately the poor. While we are at it, we must not forget that the common man in this country needs good health, education, better roads and markets which can give him/her high chances of being who they want to be. We must therefore, push for more resources towards the betterment of these services so that the average citizen can have the capability to pursue and realise what they value in life; in other words, being self-reliant.

It feels right to say that in this country, this office remains one of the few lines of defence for the people. Disunity within it is a cost that the people cannot afford. It is factual that this office depends on all Opposition parties and members of Parliament. It is also evident that the Opposition in Parliament is numerically small. On that note, while differences in opinion and ideas are healthy and should be encouraged, we cannot afford to be divided. We need every last one of us to be together.

Against that backdrop and cognisant of the mixed reception that this recent leadership change has met, there is need for dialogue. We need to sit down as the leaders that we are and chart a way forward for the greater good of the Opposition and the people. We also need to understand that to effectively work together, we should respect each other and accept people the way they are. (Applause) Every one of us is gifted differently and every one of us has something valuable to offer towards a better Opposition in Parliament and a prosperous country. (Applause)

We should, therefore, meaningfully accommodate each other, listen to each other, give opportunities to each other and share the scarce resources within our means for the greater good of the people. (Applause) I humbly implore all Opposition parties and Opposition-leaning Independent members of Parliament to team up with me in this office, in service of the people through constructive opposition within the realm of our Constitution.

Last but not least, I thank the media and civil society for their immense support to the alternative voices. I call upon them to remain fair and transparent in their service to the nation. To my colleagues in the Opposition, integrity, honesty, unity and hard work is what I emphasise. We can constructively agree to disagree among ourselves for together we can move faster and farther.

I pledge to accomodatively work with you and hope for the same from you in the struggle for a better country. Thank you all, members of Parliament of this august House. I really thank you because I received a lot of congratulatory messages and words without discrimination across political parties including NRM, FDC –(Interjections)- That is what you wanted to hear - UPC, DP, Independents and now JEEMA is also coming in. 

Honourable colleagues, this is what I can say. I say all this for God and my country. (Applause) To my people, I say one Uganda, one people.

Mr Speaker, at this moment in time, I would like to move that you give us time to go and reorganise ourselves by suspending the House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a request has been made by the Leader of the Opposition to be able to reorganise her team and come back. The important debate we are going to have is the state of the nation reply on the motion that was presented by the honourable member for Ajuri County. Therefore, the Leader of the Opposition, who I congratulate for the remarks, has made a request that she goes and reorganises herself so that her team can engage. 

However, I had already said earlier that there were some issues that we needed to handle urgently. I could deal with those and then we see how to handle this particular request. There is a statement from the Government Chief Whip.

2.46
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I am not standing here to oppose the request by my sister, hon. Betty Aol. However, I wanted to say something before you suspend the House. 

On behalf of the Government of Uganda, the Leader of Government Business, on my own behalf as the Government Chief Whip and on behalf of my colleagues, the members of the NRM Caucus in the House, I would like to congratulate our dear sister, hon. Betty Aol for the service that God has called you to perform; to serve the people of Uganda from the Opposition.

I pray that you maintain the smile you always wear because it will help you penetrate even the hardest points. I would like to thank the secretary general and your entire team for having sent us a lady to replace a lady. Special thanks and congratulations to you, hon. Betty Aol, from the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association because we take these positions as positions to benefit the women of Uganda and the members of Parliament representing different constituencies.

You have replaced a powerful lady like yourself and I have no doubt that with consultation: consulting your God and the people around you, you will also perform like hon. Winnie Kiiza has performed or even better than she has. I would like to assure you that Government will give you all the necessary support because this position is in our laws; this is a big position. Government has to give you the necessary support as a Leader of the Opposition in Parliament and this is what I am pledging.

If there is anything that is standing in your way, please do not hesitate to get back to me so that I can push to enable you comfortably serve your people.

I would like to sincerely congratulate hon. Winfred Kiiza, the outgoing Leader of the Opposition. Who did not see her in the trenches of Jinja, Rukungiri and all those other trenches while working for the Opposition to win throughout the country? She has always come here and defended the Opposition. To me, I think she deserves hearty congratulations from all of us. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, there have been other changes. Hon. Abdu Katuntu is one person I would like to thank and congratulate. I also congratulate my brother, hon. Ssemujju, for retaining the position to whip the Opposition with me whipping from this side. We always meet and compare notes because we are here to fight for the people of Uganda and we need one another. 

I most sincerely congratulate the Opposition and like hon. Betty Aol said, I pray that we will have constructive opposition and not a destructive one. That is what the people of Uganda want; we need constructive criticism and constructive contribution.

I would like to thank you and pray to the Almighty God to keep us all. (Interjections) Mr Speaker, for those I have not mentioned, I am waiting for an opportunity to give a full package of congratulations: to my brothers like hon. Munyagwa Mubarak who needs our prayers because the position he will be taking is a very serious one. To my brother hon. Kasibante, I only have this to say; that some of us have been here for some time. Do not hesitate to consult us on how we have been making it because we are here to help one another.

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me to congratulate my colleagues. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very unique moment for this Parliament. As you read out the names of those who have been appointed, I was very observant and I wanted to know whether we are proceeding well. The NRM side was excited about the appointments but the Opposition side, where I belong, were not very happy. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, appointments should excite both sides of the House. Therefore, are we proceeding well when one side is not happy? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, happiness is one of those things you cannot extort by public declaration. I would have declared here that let everybody be happy. (Laughter) Still, not everybody would be happy. That was on a light note.

Honourable members, in the reading of my list, I skipped the name of the new person who is going to the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), hon. Roland Mugume. He is the one who is going there. However, these particular ones are just for notification; there are no procedures required for making these changes. There is no vote required. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have constituents from Apac Municipality who have accompanied their newly elected Member of Parliament, hon. Patrick Ocan. They are here. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

We also have constituents from Ibanda Municipality who have accompanied their newly elected Member of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have constituents from Nebbi Municipality who have come to accompany their newly elected Member of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, there is an awareness workshop with the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), telecom companies and licenced operators. During the 12th Sitting of the First Meeting of the Third Session of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Speaker directed the Minister of Information, Communications and Technology to organise an awareness workshop, which will involve members of Parliament, Uganda Communications Commission, telecom companies and licensed operators. 

The workshop is scheduled for tomorrow, Thursday 9th August, at the Parliament Conference Hall. The time of commencement is 9.00 a.m. and it will terminate at 1.00p.m. You are hereby informed accordingly and please, you are kindly advised to attend. 

As I said, we will move item 13 forward and then deal with the next ones. Please call item 13.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER ARTICLE 179 CLAUSE (1) PARAGRAPH (A) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA TO ALTER THE BOUNDARIES OF KASSANDA AND MUBENDE DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

2.57
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

“WHEREAS Article 179 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to alter boundaries of district local governments;

AND WHEREAS Mubende District Council on the 29th Meeting (extraordinary) of the Sixth Council of Mubende District held on the 24 May 2010 under Min No. 04/29/10 resolved that a new district called Kassanda comprising of Kassanda County be created out of Mubende District;

AWARE THAT on the 3 September 2015, Parliament resolved to create Kassanda District Local Government out of Mubende District Local Government comprising of Kassanda County in accordance with Min No. 04/29/10;

FURTHER AWARE THAT at the time of passing that resolution to create Kassanda District Local Government out of Mubende District Local Government by Mubende District Council, Bukuya County was part of Kassanda County in Mubende District;

NOTING THAT Parliament, in its resolution of 4 August 2015, resolved to create Bukuya County out of Kassanda County in Mubende District in accordance with the 25th council Meeting of Mubende District Council Resolution, Minute 04/17/05/2015 of 20 May 2015; 

FURTHER NOTING THAT, the resolution of Parliament of 3 September 2015 created Kassanda District in accordance with Mubende District Council Resolution of 24 May 2010, omitted the fact that the newly created Bukuya County was originally part of Kassanda County of Mubende District Government;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament: 

    1. That the boundaries of the newly created Kassanda District Local Government be corrected to include Bukuya County in accordance with the Mubende District Council Resolution of the 24 May 2010.
    2. That this correction takes effect from 1 July 2018 to enable the people of Bukuya County participate in the elections of the newly created Kassanda District Local Government leadership.” 

I beg to move. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by Members for Kibuku, Ndorwa, Kasese, Bwamba, Kassanda and Bunyole West. Would you like to speak to your motion honourable minister?

MR BUTIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You recall that we had to do the same thing for Omoro District, Pallisa and Butebo districts, which did not necessary succeed. And we are doing the same thing as far as Bukuya and Kassanda districts are concerned.

It is important that for the elections which are taking place now in Kassanda District, we have to include Bukuya County as part of Kassanda District. We have carried out thorough consultations with Mubende District and Members of Parliament of the affected areas I am talking about and we all agreed that this motion should be brought today so that we can formalise this very important update of Kassada District.

I, therefore, request that his resolution be debated and passed. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was this motion referred to the Committee on Local Government? It was a motion that was directly brought to the House. Honourable members, the motion I now propose for your debate is the motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 179 (1) (a) of the Constitution providing for the alteration of boundaries of Kassanda and Mubende District Local Government.

Honourable members, the background to this and it will lead me to ask the question where I would like you Members to help; is whether this is a typical motion for altering the boundaries of a district which require a certain kind of decision by this House? Because it is strictly under that, and then you know the standard of the voting is different. 

However, this is the background. It has happened with Omoro District and Butebo District. Two motions were presented to Parliament. One motion which came first was for the creation of districts. Subsequently, motions were brought to create counties and of course the motions that were brought to create new districts were based on district council resolutions of the affected areas.

However, subsequently, when that process of creation of the new district was halted by Cabinet; a subsequent motion was brought to this House for creation of counties. Now the motion for creation of counties was debated and finalised before the motion for the creation of districts.

Eventually, the motion for the creation of districts was also reactivated. However, the motions came in their original form without taking into account the changes that had been made in the counties. Their names had been changed and things like that.

For example, the case of Omoro District; the district resolution was for the creation of Omoro District out of Omoro County. By the time this decision was made, Omoro County had already been split into Omoro County and Tochi County. And by the time the district decision was being made, it was Omoro District comprising of Omoro County and yet the initial motion for that district was when there was no Tochi. It was only Omoro taking care of the geographical area of the six sub counties.

Therefore, a correction motion was brought to activate that process and deal with the original motion with the original geographical territorial area of six sub counties. This is similar to the situation. Now the question is, is it a motion for altering a district boundary or a motion to correct this particular anomaly?

3.09
MR IBRAHIM SEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, if the motion by the minister was for correction, it should have come as a single motion. You do not walk into Parliament every day to make correction on the same thing; you look shabby.

If you made mistakes when we were considering districts, correct that mistake at once whereby you do not have to give a scanty justification for Omoro, Mubende and maybe tomorrow you will be coming for another motion. Therefore you will need to be smarter next time.

The next thing is, issues of districts are very controversial especially when it comes to boundaries. This Parliament created a district in Tororo at one time, in good faith. The implementation hit a snag with claims that some people were included against their will while others were left out. That is why I am hesitant to approve this motion before the committee -

The minister said that they have carried out consultations. Meaning he has not come here to correct, he has come to alter boundaries.

It would be prudent for this particular motion to go to the relevant committee of Parliament because we did not have the benefit of being part of the consultation that the minister has done. The only way we can interact with those consultations is through a committee of Parliament.

We may think it is a correctional motion but I fear that tomorrow there may be an uprising in one part of Mubende either for being included where they did not want to be or for being excluded -(Interruption)

MR OSHABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing this motion and for the wonderful background that you gave. I would like to appreciate hon. Ssemujju for trying to think that there could probably be a problem in Kassanda. I am a Member of Parliament for Kassanda North; there is no problem there; only the technicality that was explained by the Speaker. 

At the time of creation of Kassanda District, the motion from the district indicated that Kassanda District would be inclusive of Kassanda County North and Kassanda County South. 

However, at the time of creation of new counties, the Ninth Parliament created Bukuya County out of Kassanda North represented by Dr Bukenya the chairperson of the health committee. 

Recently, a new district council was created and councillors from Bukuya took over leadership in Kassanda District. We request that we correct that anomaly so that we have a legally binding institution in Kassanda District which became operational on the 1st July. Thank you, so much. 

MR SSEMUJJU: We are dealing with a motion to alter the boundary of the district, that is according to the Order Paper, moved under Article 179 of the Constitution. If it was for purposes of correction, maybe as you have righty guided, the minister should have asked Parliament to correct it but he is moving a motion to have boundaries altered. That is what his justification speaks about - consultation. The minister will now have to explain that the motion is to correct but not to alter the boundaries. Thank you.

MR BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I concluded by saying that the boundaries of the newly created Kassanda District Local Government be corrected to include Bukuya County in accordance with the Mubende District Council resolution 25th May, 2018. 

This correction should take effect on the 1st of July. I am not debating the Order Paper but rather my motion, which I have here -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister guide the House; the heading of the motion says that you would like to alter the boundaries of the district, what is the substance of your motion so that we can correct the record. 

MR BUTIME: The substance of the motion is to correct the boundaries. Thank you.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If the substance of the motion is about correcting the boundaries, then let us save the time of this House and at an appropriate time, I will probably move that the question be put. 

However, I would like to know from the minister whether the alteration of the boundaries will result into creating a new position of a Member of Parliament? It should be on the record-be as it may, I therefore move that you put the question because the writing is on the wall. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very innocent motion which I invite members to unanimously pass. The only thing I see is the chronology of the creation of Bukuya as a county and the creation of Kassanda District; it is not very clear which motion came first.

I thought what came first was Kassanda District out of which-from the motion I can see that Kassanda District was created on the 3rd September, 2015 but Bukuya County had been created on the 4th August 2015.

It follows that you have come to merely correct not to alter boundaries, and that should be clearly reflected in the headnote of your motion and we move on. 

3.17
MR FUNGAROO KAPS HASSAN (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and minister for this motion. If a mistake was made, it must be corrected. 

However, I would like to use this opportunity to bring to your attention the fact that once boundaries are altered here, the other departments of Government, for example, the ones that do statistics, mapping need to be informed and involved immediately.

If you look at the maps of Uganda, the district maps have a lot of mess. Whatever we do here does not correspond with what comes from the Statistics House.

The Minister of Local Government should work with other departments so that whatever we do here does not reflect in a mistake like what we see in other places where there are numerous boundary problems? Are we not going to hear of problems from Kassanda or Mubende tomorrow after correcting these mistakes? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, respond to that issue. Would you like to notify other departments so that they take full knowledge of what they need to do in their planning?

MR BUTIME: Mr Speaker, as I said, we had a lot of consultations with stakeholders and when this is done, we shall carry out induction to inform all relevant authorities and institutions. We shall organise further meetings to sensitise people about what has taken place. 

Therefore, I do not see why hon. Fungaroo should not believe that all this nitty-gritty will be done and sensitisation will take place - even when Obongi was created as a town council, this was done. More will be done to make sure that people appreciate and understand so that administration and politics become smooth. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will put the question. Let me first read the motion to which we are taking a decision.

The motion is; “That the motion for the creation of Kassanda District Local Government be corrected to include Bukuya County in accordance with Mubende District Council resolution of 25 May 2010.” Also, there is further prayer that the correction takes effect on 1 July 2018 to enable the people of Bukuya County participate in the elections of the newly created Kassanda District Local Government leadership. I now put the question.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Nabikabala Primary School being represented by hon. Akamba Paul and hon. Naigaga Mariam. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL YOUTH DAY 2018 AND LAUNCH OF THE UGANDA GREEN INCUBATION PROGRAMME – SONGHAI MODEL PILOT PROJECT; SUNDAY 12TH AUGUST 2018 AT KAMPIRINGISA NATIONAL REHABILITATION CENTRE – MPIGI DISTRICT

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL Development (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florance Nakiwala Kiyingi): Mr Speaker, I rise to brief you about the forthcoming commemoration of the International Youth Day.

The purpose of this parliamentary statement is to provide information to Parliament regarding this year’s International Youth Day celebrations scheduled to take place on Sunday, 12 August 2018 at Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre.

You recall that every year on 12th August, we join the rest of the world in marking and celebrating the International Youth Day in conformity with the United Nations (UN) General Assembly resolution A/RES/54/120 of the 54th UN session adopted on 17 December 1999.
 
The International Youth Day provides an opportunity to all state parties to evaluate various policies, programmes and strategic interventions aimed at empowering young people. Specifically, on this day, we take stock of what has been done, what remains to be done and how we can position the youth to play a critical role in the social, economic and political transformation of their respective communities.
 
The celebration of the International Youth Day is in line with the world’s programme of action for youth, which is the UN framework for youth development in mind-set change and empowerment. It is also in tandem with the African Youth Charter and the Commonwealth Plan of Action for Youth Empowerment.

The theme for this year's celebrations is "Safe Spaces for Youth." The theme was adopted by the UN inter alia focus on ensuring safety of youth in all settings. The theme provides an opportunity for state parties to re-examine policies, programmes and interventions that enable young people to meaningfully communicate their experiences, expectations and contributions towards transformation of the economy.

Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that in technologically connected world, the aspirations of young people to engage in political, civic and social matters are ever growing. They will need safe spaces to effectively contribute to the development, including but not limited to peace and social cohesion for positive youth development.

As has been the case in the previous years, the International Youth Day Celebrations will take place at various local government levels; but the national venue will be at Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre, Sports Ground, in Mpigi District. His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda is expected to preside over the function.

Prior to the actual day; during the Youth Week (5th - 11th August), various activities will take place to mark the day. The activities include community dialogue, tree-planting, community work (cleanliness campaigns), sports activities (community football in Star Times Stadium and other district games spread through the country as well as netball tournaments). There will be HIV/AIDS testing and counselling, information on Adolescent Sexual Reproductive Health and Rights (ASRHR).

As part of the activities on the International Youth Day, the Chief Guest, H.E the President of the Republic of Uganda will launch Uganda Green Incubation Programme - the Songhai Pilot Project located at Kampiringisa. Songhai Model is an integrated agricultural production system that seeks to address problems of poverty, unemployment and food insecurity by strengthening the technical and organisational capacities of communities to produce efficiently and sustainably.

The model uses ecosystem approach that draws nature's contribution to crop and animal growth such as soil organic matter and soil micro-organisms, bio-control and integrated pest management. Under this model there are no chemicals, wastes and pollution. It enables farmers to produce better and more, with less. The Songhai Pilot was approved by Cabinet in December 2016 and is being implemented on government land in Kampiringisa as directed by H.E. the President.

I would like to take this opportunity to invite colleagues to come to the national celebrations at Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre in Mpigi District on Sunday, 12 August 2018. I also request you to support the day's celebrations at the various levels in all districts in the country.

Action required of Parliament:

I will request my colleagues to-
(i) 	appreciate the importance of engaging young people to exercise their basic civil rights, to enable them to undertake free and voluntary action in order to advance their social, cultural, economic and political goals;
(ii) 	note that the theme for this year's International Youth Day is "Safe Spaces for Youth" and the National Venue is Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre Sports Ground in Mpigi District;
(iii) 	note that H.E the President will on this day, l2th August, launch the Unique Uganda Green Incubation Programme - the Songhai Model Project. I also request Parliament to note that His Excellency the President of Uganda has been invited and he is expected to preside over the occasion. 

Lastly, I request Parliament to accept my invitation to the national celebration at Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre Sports Ground in Mpigi on the 12 August 2018 at 9.30 a.m. I appeal for your usual support to your districts and constituencies in honour of the International Youth Day. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, this is a statement of public information and also public policy on issues of the youth. We can have a limited debate, otherwise we can receive and note it and move to the next item. Have we noted it?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, let us have the next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the request by Government to borrow up to SDR 231.7 million, equivalent to US$ 335 million, from the International Development Association of the World Bank, as additional financing for the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy to handle expeditiously and report back. Clerk, extract the minutes and forward them to the committee accordingly. 

Honourable members, there were very urgent matters that needed to be raised. The Member for Nakapiripirit is not here; can we have the Member for Igara West.

3.32
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara West Constituency, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of urgent national importance. 

Last week on Friday, 3 August 2018, lightning struck one of our schools in Igara West called Nyakazinga Primary School. It is a Government-aided school located in Kyamuhunga Sub-County. Thirteen pupils were hit and they were hospitalised in Comboni Hospital Kyamuhunga. Luckily, we did not lose lives. As I speak today, all the 13 pupils have been discharged from the hospital and are back in their homes.

However, Mr Speaker, the school was partly destroyed by the lightning. With your permission, I would like to make two requests. One, I appeal to Government to immediately come in to support the rehabilitation of this school and provide adequate lightning arresters for Nyakazinga Primary School.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, you will recall that about four years ago, we lost five pupils at Nyakabingo Primary School in Bushenyi and another five at Buramba Primary School. We reported this to Parliament and it was discussed extensively. Parliament then took a resolution urging Government to provide lightning arresters to all schools, private ones inclusive. We took this decision because we were mindful of our responsibility as Parliament and as Government to ensure safety of the lives of our children in these schools. Therefore, I would like to request that we get an update from Government.

I do not want to believe that this is only a problem in Igara West. Probably, even in other areas, we may be having similar situations. What happened to the implementation of this key resolution of Parliament to have lightning arresters on public buildings, particularly our schools? I wish I could get an answer from Government on this matter. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Education, what happened to the lightning arresters that we agreed to have installed on all schools buildings?

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCTION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a pity that this happened and lives were lost. It is true Parliament took a decision to have lightning arresters installed in all schools. 

Mr Speaker, Government has taken this up. We have started installing them in all our schools. However, we started with the areas that are more prone than others, and of course depending on the amount of money that is provided in the budget. Right now, I cannot give you the number of schools where lightning arresters have been installed, but probably in future, I will be able to do that; otherwise, we have a plan to – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving way. In the Ninth Parliament, we passed a resolution urging Government to install lightning arresters in all Government-aided primary schools. This august House went on to approve funds for Government to buy and install those lightning arresters. I am surprised that four years down the road, the minister is saying that they have just started the installation process. 

Mr Speaker, I really feel that the minister is not serious or he does not know what is going on. If you do not know what is going on, it is better to have the right person come and explain to this august House. Thank you.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague that I am very serious and I know what I am talking about. It is true that a resolution was taken in this House. However, in that year, money was not provided. If you check the records, you will prove that money was not provided. It is this year that we got some money and work has started. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Member for Tochi County, you have the Floor.

3.38
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I rise on an urgent and important matter. 

Early this year, the Ministry of Health recruited two people per parish in selected districts to implement the Community Health Extension Workers Programme. These people were to undergo six months’ training - four months in class and two months at the health facilities within their localities. 

A team from the Ministry of Health met with a team from the districts. They surveyed and identified health facilities within the districts. Omoro District was among the districts selected to pilot this programme under the Ministry of Health and 146 people were identified. 

The training was meant to commence this August. The health facilities that were identified within the district were also inspected by a team from the Ministry of Health and they made some recommendations for corrective measures to be made within those facilities. The owners of these facilities were given a timeline of three months to put everything in place to make those facilities ready to take in these trainees under the Ministry of Health. Some of them secured bank loans to refurbish their facilities to meet the requirements as stated by the Ministry of Health. The districts were also asked to identify five staff within the sector to be trained as Trainers of Trainers (TOTs). A one week training programme took place in Lira District. 

Mr Speaker, the other training was supposed to start this month but the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Health has written to the districts stating that it should not take place within the districts. Instead, it has to be shifted to the National Leadership Institute, Kyankwanzi. 

The issue is: if five people from the health department go away to Kyankwanzi for four months, it will leave a very big gap within the district. The initial idea was that the training be carried out in the districts so that there is no gap left within the health sector. 

Secondly, the service providers that were identified acquired bank loans to ensure their facilities met the standards set by the Ministry of Health. They secured loans and worked on those facilities to meet the standards yet now these people are not going to be taken there for training. How are they going to meet their obligations and pay back the money if these trainings do not take place there? 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Health reconsiders its decision to move the training from the districts to Kyankwanzi, and its decision to remove the five people from each district. Otherwise, this will leave a very big gap and will also create a challenge within the districts. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can somebody take responsibility for this, because these are really urgent matters? You say you are going to train people from the existing structures and now you want to take them away for six months. Who will be working in their places? That is the challenge.  

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we do request that the Minister of Health makes a statement tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let the Minister of Health make the statement today. Let somebody get in touch with the minister. 

MR BAHATI: Okay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.44
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the disgruntlement between bibanja owners and the landlords in Bugangaizi East Constituency.

Mr Speaker, Bugangaizi was known as the main area of historical land injustices during the colonial rule. Therefore, the Government of Uganda, through Parliament, drafted the Uganda National Land Policy, which provides for the address of the historical injustices on land matters. 
The Uganda Land Fund was created and this House, in the last financial year, appropriated funds to be used specifically to compensate absentee landlords and to carry out systematic demarcation of some pieces of land in this new financial year. This is in accordance with the Uganda Land Commission work plan. 

Yesterday, I went to the office of the Uganda Land Commission to follow up on the progress of the systematic demarcation of Block 128, Plot 11, in Buhonda, Bugangaizi East, which had been earmarked for systematic demarcation this August. I was told that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not released the development expenditure, including funds for the land fund meant for the compensations and systematic demarcations for this new financial year. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to bring it to the attention of the House that there is fighting in Bugangaizi between absentee landlords and bibanja owners, even in areas where the Uganda Land Commission has already acquired land. Some conmen, among who are absentee landlords, have tempted to illegally reacquire some land by taking advantage of the un-demarcated land that the Uganda Land Commission acquired. 

I pray that Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, releases funds that Parliament appropriated for this exercise to the Uganda Land Commission this new financial year. This will enable our people, who have suffered from historical land injustices, get land titles and also settle and embark on real development. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, why are you not releasing this money? 

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, it is true this Parliament appropriated resources to establish the Uganda Land Fund. However, we have been working out the regulations to establish this fund so that it is administered properly. We know the urgency of the matter, but this is a process that is ongoing. We shall release the funds to the Uganda Land Fund as soon as this process is completed, preferably in this quarter. 

3.46
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Mr Speaker, the matter of national importance that I am raising is in respect with the huge consignments of contraband sugar that have been smuggled into our country. This sugar was offloaded from a water vessel at Jinja to waiting trailers that were filled to capacity and ferried to unknown destinations.

Mr Speaker, the screaming headline in the credible Government paper, the New Vision, clearly indicated that this sugar had been banned in Kenya but it was sneaked here. By the way, these sugar samples were tested by the body that is charged with food safety in Kenya - the Kenya Bureau of Standards - and it was found with very high and harmful levels of mercury, copper, lead and other toxic elements. This sugar is therefore contaminated and harmful for human consumption. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to make a prayer. Uganda National Bureau of Standards should have been alert but it seems they are sleeping on the job. My prayer is: Could the line minister come with a statement to allay the fears of Ugandans? This is because we are consuming lots of this sugar. Kenya launched a serious crackdown on this contraband sugar, which was imported. 

Equally, in Tanzania, they did so. You are aware that under the Common Market Protocol of East Africa, there has to be zero tax on all goods manufactured within the region. However, Tanzania has now imposed a 25 per cent import duty on any sugar that comes from Uganda. Can you imagine that, Mr Speaker! Therefore, the minister ought to come and explain this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you please explain that situation. 

3.39
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. First, I would like to inform this august House that the sugar that had issues in Kenya was destroyed in Kenya; it never crossed the border at all. Therefore, if you have evidence, please bring it and lay it on the Table. I wish you could bring evidence to that effect and then we will follow up in case some of that sugar was smuggled into Uganda.

Otherwise, Mr Speaker, allow me to get more information, if there is any. However, I would seek advice from my colleague. I wish to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we now have the Member for Bukooli Islands.

3.50
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to present a matter of national importance on an issue I have raised here several times. 

Yesterday, when I came to Parliament – (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter that has been raised about sugar is serious and urgent to all of us because it threatens the lives of Ugandans. It is actually a security problem because contaminated substances that can cause ill health have entered Uganda. 

The answer given by the honourable minister, and you can see from the reaction of the Members, is not accepted. Are we just going to leave it like that? Is it procedurally right for us to leave this issue die like this without a proper conclusion? Isn’t it proper to for us to investigate or even create a select committee to investigate this matter? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter is raised as an urgent matter and the minister has responded that the sugar that was intercepted has been destroyed in Kenya. She said if there is any evidence anywhere that some of this has sneaked into the country, information should be given to her to take action. Period! What is there to debate?

MR OUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Daily Monitor of the day before yesterday carried a story saying that people in Bukooli Islands are vacating their homes because crocodiles are killing them.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that from 1998 to date, 256 people have been killed by crocodiles and out of these 153 were females and many schoolchildren. Why are they being eaten by crocodiles? It is because we do not have water tanks in our schools and boreholes, so schoolchildren are forced to go and get water for drinking from the lake. They are killed by crocodiles when they go to fetch water. This issue is very serious because pupils have started fearing to go to school or to the lake to fetch water.

My humble appeal is that the Government should immediately give us an expeditious plan to construct boreholes within the islands so that children are not killed. Secondly, the concerned ministry in charge of tourism and wildlife should give a statement on the Floor of this Parliament about their plan to protect these people, because it is the work of Government to ensure people’s lives are protected. 

One time in 2007, a schoolgirl was killed by a crocodile in the morning. She had gone to fetch water and something queer happened. The police who came to the scene said the laws could not allow them to shoot at or kill the crocodile because it has killed a human being and so they just scared it. People are still wondering what to do and they say crocodiles are being kept by people. Last week, an old man called Mongo Jackton was killed by people for allegedly keeping these animals.

My humble prayer is that the ministry and Government should tell us how they are going to protect these people. Mr Speaker, while the Government is protecting the fish, it should realise that we used to have small boats that we used go with to fetch water but all of them were destroyed. We were not using them for fishing but to fetch water. Now, when the boats were destroyed, our people have been left at the mercy of crocodiles; they are being eaten by these animals. That is my prayer, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister in charge of the sector - hon. Kiwanda, the ones in parks as well as those in the water are killing people.

5.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Member for raising the concern. 

The problem of human-wildlife conflict is on an increase in the country, not only with crocodiles but also elephants and very many other species that we have in our national parks. However, as a ministry, we are coming up with a statement on the mitigation measures to address the human-wildlife conflict in general.

My senior colleague has gone to Namayingo District and he will be there for three days, with a whole team from Uganda Wildlife Authority. They have gone to see what mitigation measures can be put in place for Namayingo in particular. We are coming up with cages from where people can fetch water but at the same time, we are forced to eliminate some of the wild animals that are causing havoc to the communities.

On behalf of the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, I would like to pass on our sincere condolences to the families that have lost people to crocodiles. However, I would like to promise the House that the ministry and the Department of Wildlife are coming up with all it takes to mitigate the human-wildlife conflict.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It sounds very scary that an animal eats a human being but human beings are not allowed to defend themselves by killing the animal. According to the report, a girl was killed and the police came with guns but they just shot in the air and could not kill the animal. How can we protect the people of Namayingo who are in immediate danger? If the crocodiles came today, what are we going to do to protect those people?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, is there no way all the animals that need to be protected can be gathered and given one place in Uganda so that they live there and do not threaten human beings? Thirdly, what is the value of protecting crocodiles? If it is about tourism, can you tell us the number of people who have come to see the crocodiles and how much money you have earned from that? Is that money worth the lives of the people who have been killed by the crocodiles?  Thank you.

MS ALUM SANTA: Thank you so much, honourable minister. I would like to thank you for the statement you have just issued. 

Mr Speaker, one time I brought a matter of national importance on the Floor of this Parliament concerning the issue of the wildlife-human conflict in Oyam District. Up to now, your ministry has not come to solve our problem. Every day, the elephants come in big numbers. Yesterday, there were 20 elephants in the area. The local community has been using local ways to drive them away. However, as I talk, they are becoming defiant. Even if they beat drums or saucepans, they do not go away. 

The honourable minister has just mentioned that he is coming up with a statement. Mr Speaker, I would like to know when the minister is coming with this statement because children are not going to school currently in Kamdini Subcounty and all the food crops have been destroyed. I pleaded that the ministry adds us rangers to help drive these elephants away but up to now, they have not done anything. 

Therefore, I would like to seek for clarification from the minister. When are you coming with this statement and when are you going to rescue our people from this dangerous situation they are living in? Thank you.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you, honourable members, for the points of clarification that you have raised. Hon. Fungaroo proposed that we kill the crocodiles or the animals. Of course, the laws are made from here. Currently, there is a Bill on wildlife which is on the Floor of Parliament and in some parts it includes compensation instead of compassion. As of now, the law does not talk about compensation, it talks about compassion. 

On the issue of killing, I would like to remind the Member that we do not only conserve for tourism but we conserve for future generations. I would not think that you would be very happy to tell your children that we used to have crocodiles or lions here in Uganda but we killed all of them. Therefore, killing the animals should not really be an issue. 

In these crocodile prone areas, we have provided cages. We have done this at Kazinga Channel and we are doing the same in some areas where we have water sources. I would like to promise Parliament that as a ministry and Department of Wildlife, we are putting in place all these measures. 

Mr Speaker, recently I was in Namibia and I would like to remind honourable members that Namibia is almost four times the size of Uganda and they only have two million people. However, even in such a huge country, the human-wildlife conflict is an issue. It is not only the population of human beings that is growing but even the population of animals. Therefore, we need to see how to mitigate this.

Mr Speaker, we cannot put all these animals in one place because it is not a zoo. There is a difference between a national park and a zoo. We can put a zoo in a place like Entebbe but we have 10 national parks and 10 game reserves. We are digging trenches and we can also put electric fences. However, all these projects need a lot of money. We shall come here to Parliament and appropriate money to help solve this issue. All this is going to be included in our statement.

Honourable member for Oyam District, I received this communication. We are including this in the statement. We have also received some complaints from the districts that are surrounding Murchison Falls National Park. 

Honourable members, also put yourselves in my shoes; this is what we go through. Some of these areas that the communities have occupied used to be hunting areas for these animals and the animals used to think that these areas belonged to them. Now that the population has increased, we want to also encroach on this land and you cannot tell them otherwise; they still think that this land belongs to them. However, we are doing everything possible to mitigate this because we need the population and also their lives. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I understand hon. Godfrey Kiwanda’s interest in tourism. However, when the honourable member was putting across this issue, he spoke about two issues on this matter. The first issue, which was left out completely, was about a farmer dealing in crocodiles. I have seen some crocodile farming in Mpigi District. He mentioned that some farmer was killed, instead of the crocodiles being killed, because he was accused of keeping this type of “fish”. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to know whether we should not give time to the minister in charge of agriculture instead of bothering the honourable minister in charge of tourism with this issue. This is because what the colleague spoke about concerns farming. I wonder whether it is not procedurally right for the minister in charge of agriculture to make a statement, guiding Ugandans on how they can do crocodile farming and ensure the safety of their neighbours. Isn’t it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, that we give the minister in charge of agriculture chance to explain? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is your opinion. However, a farmer grows crops and those crops are destroyed by elephants, then you want the minister who is responsible for growing crops to be the one to come and explain. The mere fact that you call it farming does not mean it is automatically agriculture. If you are dealing with species that are protected, it is another ministry. Therefore, the word “farming” alone does not warrant it to go to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; it depends on what you are dealing with. 

If you decide to farm lions, would you go to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries? Let the department responsible for this thing handle these wildlife-human conflicts properly. Let it be handled properly and the right docket is under the minister who is dealing with these issues now. If there are comments that the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries can help with, that is inter-ministerial and they can deal with that themselves and agree on which aspects to deal with. Isn’t that true?

4.08
MS BETTY MUZANIRA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for according me this opportunity. I rise up on a matter of national importance regarding health facilities and poor facilitation in these facilities.

Mr Speaker, it is a pity and a shame to see that the women of Uganda and their babies continue dying every day while giving birth. Last Monday, we buried a woman and her baby in Rukungiri. They died due to lack of medical supplies in our health centres, especially gloves. It is a shame on us as a Government. Indeed, more deaths are caused by lack of district referral hospitals where these poor people can be referred to after failing to get appropriate medication from the health centres IV where they go to first.

My prayer is that the Government explains to us why the health centres lack medical supplies, even gloves which are cheap. Secondly, why doesn’t Rukungiri District have a district referral hospital?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Minister of Health is here. There was an earlier issue of the training that you want to do for five people per district and now you want to take them to Kyankwanzi. What will happen with the gaps remaining in the district health centres if these health workers are all taken away for six months? Does it make sense? Also respond to this issue that we have just heard.

4.10
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Please allow me to start with the question that has just been raised on the issue of supplies. Honourable members, you will recall that we made a statement on the Floor here regarding stockouts of the polio vaccine in health facilities. That same reason stands for the lack of supplies, which has since been addressed. 

Mr Speaker, we had a challenge of supplies because of a small misunderstanding with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which we sorted out. National Medical Stores is now supplying items to these facilities. That issue has since been corrected. 

On the issue of extension workers, allow me to correct hon. Peter Okot because there is a mix-up in his understanding. Extension workers are different from health workers. Extension workers do not work in the health facilities. They are like village health teams, only that they are a little higher. They work in the community. This is a programme that we are using to revise the village health teams’ strategy and amend it to a more robust one for our country.

We have developed a strategy in which we are identifying potential candidates who are senior 4 leavers from the communities. We are identifying two per village and we are preparing to train them. The training will take six months, not four. Thereafter, they will be deployed to work in their community. 

The venue for the training is still under discussion because it also depends on the amount of resources we have. We are discussing whether we should train them in the districts, where the facilities for training have to be available. You know that schools are used all the time. We are discussing training them in schools when children go for holidays but that time is too short. We are looking at all avenues. We have to agree on that with our partners who are supporting the training. 

That is the difference between health workers and extension workers. We can, however, make a statement on extension workers so that Members are better informed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was an aspect where the ministry had already engaged some service providers to provide the facilities for training and some of them have incurred loans to make those facilities meet the standards required. Now it looks like they are not going to be trained there. How do they recover their money since they were told to do so by your ministry?

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, that is not true. We have not engaged any service providers as yet. The policy is yet to be approved by Cabinet. Thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is good for community health workers or extension workers to get training. We know that the Ministry of Health has training institutions in Uganda, the highest being Makerere University’s Faculty of Medicine, Gulu University, Mbarara University and other universities that teach health programmes. We also know that Kyankwanzi is a training institution for certain types of trainings including political training, firing of guns and other military things. 

Can you give us the curriculum that you are going to follow to train these people? If the training curriculum has things like learning about guns instead of medical instruments like syringes, stethoscopes, thermometers and the like, then we can say that maybe you are justified and the fear that my colleague has could be wrong. Mr Speaker, can the minister give us the curriculum to be used for training those extension workers, which makes it necessary for Kyankwanzi to be one of the options to be used for their training?

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, the minister has given her submission concerning the training very well. In her submission, she clearly said that there is no plan to train the health workers in Kyankwanzi. Therefore, is hon. Fungaroo in order to put words in the mouth of the minister which she has not said? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Obongi, the person who said that they were supposed to be taken to Kyankwanzi was the honourable member for Tochi County, not the minister. Can we leave this here? 

MR PETER OKOT: Mr Speaker, there is a letter written by the Permanent Secretary (PS) in the Ministry of Health dated 4 July, giving the timetable on how the training will be conducted. The first batch is meant to begin on 4th to 5th of October and they are 500 community health extension workers. I am therefore surprised that the minister is saying that nothing has been concluded yet the PS has come up with a timetable for this training. I do not know whether they are coordinating well within the ministry. The minister is saying one thing and the PS is saying another. 

Mr Speaker, it is not true that no service provider was contacted. There was a team from the Ministry of Health together with a team from the district – I am speaking for Omoro because this happened there – that went and identified three facilities. These were Labora Youth Centre, Gulu Institute of Health Sciences and Tochi Resort Beach. At Tochi Resort Beach, they said certain things should be put in place and the proprietor went ahead and did this. They were even given timelines within which to finish, knowing very well that the training would start in August.

Therefore, I am surprised to hear this from the minister. We need some clarification here, Mr Speaker.

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, allow me to say that there is a difference between “contacted” and “contracted”. I said we have not contracted any service provider. The programme, as it stands, is awaiting Cabinet approval. Whereas the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has given me a certificate of financial implications, Cabinet has not approved that policy.

Secondly, as we prepare for the training, it does not stop us from sampling many training facilities, Kyankwanzi inclusive. We are looking at all options but we can only zero down on an option when we agree with our partners because this is going to be paid for by partners. It is only when we agree that I can say, “Yes, we have agreed to that facility with the partners”. 

As I mentioned before, give us time. We shall present the whole community extension workers’ strategy to this august House. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.20
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. However, before I present the issue, I would like to take the opportunity to congratulate hon. Betty Aol for leading the Opposition team on the Floor of Parliament. (Applause) To some of you who do not know, at least on the route to the north, we will now have two “weeu weeus”. (Laughter) I will make sure that when she is going, I go very close to her so that the road can be cleared. (Laughter)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what are “weeu weeus”? (Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, there are times when we run short of these linguistic expressions because words may not express things the way we would want to express them. I mean these vehicles that clear the way –(Laughter)- used by the police or the military. To an ordinary person like me, if you give me the technical name, I will not understand it but when you say “weeu weeu”, I will understand. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I stood up on a very important matter that came up last week. We are still anxiously waiting for the minister in charge of trade to update us on the buying of maize and the centres from where it is being bought. 

For now, the issue of cooperative societies, particularly in the north and east, has not attracted the attention of Parliament. I remember when the minster was talking about buying maize, we thought the best medium for this would be cooperative societies because they have the infrastructure and farmers are the ones who are being directly affected by the low prices.

However, Mr Speaker, we came to learn, as members of the Budget Committee, that the situation of Busoga Cooperative Union and Lango Cooperative Union had become so desperate that the committee, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I see some children leaving; let me introduce them. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Bumwalye Primary School in Bududa District. They are represented by hon. Godfrey Watenga and hon. Justine Khainza. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the Budget Committee, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, was able to earmark Shs 1.9 billon to help save the assets - I think the only assets now left - in the hands of Lango Cooperative Union. This is because most of the assets have been sold yet you and the ministry are aware that Lango Cooperative Union is expecting over Shs 11 billion in compensation from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Mr Speaker, the only property left in the hands of Lango Cooperative Union, which is a big ranch situated somewhere in Kwania I think, has been advertised for sale. I think this is strategic because although the money was approved by Parliament on the 3rd of May, up to now that money has not been released. For that reason, I believe it is strategic that the money be delayed so that we lose that prime property.

I stand here as an elder from Lango sub-region, a member of Lango Cooperative Union and a farmer to say that if we really care about the rural people and farmers, we have to revive the cooperative societies that used to save and help our farmers. For this particular case, Mr Speaker, since the ministry went ahead to allow Shs 1.9 billion in the supplementary budget for the purpose of saving this property, why would the Microfinance Support Centre, which is a Government agency, want to sell the property of another Government-funded agency? I think there is some problem there and I am asking the Government to take action.

Mr Speaker, what I am asking this Parliament to do is to stay that sale and the minister in charge of trade must assure the people of Lango sub-region that we are not going to lose our prime land under the guise of a loan. That prime land must be saved for the purpose of the cooperative union. We are asking you to take action because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development already has the money released for that purpose.

Mr Speaker, this is a matter of very serious national importance which I would like this Parliament to take note of, particularly the minister in charge of trade –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the minister respond now?

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to respond positively. (Laughter) Thank you.

4.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES) (Mr Fredrick Gume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issues raised by the honourable member are pertinent. There was a supplementary budget passed as part payment for the debts claimed by Lango and Busoga cooperative unions. Resources did not come in time and consequently, it was not effected.

The ministry is aware of what is happening and the advert made to sell off the land belonging to Lango Cooperative Union, emanating from a debt with the Microfinance Support Centre. We also note that the Microfinance Support Centre is an arm of Government and Lango Cooperative Union is also owed money. 

We have consequently written to the minister to stay the sale of the property because they demand money while we also demand money. In such a circumstance, even a contract could work. However, as far as we are concerned, the letter has been acknowledged by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I am sure that the land will not be sold. I would like to thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have come to the end of this particular phase. I would like to give a moment to the Member for Kasese District, the former Leader of the Opposition, to say something.

4.29
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I rise to heartily congratulate my dear friend, sister and colleague, hon. Betty Aol Ocan, upon her appointment as the current Leader of the Opposition in the Parliament of Uganda. Hon. Betty Aol, congratulations!

I would like to also thank the Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues for having given me the utmost cooperation I needed in my tenure as the Leader of the Opposition.(Applause) I do not take it for granted, Mr Speaker, that you treated me as a friend, colleague  and a leader with dignity and respect. I would like to thank you for that respect, dignity, cooperation and love you showed me during my tenure that enabled me to do what I managed to do. 

I would like to also thank the successful team I worked with, which has brought us this far. We have achieved what we have achieved because of the cooperation, teamwork and hard work we put together to enable the Opposition in Parliament do what it managed to do.

Mr Speaker, what we have been doing was an addition to what the former Leaders of the Opposition did. It is the foundation that I am leaving behind for hon. Betty Aol to continue building on. At an appropriate time, I am going to officially hand over to her in our office. I am ready to work with hon. Betty Aol and I will give her the necessary cooperation as we work to have a good country for all of us to live in and make Uganda a better place for all Ugandans to enjoy and create a better tomorrow.

Mr Speaker, contrary to media speculation and the article that appeared in the Daily Monitor – it was sad that the Daily Monitor could come up with such a statement about Winfred, the person, and my character. They reported that I said that I am not going anywhere. Actually, what I said was that I am waiting for the parliamentary process so that I can do the process of handing over to my colleague, hon. Betty Aol. It was very shameful that the Daily Monitor could report that as a cover page story, which has tarnished my image. It is unfortunate and I condemn it in the highest terms possible.

Otherwise, thank you, colleagues. I would like to thank the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) party under the leadership of Gen. Mugisha Muntu for having given me the opportunity to serve my country. (Applause) It was not an easy task.

I would like to also thank hon. Patrick Amuriat Oboi for the appointment he has given to my sister; it is in good faith. We shall continue to work and build Uganda for the good of all Ugandans in order to ensure that democracy and good governance prevail so that Ugandans can get fair service delivery as they deserve. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that it is now time for me to also be led. I played my part and now it is time to see others also play their parts as I also give them support. It was a humble and enjoyable opportunity for me to serve Ugandans. Therefore, I would like to thank all Ugandans who journeyed with me as I led the Opposition; it was such a joy to learn that Ugandans appreciated my service. How would I have known if this appointment did not happen; I would not have known that Ugandans appreciated my service.
 
I can only say that as Ugandans, we are together and we shall continue to serve this country and move the people’s agenda forward. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Would you like to say something, Gen. Moses Ali?

4.34
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Ali Moses): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Government, I would like to thank FDC for making changes, which is normal. 

Secondly, I would like to laud the beneficiaries of those changes, especially the Leader of the Opposition. I am happy that my champion from Apaa is also one of the beneficiaries. (Laughter) We are very grateful. Now that we are in a different category, we probably have to handle the issue of Apaa differently.

I am also very happy that hon. Winfred Kiiza talked about the newspaper article; I read it this morning and I was surprised, but she has now cleared the air. I am very happy for what she said because that is the speculation of newspapers. That also gives strength to the incoming Leader of the Opposition so that she upholds the position firmly. 

Definitely, being the Leader of the Opposition, she would also have to change from her usual talk in Parliament – (Laughter) – because she is now the Leader of the Opposition and so, she cannot say all that she used to say. (Laughter)  However, it is definitely up to her to decide how she can handle herself. We are ready to give her all the necessary support as we have done to the other former Leaders of the Opposition. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to single out one activity of the former Leader of the Opposition. She was the only Leader of the Opposition, having heard a lot about Apaa, who managed to go deep inside Zoka Forest. That should go into the records. If we are writing the records of the history of Uganda and if you ask in Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) which Leader of the Opposition ever went to Zoka Forest, I think she will be the only one. (Applause) Thank you very much, hon. Kiiza. We are very grateful for your courtesy and courage in going that far. 

To the rest of the colleagues – I have not seen my colleague here who has always refused to stand up. I think he has also “eaten”. We are very happy. In the Government, we are always ready for you and we shall work together. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 4.39 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 9 August 2018 at 2.00 p.m.)
 
