PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - FIRST MEETINGTUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA9928THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023Tuesday, 22 August 2023on the Floor. Once the colleagues allow then we shall recommit them, since the procedure is very clear. I have also been following, in the news, issues relating to the plight of one of our colleagues, Hon. Ssegirinya, who is sick in the Netherlands. It is very sad that our colleague is in such a situation. We pray for him and as Parliament, we shall play our role, following the law. I received many messages from most of you and I want to guide very clearly; Parliament follows clearly stated guidelines and procedures when processing treatment abroad for any of its Members, including the ministers. We do not process it via social media, videos on Tik-Tok, attacks and debates. Even if you came here and made a resolution to take someone to hospital, if the procedure is not followed, that Clerk will go to prison; no one will go in for the Clerk. The procedure is very clear that if you have an ailment that requires treatment abroad, you have to apply to the Uganda Medical Board for referral. The referring doctor, after confirming that the ailment or procedure to be performed to relieve the condition of the patient cannot be performed in Uganda, fills out the Medical Board referral form. He also secures other signatures of senior colleagues to demonstrate consensus that indeed the diagnosis is factual and the condition cannot be managed in the country either due to capacity deficiencies or equipment deficiencies. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 20TH SITTING - FIRST MEETINGParliament met at 2.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I am ready to communicate because I have been accused of not communicating. I also thank you for being here in huge numbers so that we are able to do our part. I also wish to inform you, colleagues, that since the court ruling on the Narcotics law case, we must establish quorum before proceeding to any stage of processing any law, especially the second and third readings. For the debate and all the other issues, you do not need the quorum, unlike the stage where the decision is going to be made. So, today we shall have the Third Reading of the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Bill, 2023. I urge the Whips to ensure that Members come in so that we establish quorum when we reach that stage. I know there are colleagues who have informed me that they want to recommit some of the clauses that we passed during the second stage. I will give you a chance to present your issues 9929THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023Upon the recommendation of the Uganda Medical Board, the patient presents a confirmation of sponsorship of the process of referral. That is when you come to Parliament and we confirm that indeed, as Parliament, we are ready to meet the costs of referral. With a filled out referral form and proof of sponsorship, the referring doctor presents and defends the application before the Uganda Medical Board; that is a team of 12 senior consultants. Upon approval of the board, the patient is issued with a referral letter from the Director-General of Health Services. The Ministry of Health issues communication to the Office of the Prime Minister or Parliament for processing of foreign currency and the referral.You are the same people who will go on Tik-Tok, if you do not want to listen to very clear procedures. I have seen you, honourable colleagues, putting other officials on oath and even directing CID to arrest Government officials for not following accountability procedures. Therefore, you must behave the same way. The same yardstick you want the public and Government officials to be subjected to is the same yardstick we, as Members of Parliament, must be subjected to when it comes to utilising Government money. Whether you love it or not, I am not here to convey good or bad news; I am here to convey what is written because most of you have not been following it seriously. Honourable colleagues, we have received cases where some of you complain that the Medical Board has not processed your issues and has not given them attention. As presiding officers, we have tried to reach out to the Medical Board and the minister, who has helped on several occasions but on some occasions, even ministers have been denied treatment abroad because the specialists here say that they can be treated here. Now, when you come to the Speaker or the Leader of the Opposition and he picks money from his pocket to help you, do not think Parliament has sponsored you. I wanted this to go out to all Members of Parliament. If you have any issue and you do not know about the procedure, approach the Office of the Clerk who will guide you on how the procedure is done. I have cross-checked and the Uganda Medical Board has not received any application from Hon. Ssegirinya but also, the Offices of the Speaker and the Clerk have not received any formal information from Hon. Ssegirinya on his treatment. I have seen statements from the Leader of the Opposition and our Public Relations Officer (PRO) already issued a statement. Let us now be proactive and see how best we can help him because in the state that he is, he is not able to come and make the application. Whoever can reach out to his relatives, please, bring his documents and we will present them to the Medical Board to see how best our colleague can be helped. The moment we are told that Hon. Ssegirinya’s documents have been approved, the next day, we shall ensure he receives all the necessary funding; the way we have done for other Members of Parliament. Honourable members, you are allowed to react to my communication when I finish communicating. I have just started communicating so you better be patient. Honourable colleagues, the second issue I want to touch on is in regard to congratulating our very own Joshua Cheptegei, who has equaled the world record of three world championship athletics consecutive wins, which was done in Budapest. (Applause)  We join Ugandans to congratulate him and I hope, as usual, a formal motion will be moved by one of us so that we are able to appreciate our colleague on the Floor of Parliament. With that, if there are any reactions to my communication, I welcome them.9930THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 20232.26MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very happy that you have raised the issue of clearance from the Uganda Medical Board for Members of Parliament and staff.I would like to inform the House that when Parliament conceived the idea of institutionalising medical insurance, there was a thorough discussion with the Uganda Medical Board. It was agreed that there would be a contact person; our medical doctor housed in Parliament so that if anyone has an issue, the first place to call is our medical personnel who will assess the case or recommend areas to go to. The Commission can only guide on policy matters and our medical team is already recognised as the contact persons for Uganda Medical Board. The minister can only reinforce. I would like to provide you with this information so that no one is disadvantaged due to lack of contact with the medical board. Mr Speaker, I think I can also offer help although I am not a medical personnel. (Laughter) I can limp with you to ensure that you process your papers. That is what I wish to see – (Mr Basalirwa rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, former commissioner. I will allow Hon. Basalirwa. Honourable colleagues, this afternoon in the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers from St Paul’s Primary School, Lyantonde. They are represented by Hon. Kyaka Pauline and Hon. Enos Asiimwe. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Can you stand up and wave at us? Thank you.We also have a delegation of staff of the National Assembly of Kenya led by their team leader, Mr Mohammed Jimale. They are here on an exchange study programme with the Parliament of Uganda. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House.  Please join me in welcoming them.  (Applause ) You are welcome. Thank you.2.28MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, sensitivity concerning sickness and health is very difficult to handle, especially when you are following formal procedures and more so when you are dealing with a colleague who is in the hospital almost dying. Mr Speaker, I said here and I am at the risk of repeating myself - When the President flew his daughter in a presidential jet to Spain for antenatal care, he said he did not trust Mulago National Referral Hospital because they were about to amputate the limb of a Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces’ soldier. Therefore, he created doubt about our health care provision –(Interruption)I can see colleagues - and you are victims. I am raising a matter that is going to affect you, but you are jeering. The guidance I seek from you, Mr Speaker, is, if the Head of State has all this luxury - I saw colleagues falling on each other to shake hands - He travelled there with a presidential convoy, including a toilet. If we had all that luxury that is not subjected to any procedure – We have someone dying in hospital and it puts you, our leaders and supervisors, in a very difficult situation. Mr Speaker, we follow the same media that you follow. You are now being attacked for not caring about one of your MPs. Therefore, I would like to plead that the same channel that allows the President to fly his daughters for antenatal care - which can be given by anyone, even someone who graduated yesterday - be followed to save life. Once that life has been saved, my colleagues who have been clapping can then celebrate and go and comfortably shake hands with the bazzukulu, if you have finished with the sons. Thank you. (Laughter)   THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, if you want to benefit from the luxury, you can move a motion here so we also buy for you a toilet. (Laughter)  Otherwise, it seems you want a mobile toilet. Move a motion, as the Whip COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR9931THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023of the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC), and we will subject it to debate to see if we can buy it for you so you can enjoy the luxury. Otherwise, you seem to know more about what people are benefiting than I. Please move that motion so we can buy it for you. Honourable members, how can I rule that we should start giving the luxury you are talking about? On this matter, what I read is what was written and must be followed. It is not subject to debate. It is not my opinion so it is closed.2.32THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga):  Thank you for your kind indulgence, Mr Speaker. For the record, what the Speaker has read is the procedure. I am in close contact with Hon. Ssegirinya; I spoke to him this morning. Indeed, he is in a very bad state. He even acknowledges the fact that he did not communicate properly, but he needs help. We are working backwards to ensure that help is accorded. I can confirm that he is in hospital and therefore, help should be extended. I am in contact with the Clerk’s office to ensure that we work backwards to see how much can be done to support him. Mr Speaker, this challenge brings into perspective a complaint that I have heard from a number of Members. I am a member of the Parliamentary Commission and we need to revise our insurance scheme. It is not very helpful to many Members and they are complaining. I think some of the insurance companies are cheating honourable members. Some of them are supplying “air”, thereby limiting Members to Panadol.  (Applause ) We need to revise it. Probably, the first line of contact for the Member should have been his insurance company which seems not to be available for help. Therefore, I seek your indulgence to cause the Commission to review our insurance and see how much more – The Uganda Medical Board and its attendant bureaucracy should be the last resort. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Leader of the Opposition (LOP). The Office of the Speaker and my office have already received that. In fact, the Speaker has already instructed the Clerk to study this matter and prepare a Commission paper which is going to be handled in the next meeting of the Parliamentary Commission. We are just waiting for that paper to look into it. Otherwise, we are paying heavy premiums to insurance companies yet the same companies are moving around and asking Members to go for medical insurance. You are failing to handle a small group so how will you manage the whole nation?Honourable members, we are going to handle this matter. The Clerk briefed me this afternoon and assured me that the moment we get clearance, we have enough funds and capacity to help our honourable colleague. It is only that for the Clerk to sign the paperwork, the right procedure must be followed because he is accountable, as a Government official. Hon. Nambeshe, you had a reaction .2.36MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join you in conveying my congratulatory message to the gold medal winner; Joshua Cheptegei, for the sterling performance. Mr Speaker, the basic glowing tribute that this House would pay, particularly the Government, to Cheptegei for his starring performance would be to fast-track the completion of the National High Altitude Training Centre in Teryet, Kapchorwa. Three months ago, the Minister of State for Education and Sports, my good friend, Hon. Ogwang, was very bitter with the contractors because of delays but worst of all, defects in the construction. This construction project was supposed to be handed over -  You know it commenced way back in 2012 and was supposed to be handed over in 2020. Up to now, they are dragging their feet. By the way, out of the Shs 27 billion 9932THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023- Actually, I am reliably informed that Shs 26 billion has been utilised. However, there seems to be no value for the works that are on the ground. Therefore, my prayer, Mr Speaker, is that the best praises or aggrandisements that we can accord to this champion is having this wonderful training centre finished in good time. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable Minister of Education and Sports, would you want to comment on the issue? 2.38THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our son, Cheptegei, has done us proud. The whole world is singing, “Uganda, Cheptegei, Uganda, Cheptegei”. We must thank God for the gift of Cheptegei to this country. I can confidently share with you that this high-altitude training centre is almost complete. Almost 98 per cent of the work has been done so far and soon, we shall be inviting you and Members of Parliament to come and see the beautiful work that is going on in that place. I submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, expedite the process. Honourable members, I hope you are not reopening a matter which I closed. I had allowed Hon. Kakembo. I communicated on two issues, one is closed and the other one, which is not closed, is the one of Cheptegei. 2.39MR MICHEAL KAKEMBO (NUP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to react to your communication concerning  the achievement of Joshua Cheptegei. The minister was very happy with what we achieved as a country. I want to inform the House that it begins from far; 2024 is not very far. We have the Paris Olympics in 2024 and the qualifiers for the Olympics are on the 9th of next month. Most of the athletes, including the boxers whom I have picked interest in, have not received any funds. As we speak, they have not entered their residential training in Lugogo to prepare for the Olympics. I want to bring this to the attention of this House and the minister; when are we sending funds to prepare our athletes, the boxers and other categories, so that they can compete favourably in the Olympics? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable minister - Colleagues, I might be forced to put a ban on  procedure so that I first handle the business of the House instead of shortcuts via procedure.DR MUYINGO:  Mr Speaker, this was budgeted for. We have some money and I think when our boys come back, training will start.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Hon. Ssewungu. 2.41MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports where the honourable minister comes to appear but we are not getting proper information. The Chief Opposition Whip and the minister are not giving us the same position. We have visited this National High Altitude Training Centre and know what is there. The minister is saying that it is almost completed but these young men, including Cheptegei, have been training from Kenya all along. If it were favourable, they would not be going to train from Kenya to win us the medals we are getting. Mr Speaker, I would pray, with your guidance, that you direct the Committee on Education and Sports to give us a proper position on what is happening. We already know that Uganda cannot host football games here under the Federation of Uganda Football Association because Namboole Stadium is not functioning although they say they are working on it. [Mr Nambeshe] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR9933THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023Namboole Stadium even has a hotel but we do not know where the assets were taken. The minister might be here trying to please us for the sake of the cameras but the fact remains that the National High Altitude Training Centre is not yet favourable, considering the percentage that the Chief Whip has stated. Therefore, it is within your powers to find out who is telling the truth between the minister and our Chief Opposition Whip. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What if I find that both of them are lying? (Laughter)MR SSEWUNGU:  It is still at your discretion, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, honourable colleagues. I think what is very important - The problem of being caught off guard from here and you are expected to give an answer which is based on percentages and facts sometimes becomes difficult.Honourable minister, do you think Thursday would be good for you to give us an update on these stadiums and the National High Altitude Training Centre? DR MUYINGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thursday will be okay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think, colleagues, it would be better that he goes and verifies. Even the Opposition Chief Whip said, “I have it from reliable sources,” but he has not shared the reliable sources. Therefore, we do not know how reliable they are. Yes, Hon. Ssewanyana.2.43MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (NUP, Makindye Division West, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your commitment towards helping Hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya. Going to the point in your communication about our very good performance by our own, Mr Cheptegei in Budapest, indeed it is great for Ugandans. However, we should, as a country, look at how to improve our performance; not the individual Cheptegei but as a country so as to win more medals at the World Athletics Championships. In the past two events, Uganda managed to collect more than two medals. We thought that by this time, we would be able to have the capacity of producing better performers by getting more medals like Kenya, which gets more than 10 medals at the World Athletes Championships and other African countries. Therefore, I would like to ask the minister to come out with a comprehensive report on our performance and why it has gone down because even participation is going down. We took more than 25 athletes to Oregon, America. Today, we do not have more than five athletes participating. We are not even sure that we will get another medal from this event. Another point, which we will not speak about because we have a minister here, is about something in sports. We have heard the national netball coach, all over the media, crying for his payment. We expected to win the Netball World Cup but because of such demotivation within the technical team of the netball team, we came fifth in the World but the first in Africa. Our biggest aim is to bring the World Cup to Uganda.I know the minister has all those answers because they are the people governing the National Council of Sports and all other sports managing entities. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Silwany, do you want to add something? I will conclude on Cheptegei with the MP. 2.46MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today, I want to raise this to the minister. When you look at all areas of sports in Uganda like athletics and football, it is something that is nurtured. 9934THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023However, honourable minister, every district in Uganda receives only Shs 3 million for sports. Is there a deliberate target by the Government - primary schools are going for post-primary football competitions, but they are completely stuck? The same applies to vocational institutions. Various technical institutions and secondary schools are completely stuck. How are we going to get future Cheptegeis if we are not nurturing young blood? It begins from nurturing the young people. Once the Government does not deliberately invest in sports, we, as Parliament, must take a decision and then the Government will become positive in investing in sports. We should put a fair amount of money aside for sports and nurturing the young generation so that we can get future Cheptegeis. Even if we come here and say that the training centre is almost complete when we are not handling this at secondary and primary levels, we will not achieve anything. The question I would like to ask the minister is, what is his suggestion on this? We should solve this once and for all because we have been talking about sports. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we do not deal with suggestions here; we deal with solutions and decisions.MR SILWANY: Thank you for your guidance. Can I get a concrete solution from the honourable minister?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The honourable minister will answer all these on Thursday. All of them will be captured in the statement, especially what Hon. Ssewanyana has raised. We have to ensure that we capture it in detail and then I will allow a debate.  2.49MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the congratulatory message about the performance of Cheptegei. I would also like to thank the Members who have commented and given us suggestions.I want to speak as an MP from Sebei; we were equally very happy when he made it. This morning, I talked to him and he has again promised that in the next championship, we may also have another medal. (Applause)However, I would like to talk about two things; the medals we are getting now are actually through these people’s sweat. We, as the Government, have not yet done enough. Otherwise, we would be having many more medals. As we speak, Kiplimo who has been performing very well is not doing well; he has a dislocation. He does not have a road that connects to his home, there is no power and no water in his home. Most of these athletes you see are from the upper belt in Sebei. However, the upper belt has no roads at all.I want to convey the requests of these athletes, because we interact with them every day, that they be given a road which will run along the upper belt between Mt Elgon so that they can use it to jog and improve their performance. Finally, on the matter of –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have allowed you to continue speaking; conclude. MR CHEMONGES: On the issue of Teryet – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a maiden speech and on maiden speeches, I do not allow a point of order. Honourable member, conclude.MR CHEMONGES: On the issue of Teryet, I am happy that all of you have been following. About Shs 26 billion was allocated for phase 1 but as we speak, about Shs 24 billion has been spent. The truth is, we may not know the cost of putting that runway. However, by the look of things, there is no value for money completely, even when you look at the hostels that have been built. We can all go there one day. The hostels that have been put up have small [Mr Silwany] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR9935THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023bathrooms and rooms; they are like a primary school. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I request the Whips to call all the MPs in the lobby to come in and we establish quorum? I see some Members are getting out when I need you in. Clerk, please help me establish quorum. I want to know how many Members we have online and physically. Honourable members, if you remember, we agreed last week that the Minister of Finance lays on the Table information relating to all funds released for the Parish Development Model so that we upload it on the system and you check whether your area has received the funds. Honourable minister, are you ready?LAYING OF PAPERS2.53THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a list of Parish Development Model SACCO Capitalisation for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to lay. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The document looks very heavy but if we can get a soft copy so that we upload it on our Alfresco  system, that would be good. For now, put it in the library for access by all Members of Parliament so that we are able to know. MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, indeed this is a heavy document of 423 pages, capturing information of 10,585 SACCOs. We have a soft copy and we have sent it through the system so that it can be downloaded. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, ensure that Members receive a copy of that document. Colleagues, we have been getting mixed signals. Some Members say, “No, we have received only Shs 20 million in the financial year”. Others say, “We have received only Shs 100 million”. The finance ministry says, “We sent all the money”. So, we want you to verify for your areas. Clerk, do you have my information? I have matters of national importance, which we are also going to handle but I want to first dispense of this Bill, once I establish that we have quorum. Today is free sitting so colleagues, feel free.MR OFWONO: (Text expunged.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, physically, we have 161 Members and on Zoom, we have 41 Members. I see the LoP has also entered, meaning we have 202 Members. We therefore meet the quorum required.BILLSTHIRD READINGTHE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  (Member rose_) Please, I am going to guide. I know the issues that you want to raise. Honourable minister?2.57THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker, in keeping with Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to move that the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Bill, 2023 be read for the third time and do pass.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There were some of you who had clauses, which you wanted to recommit and I was informed. Let me start with the Chairperson, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.2.59THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Wilson  Kajwengye):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to move, under Rule 138, for recommittal of clauses 18, 19, 52 and 69 of the Bill.9936THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is the motion seconded? (Members rose) Honourable colleagues, let me guide you on this. You all know very well that we ask, whether it is seconded or not, before you even justify. How do you justify something which is not yet seconded? Is the motion seconded? (Members rose) It is seconded by Hon. Komakech, Hon. Kakembo, Hon. Silwany, Hon. Opolot and the Member for Namisindwa.Honourable chairperson, could you explain the clauses that you want to be recommitted?MR KAJWENGYE:  Mr Speaker, clause 18 is on penalty and the recommittal is for the purpose of making the text clearer, aligning the wording and making the criminal offences align with the relevant laws. Where we had amended, we are just -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let me guide on how we are going to handle this. Once we have clauses for recommittal, we have to go back to Committee Stage. It is at the Committee Stage when the justification will be put and then we put a question on each and every clause and see if Members agree or not. So, if there is any other Member who has any point for recommittal - because beyond here, we shall go to Committee Stage.3.01 DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I proceed under Rule 138 to move a motion to recommit the Fourth Schedule of the Bill and consequently, clauses 2 and 90. I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Clause 2, clause 90 and the Fourth Schedule? Is the motion seconded? (Members rose) It is seconded by Hon. Namugga, the Member for Kalangala, Member for Wakiso, LoP, Member for Nansana and Dr Bwanika.Hon. Oguzu Lee?3.02MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha):  Mr Speaker, the Fourth Schedule, which I had wanted to propose for recommittal, has been covered. There was no regulatory impact assessment done for this particular rule and we think it is important to recommit it.3.03MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Under the same rule, I move that we recommit clause 8.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? (Members rose)  It is seconded by Hon. Namugga, Member for Wakiso, Member for Kalangala, Member for Mukono and Hon. Ssasaga.Honourable colleagues, I put the question for  recommittal of clauses 2, 8, 18, 19, 52, 69, 90 and the Fourth Schedule. Hon. Jonathan?3.03MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I would like to be convinced by the Members who are moving for recommittal. They should give strong justifications for each of the clauses that they are proposing so that when we give them the permission to recommit, we are actually sure that there is a compellable reason. Therefore, I would like to persuade you to give each one of them a chance to state their reasons so that we vote on issues that we understand.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I was avoiding a repetition because you will give the same justifications at Committee Stage. Also, a recommittal does not mean that the proposed change on a clause has been accepted or not. When we reach the Committee Stage, I believe we will task them to justify. The committee chairperson and the minister will also come up and give their views and we shall have a debate, clause by clause. 9937THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023If I open up at this stage, we shall be doing double work. So, Hon. Jonathan Odur, I do not know whether you can agree with me on that. However, we will ensure that we listen to the movers for the recommittal of each clause and ensure that they convince us. If they do not, Members will reject it. Hon. Ssekikubo?MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A Bill is composed of clauses, which must be read together so that a common purpose is formed from those sponsoring the Bill, and this House, which has debated the same. However, listening here, more than 12 clauses are being proposed to be recommitted, including a schedule, plus a host of others that Members have.Bearing in mind that this Bill has gone through a chequered history, and indeed, it had been referred for harmonisation, and we are now getting back to the same point where we left off - because once you pick out the 12 clauses, they must be having other ramifications to the entire Bill this House passed without Members being let to know what was passed at that point in time.Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, to refer this Bill back to the committee so that all those that have issues can raise them? Short of that, we are having a committee sitting and at the same time, the Committee of the Whole House. That shows that there must have been failure to harmonise in the first place, and for what reasons, I do not understand. You are now making the Speaker to try to cure the Bill that is incurable because Members are saying that once you raise more than 12 clauses, it means there is a fundamental problem with the Bill.  Mr Speaker, may I, therefore, propose that it would be better to have another opportunity before the committee since the Bill is now falling out of hands of this very House that determined it in the first place.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, this is a Bill of 94 clauses and five schedules. Members are proposing to recommit seven clauses and one schedule out of the 94 clauses.Secondly, we were here two days with numbers that were way beyond the required column, and we handled this Bill; gave it a lot of time. I want to know if there is any Member here who will say, “I was never given a fair chance of putting up my argument.”Thirdly, Rule 138 of the Rules of Procedure foresaw this. I might have put up my arguments at Committee Stage but colleagues did not agree with my submission. Then I went and got more information that I can share with these colleagues. So, you are given time to come and recommit a clause, which has already been processed because you can only have recommitted a clause that has been processed by the Committee of the Whole House. You cannot go outside the report of the Committee of the Whole House. So, the Bill is still in our hands and nothing has gone out. I only urge you colleagues to always be here from the beginning to the end and to be committed here. I will not be happy for us to sit here for two days doing work, and then someone comes and says, “We did not harmonise.” If only you knew what we did during the time we spent here.Also, some of the clauses are consequential amendments, which the committee combed. Before we even allow you for recommital, we had a very long debate - why are you disturbing us. Justify why we should recommit this clause. In the interest of time; instead of going back and forth, I felt I could put the question and then, we go to Committee Stage and listen to Members. I would love everyone to be listened to.Honourable colleagues, I put the question that clauses 2, 8, 18, 19, 52, 69, 90 and the Fourth Schedule be recommitted. (Question put and agreed to.)9938THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023Clause 2 THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Batuwa?3.12DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City):  The amendment I want to cause in clause 2 is a consequence of the amendment of Fourth Schedule; unless I justify the Fourth Schedule, it will not make sense because its effect would be seen in two clauses: 2 and 90. Therefore, I beg that the amendment that should be caused in clause 2, the interpretation clause, is as a result of the amendment in the Fourth Schedule. It can only make sense if we have handled the Fourth Schedule. During that time, we shall handle clause 2 and clause 90.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Let us stand over clause 2.Clause 8THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Aisha.MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Clause 8 is about the removal of a name from a register and it states: “Where a medical practitioner, dentist or veterinary surgeon is convicted of an offence, under this Act, he or she shall, notwithstanding any other law, be liable to have his or her name removed from the register of practitioners licenced or registered to practise within Uganda, as the medical practitioner dentist or veterinary surgeon as the case maybe .”Mr Chairperson, the amendment I seek is to add in police and army officers. This clause is premised on the fact that medical and veterinary practitioners are singled out for further punishment because of the nature of their jobs that brings them into contact with these prohibited drugs and substances. I would like to say that in the same way, police and army officers are also conditioned to come into contact with these substances. I think they should be added. During a committee meeting last time, I was convinced to put it aside, on grounds that these professions that had been singled out were subject to this particular clause. They are the concerned people. With all standards, police officers throughout this Act are the enforcers; they come in touch with substances and so, they are concerned. The other argument was that they are not professionals. Mr Chairperson, there is a code of conduct for police officers and there is a UPDF code of conduct, which conditions them to be professionals. Members should know that once these people are convicted under this Act, it means they are likely to be reckless to the community since they hold very dangerous guns. Therefore, I would like to move colleagues to accept adding police officers and army officers. I propose it reads, “Where a medical practitioner, dentist, veterinary surgeon, police officer, or army officer is convicted of an offence under this Act, he or she shall notwithstanding any other written law, be liable to have his or her name removed from the register of practitioners licensed or registered to practise within Uganda as a medical practitioner, a dentist, a veterinary surgeon, a police officer, or an army officer, as the case may be.” I beg to submit and appeal to colleagues to support me. Thank you. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you, Hon. Aisha. Hon. Niwagaba. MR NIWAGABA:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I believe this particular motion for recommittal is misconceived. Police officers and army men are not professionals; 9939THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023they are not registered as professionals. Once they are convicted of offences, they can only be liable to dismissal from the respective forces but not from the register because they are not registered as professionals. Therefore, I move that this recommendation be rejected.MR MPUUGA:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Without losing the gist of the motion to recommit, the honourable member sought to bring into contact this legislation the army and police because they will regularly be in contact with this. Instead of dismissing the attempt, wouldn’t it be proper to encourage the Member to propose an additional subclause (8) to read, “Where the person is an army or police officer…” - The army and the police have regulations. In any case, this law is both penal and regulatory in nature. Are we leaving it open that contact with these particular substances has no recourse to bring them into line? We could utilise her attempt for recommittal to introduce a subclause that probably would bring these service men and women into line.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honour -able members, hon. Jonathan usually tells me certain things that I refuse and then regret later.We had this argument. The police officers are clearly covered under clauses 18 and 19 of the Bill. The army officers do not have any role under this Bill. There are penalties for police officers because they have a role provided for in the Act. I put the question that clause 8, be amended as proposed by Hon. Aisha. (Question put and negatived.)Clause 18MR OPIO:  Mr Chairperson, clause 18 is on penalty for malicious entry, seizure and arrest. The House amended clause 18 by substituting the word “vexatious”, wherever it appears, with the words “malicious and or without reasonable cause”. I wish to make further amendments to clause 18 as follows: Clause 18 is amended in subclause (1) by inserting immediately after the words “police officer” the phrase, “Or any person authorised by the Inspector General of Police for purposes of this Act”. The justification is:1. Under clauses 80 and 85 of the Bill, the Inspector General of Police (IGP) is empowered to authorise other persons other than police officers to search, seize and detain or arrest, detain a person, package or conveyance suspected to possess or to be used for conveying of narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances;2.  The amendment is to broaden the penal provision to also apply to persons authorised by the IGP, under clauses 80 and 85 of this Bill. In other words, we have other persons other than the police officers authorised to search and arrest. We are saying that the penalties should apply to them. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Honourable minister? GEN. MUHOOZI:  Mr Chairperson, I concede. It is an improvement geared at ensuring uniformity of the various clauses of the subject. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Oguzu, would you like to comment on that? MR OGUZU:  I would like the mover to clarify why I should be held responsible if I have been authorised. If I am delegated to do something, why should I become responsible for the actions of the person who has delegated me? 9940THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Attorney General, would you like to guide? MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Look at an example of an officer of the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). When vessels are coming in for purposes of customs, the police may say “you may seize and arrest any person who is bringing in narcotic drugs”. When that URA officer arrests someone maliciously, that person will get the same punishment as if he were an officer. The justification is that you have been placed in the position that the officer of the police would have been conducting that duty. That is an example of a person who may be in that position. Thank you. MR OGUZU:  Attorney-General, my understanding is that if I am sent to arrest someone, the charge sheet should be clear or the reasons for arrest should already be defined that I am going to arrest so and so for reasons A, B,C. So, how does it become malicious on my side when I am instructed to do it? THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Basalirwa also had a submission. Attorney-General, you will answer once. Hon. Basalirwa, do you have an addition to this? Attorney-General?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. The better option is to read the entire provision because it puts it in a better perspective. It reads, “A police officer or any other person authorised by the Inspector General of Police for purposes of this Act, who without reasonable grounds or suspicion, enters or searches or causes to be entered or searched in a building, conveyance or place, commits an offence.” Therefore, if the customs officer is given a duty under this Act to be one of those officers to enforce the provisions of this Act, and he enters your premises without having reasonable grounds for doing so, he commits an offence. It is not that he has been instructed to go and arrest. He is given instructions to perform the functions under this Act for seizure and arrest lawfully. Therefore, if he does it unlawfully, he is personally liable. He cannot say I was instructed.If the IGP instructs him to arrest you for no reason, then that officer should not do it.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Ssekikubo? Honourable colleagues, I have been informed that we have a problem with our AC system but they are working on it. MR SSEKIKUBO:  Mr Chairperson, when I listened in to the proposed amendment, it is to the effect that any other officer or person authorised by the IGP. And I would like to go back to the original provision. The original provision was well contextualised; a police officer. But, Mr Chairperson, my fear - and I hope of Members - is that once you allow persons to go for search; that is a technical duty that must be given to a person who is known for  search because the Attorney-General is very careful and he has alluded to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) officers. However, there could be circumstances where you are not applying the URA officers but any other person, any other outfit could be ordered to go and search - and they do it sometimes maliciously; living in Uganda you can understand. Sometimes, it is done maliciously, to search, and sometimes because they are not professionals, they are not police officers; they can do a lot to implicate a person being searched. So, that is why I would urge the chairperson, why don’t we leave it with the Police? Because at the same time, once you say you are putting somebody authorised by the IGP and somehow you hold him liable, it means that everything is not well-knit. Those officers who are going out to search should be very professional, they should be conducting the search diligently, and searches are usually done procedurally. You cannot just wake up to go and search.9941THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honour -able colleagues, I want us to move.MR SSEKIKUBO:  I, therefore, propose for the chairperson and the mover to drop that amendment, Mr Chairperson.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But Hon. Ssekikubo, these people are provided for under clauses 85 and 80. Honourable colleagues, I want to put it here - we sat and processed the Bill, here. We are not going to start from clause 1 until the end that we are repeating the whole Bill. Please, and do not make me make a roll call for that day - who was here and who was not here. We did work once, you were not here and you will not make us repeat it.I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.) Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Procedure, Hon. Ssemujju.MR SSEMUJJU:  Mr Chairperson, a while ago, you instructed whips to invite all the MPs. Now, your ruling is that those who were not here should not disturb. The procedural issue I am raising is whether we should now ask those you have called to go away because they were not here last time. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  No. Honourbale, if you got my message very well, we sat down here, we had quorum, we discussed the Bill, and we reached this stage. Now, if Members are going to say, “no” to some clauses, they show you, “but this is covered in this clause” - No, we shall also handle it when we reach because you were not here when we were handling that. We will not finish, even if I gave you a whole year. We will not finish. The team that will come tomorrow will also demand the same. So, I request colleagues - let us be fair, we did work. I remember when we were here, colleagues said; “but Mr Speaker, you have taken so much time on this Bill.” I said honourable colleagues, I want to give you enough time to handle the Bill. We spent nearly 10 hours in total on this Bill. So, let us appreciate the work we have done and do not open up to - But, for clarification, I am sorry if that was- if those that came today wanted a maiden chance on this Bill. Hon. Ssekikubo is now my best ally on this so that we finish. Let us move.Clause 19THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Chairper -son and if a clause affects other clauses, please, refer to them so that Members –MR SAMUEL OPIO : Clause 19 is related to clause 18; penalty against a police officer. We propose to amend clause 19 as follows:0. In the head note, by inserting immediately after the words, “police officer”, the words “or authorised persons by the Inspect General of Police”, and thereafter, wherever the words appear in the clause.a. In paragraph (a), by deleting the words, “of his or her office”. Justificationa) It is a consequential amendment arising from amending clause 18.b)  Clause 19 is a penal provision against a police officer who does not perform a duty imposed on him or her or gives custody to a person charged with an offence under the Act. Therefore, since duties similar to those imposed on a police officer under the Act are also imposed on authorised persons, under clauses 80 and 50, it is prudent that they are also penalised for the non-compliance.9942THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able minister -GEN. MUHOOZI:  The re-committal is accepted for uniformity purposes.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Otimgiw, on a consequential clause.MR OTIMGIW:  Absolutely, Mr Chairperson. On clause 18, when we looked at the issue of malicious, we increased the penalty to 10 years. Now on clause 19, which is almost related to some element of maliciousness, the penalty is only two years. I was thinking that we adjust the penalty from two years and we move it at least to a minimum of five years because it is almost the same. If malicious at 18 is 10 years and this is almost the same, perverting justice, thank you.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We can first - I will allow you Hon. Isaac, do not mind. MR ODUR:  Mr Chairperson, I would like to get clarification from the mover. Under this Act, we have given responsibilities and duties to several people including ministers, for example. Is it a proposal from the movers that if a minister, for example, charged with the responsibility of licensing does not license, then he can be charged a penalty, under this provision? Because once you put any other person under this Act, you are talking about the members of the committees - you remember. We have formed some committees somewhere, all of them. Is it the interest that -THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  But honourable, I thought this was on handling of narcotics.MR ODUR:  If you read it the way it is - I just want to be sure. If that is okay, I would be happy to get ministers arraigned in court for me. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Attorney-GeneralMR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA:  No. Ministers should not be - these are “the persons authorised by the IGP” - Maybe, just to clarify, the provisions that I have if I understand it is that a person or police officer or any other person authorised by the IGP for purposes of this Act; that is the amendment, it is similar to the first one or the second one.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  So, if it is a consequential amendment, I put the question that clause 19 - on the penalty - Attorney-General what do you say about the penalty?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Mr Chairperson, the issue of the penalty is always discretion of the House at this time to prescribe. However, in section 18, you are intruding mainly in the space of another person. Section 18 is not the same as 19. In 18, the police officer is infringing on another person’s rights; you enter someone’s home, you arrest them, that is entering the other person’s space. This one is a personal offence; you fail to perform your duty. So, the penalty may not be the same, but it is up to the House. I would propose that the offence be left as it is because it is more of a failure –(Interjection)-   pardon me, the clear text on the 19.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Can I- because it was moved by Hon. Opio - can you come back on the Floor and read the proposed amendment? I do not want the Attorney-General to clarify it for you when you are the one who moved. No, no, the clear amendment, Hon. Jonathan Odur wants to get the very clear amendment you read, which you said was consequential.MR OPIO: The amendment is that we are inserting immediately after the words “police officer”, the words “or authorised persons by the Inspector-General of Police.” The justification I gave is related to clause 80 and 85, which is very specific on the powers of 9943THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023search, seizure, arrest and detention. It does not go outside that particular scope. MR ODUR:  Mr Chairperson, that is exactly why I wanted us to read it entirely. Here it says, “A police officer on whom any duty is imposed under this Act.” If you introduce any other person authorised by the IGP, it is still subject to the duty imposed under this Act unless you revise it. By interpretation, you mean that any other person but if the Attorney-General clears, I have no problem. MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Hon. Odur, I think you are correct. “A police officer or any other person authorised by the IGP on whom any duty is imposed under this Act.” The person they are talking about here must have the authority of the IGP and they will fall under this. It is perfectly fine, in my view. MR OTIMGIW: Mr Chairperson, I am afraid I will beg to stand by my earlier amendment. If we read section 19(b), it carries a much bigger offense. It states, “If a person gives custody to a drug addict or any other person who is charged with an offense under this Act.” This is actually bigger. I would like to move a motion to amend the penalty under section 19 to five years.GEN. MUHOOZI:  I thought the Attorney-General had made a clear distinction that it is not a do or die matter. We concede on that.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. We have captured the proposal from Dr Opio and hon. Isaac Otimgiw. I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.) Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.Clause 52 DR OPIO:  Clause 52 is on interpretation of Part IV . It is amended on the definition of the word, “centre” by inserting immediately before the word, “rehabilitation” the words, “treatment and.” That means it will read, “Treatment and rehabilitation centre.”The justification is that this is a consequential amendment to clause 53, which was already passed by the House, which provides for the objects of the centres as including treatment of persons with substance use disorder. GEN. MUHOOZI:  It is a consequential amendment and so, it is allowed.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 52 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 52, as amended, agreed to.Clause 69DR OPIO:  Mr Chairperson, the House amended clause 69. Among other subclauses, the House amended subclause 2(c). However, there was realisation that paragraph (c) contravenes the constitutional mandate of Parliament to make laws. It gives powers of the committee to update and adopt laws and regulations on narcotic and psychotropic substances.I, therefore, propose a further amendment by substituting paragraph (c) with the following:“Advise the minister on legislative measures in respect of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.”The justification is that Article 79 of the Constitution of Uganda charged the Parliament of Uganda with the power to make laws. It will therefore, contradict the powers given to Parliament for the National Coordination Committee for Control of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances to have the power to update laws and regulations; to control narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances unless the authority is expressly given by Parliament under Article 79(2) of the Constitution. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honour -able colleagues, on that one, we agreed that it will come as a recommittal because we had al -ready moved. That is why he brought it. 9944THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023In the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Busulwa Memorial Secondary School, from Kiboga District.  They are represented by Dr Keefa Kiwanuka and Hon. Kaaya Christine. They have come to observe proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)Also, we have pupils and teachers of Bishop East Nursery and Primary School from Mukono Municipality represented by Hon. Betty Nambooze and Hon. Nabukeera Hanifa. They have come to observe proceedings of the House. If they are still around, please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) It has gone on record that we have welcomed them. I am sorry, I always need to be informed early so that we do that.MR SSEMUJJU:  Mr Chairperson, I think we run into trouble by making legislation too detailed. That committee does not have to be prompted to advise that legislative measures must be taken. I do not think it is necessary to put it in a law that one of your roles is to study and then, advise the minister on the legislative roles. My proposal is to delete it completely. That is their duty. We are appointing professional adults. They should do their job.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honour -able minister, what do you say about that?GEN. MUHOOZI:  Hon. Ssemujju is adding more sense to the subject. I would perfectly agree that usurping the role of Parliament is out of the question. He is also saying that advice should not be provided for in the text of the Bill and I tend to agree with him. Therefore, we can expunge subclause (c).DR OPIO:  I concede.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON : Thank you. I put the question that clause 69 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 69, as amended, agreed to.Clause 90DR BATUWA:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Clause 90 will be a consequence of amendment in the Fourth Schedule. I beg that we move it after that.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. He says that it will be a consequential amendment if we take the proposed motion of deleting the Fourth Schedule. He is requesting that we first handle the schedule and then, come back to clause 90. Fourth ScheduleDR BATUWA:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I rise to convince this House that we amend the Fourth Schedule, which has a list of the prohibited plants. I was in this House while handling that matter and presented a suggestion. I was given a response to which I went and did further inquiry. So, I come to you now with more information and I feel you should give me a chance to debate this matter conclusively.  (Text expunged.)DR BATUWA:  Mr Speaker, I would like to take your attention to March earlier this year, when we were legislating the Local Content Bill. It was brought back to us by the President and the interest was that we should legislate, having East Africa in mind. We concluded that Bill by prioritising the procurement of goods from East Africa. It is that consistency, which I want to discuss in this law. The product we call “ khat”, “mairungi” or “Catha edulis ” is recreational in nature amongst our neighbours. People in Somalia, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Djibouti and Kenya use it. These people live with us as the business community. They live with us as refugees. They live with us as long-distance truck drivers and they say that when they consume this product, it keeps them awake. [The Deputy Chairperson]9945THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023The debate on these recreational products, namely; tobacco, alcohol and this one in particular, is a debate that can only be understood by the Members representing those people.There are jurisdictions that you go to and find that alcohol is prohibited. There are also jurisdictions, which have prohibited tobacco. We find homosexuality legal in certain jurisdictions – (Interjections)– but we find the same vice illegal in other jurisdictions.Uganda is a unique country. It is in Uganda that we have 529 -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, let us listen to our colleague. Clerk, please, mute our honourable colleagues on  Zoom . DR BATUWA: It is in Uganda where we have a Parliament of 529 Members, meaning that the country is over-represented. It is in that benefit that some of us who stay in our constituencies are able to recognise that our Somali brothers and sisters and those from the other East African locations use this product and understand it the same way we debate and argue for alcohol and tobacco. The way you see tobacco is the way these people see “ mairungi.” The way you see alcohol is the same way these people see this product. We are legislating for our own people –(Interjections)-  I pray – (Interruption)MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have a beer company called Nile Breweries Ltd and another one called Uganda Breweries Ltd, and they collect revenue. We also have companies, which process tobacco and collect revenue. The honourable colleague is insinuating that we also have a company for “ Mairungi”, which could be bringing in revenue. Is he in order to insinuate that much as we have Uganda Breweries Ltd, tobacco companies and so forth, they should be treated in the same spirit as the factories that deal in “ Mairungi”?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have teachers and students from various schools under Queen of Apostles, Katimba Catholic Parish, Ssembabule District. They are represented by Hon. Gorreth Namugga and Hon. Mary Begumisa. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)Honourable colleagues, the Member is going to conclude. Hon. Batuwa, when someone is holding the Floor, please, sit. These are simple rules that you should get accustomed to –(Laughter) – because they raised a point of order. It will be up to you, honourable colleagues, to judge. The decision will be for the House. I facilitate a Member to present his view here. After Hon. Batuwa, I expect another Member to object, saying: “In Netherlands and Canada, some products are allowed for recreation. So, should we also allow them here to accommodate the Canadians who visit Uganda - because they are also our brothers and sisters?”Everyone will present their case. I will allow those who are for “ mairungi”, Hemp and even poison – (Laughter)- to present their case, if it fits in here. I will also allow those for shisha  and everything else and then, I put the question. So, honourable member, I want you to be specific: what do you want the House to do?DR BATUWA: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this is the direction that I believe we should take. Tobacco has the Tobacco Control Act, 2015; alcohol has a regulating law but this particular recreational product does not have a control law. Thankfully, we are deliberating on a law that is related to that business. It is, therefore, at this moment that I seek your support to introduce another schedule through which we shall control this product, such that a Ugandan who has never tasted it, does not taste it. It is this schedule, which we shall call the “controlled plants”. The other ones 9946THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023are “prohibited plants”, but here, we want the “controlled plants”.The evidence is also in the report of the committee. If you go through it, a study has been done in Butabika Hospital. Butabika is our national referral mental hospital and there is no way we can dispute a study by Butabika Hospital. This study was looking at 7,000 admitted cases, of which 44 per cent were due to alcohol abuse – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Batuwa, do not attribute words to officers who are unable to come here. The Head of Butabika Hospital came and proposed a ban on khat before the committee. If you are using Butabika Hospital, let it be clear that the Head of Butabika came and proposed that we ban it.DR BATUWA: Mr Speaker, the Head of Butabika Hospital is a technical person. Here, we are people’s representatives. The Head of Butabika Hospital is also proposing to ban alcohol; that is the truth of the matter. Let us look at the study in the main report, which is indicating that 44 per cent of the 7,000 admitted patients, 44 per cent were mentally ill because of the excessive use of alcohol, 31 per cent were due to Cannabis or Marijuana; the one they smoke and only 2.1 per cent was due to stimulants like khat. So, we are coming up with a law that is against a big part of East Africans. In the interest of per cent, this is when we should rise to the call of being consistent – THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable member, can you propose your amendment? Just go straight to your proposal. DR BATUWA:  Thank you. Mr Chairman, our proposed amendment is to the Fourth Schedule, to delete Catha edulis , which is “ Mairungi” .Secondly, we also propose the insertion of the Fifth Schedule, which is going to house the controlled plants, and on that list, we should include Catha edulis . Let the minister control it to the extent she wishes, the age at which somebody starts taking it, and who plants it. Let her restrict how it is supplied. Let the minister control everything about it to the extent she deems necessary. However, East Africa should be represented in the way we legislate. If you concede to that proposal, the consequences – THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Honourable, that is enough – no, if you have any new schedule, you can propose it later. DR BATUWA: I just have one thing: this proposal is not going to make a lot of changes to the law that has already taken us a lot of time to build. The changes are only in two areas - in clause 2, which is the interpretation, to provide for a definition of controlled plants. Secondly, in clause 90 – THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honour -able member, please, take your seat. Yes, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Can we first hear from the At -torney-General? MS CECILIA OGWAL:  Mr Chairman, procedurally, before the Attorney-General comes in, I think the practice of Parliament or committees is that when a subject matter is discussed extensively, then it can be a subject of re-committal. However, in this particular case, was it extensively discussed in the committee? If it was not, I think this Parliament will be departing from the normal practice by reintroducing a matter, which was not a serious matter at the committee level, at the plenary level. So, procedurally, I disagree with the introduction of another schedule. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, what you are raising is clearly stipulated in rule 134 (4). Introducing a new schedule is contrary to rule 134 (4); you have your Rules of Procedure. So, the argument by Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is anchored on that rule. Let the Attorney-General first guide us whether up to now, it is not under control. Let him give us clarification. [Dr Batuwa]9947THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023MR KIRYOWA-KIWANUKA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. A prohibited substance is defined in this proposed Act as the substance set out in the Fourth Schedule. Like Hon. Dr Batuwa correctly stated, Catha edulis is listed as a second item of the prohibited substances. Clause 11 of this Bill provides that the minister responsible for health may issue a license to cultivate or gather a prohibited substance. This law has not prohibited the use of khat, but has regulated it by requiring anyone who wants to grow khat to get a license from the minister. That is what clause 11 says.Secondly, what Hon. Dr Batuwa said is actually very important; that two per cent of the people are in Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital for the use of khat-like stimuli. It will be very sad for us to come back here, a while later, and that number has increased to 10. In fact, what we should be legislating for is to get to zero. Your arguments, as you make them, are actually important. With that report that you have, maybe, we need to start considering how to discuss the issue of regulating the use of alcohol, if it indeed has 47 per cent of the people under it. We cannot stand, as a Parliament, and prescribe or allow even one Ugandan to be the subject of this. I beg to submit. (Applause)  THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Now, honourable colleagues, one of the colleagues pushing for khat came to me and said that we are losing a big market from Somalis. I said, “Are Somalis a good example for you to use that because they take khat, we should become like Somalia? Is it one of the best examples you can use?” Yes, Hon. Basalirwa.MR BASALIRWA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seek clarification from Hon. Dr Batuwa. This Bill is intended to cure some mischief. From your medical point of view, it would be better to advise us on the health implications of taking “Mairungi”  vis-à-vis  not taking it. I am saying this, this Bill - Mr Chairman, for your information, I am the one who moved the Private Member’s Bill, although you have not given me an opportunity to articulate it - was intended to cure a mischief. Part of that mischief relates to the negative effects or consequences of consuming and/or growing some of these substances that we are calling prohibited. So, you could help us contextualise the medical, health and all the other negative consequences, so that as we take a decision, we are conscious of that aspect. Leave out the economy and those other aspects and precisely contextualise it in relation to Butabika. That way, we will be moving together. Otherwise, when we have reports from Butabika - like the learned Attorney-General has talked about two per cent, even if it was 0.1 per cent - as long as there is that consequence, as an institution, we need to be concerned about it. Thank you, Mr Chairman.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Can we hear from Hon. Santa Alum, followed by Hon. Ndyomugyenyi?MS ALUM : Thank you, Mr Chairman – THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Ssemujju, you can submit in this House without only rising on points of procedure – (Laughter) – because I know the trick is to always box me in a corner. However, I can decide to either allow or refuse points of procedure. So, you can submit without going through points of procedure, and I will give you a chance.MS ALUM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to seek clarification from the Hon. Dr Timothy Batuwa, who also, as far as I can remember, happens to have attended the meeting that we had on mental health with the consultants from Butabika. The information they gave us was so worrying to the point that they requested this Parliament to come up with a law to help the young people in this country because of the adverse effects of some of these drugs; khat is one of them. The point of clarification that I seek from the doctor is whether it is okay for us to look at the livelihood of the people vis-a-vis  the health 9948THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023threats that are always associated with the risk of consuming these drugs. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Hon. Dr Batuwa, you will tell us whether you are not satisfied with the control provided for under clause 11. MR NDYOMUGYENYI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman –THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Then, after, I will pick the procedural matter from the Hon. Ssemujju. MR NDYOMUGYENYI:  The clarification I would like to seek from the good the Hon. Dr Batuwa is on Catha edulis . When you look at what he was explaining, that it helps the truck drivers not to sleep. We are getting very many accidents on roads due to the effects of these drugs. It is very important to understand that in Uganda, road safety has been a problem. Many accidents are happening and these could be attributed to the consumption of some of these products. Therefore, I would like the Member to articulate to us if his proposal has a positive impact on the truck drivers. Thank you.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I learnt something from the Hon. Dr Batuwa that whereas in the western world they say, drive for not more than eight or 10 hours, in Uganda, we say when you drive for eight hours, take “Mairungi”  and proceed on. (Laughter)MR SSEMUJJU:  Mr Chairperson, mine is a procedural issue on two fronts. One, you asked the Attorney-General his opinion on this proposal and he said it is provided. This is how I understood him. At that stage, it means there is no problem; Khat is not prohibited completely. The procedural issue I am raising is whether at that stage, we should not have asked the mover to see if what he is moving is not taken care of by the provision the Attorney-General cited such that we do not debate looking for a solution to a problem we already solved. The second procedural issue is: as far as I know, Somalia is not in trouble because of Khat.  It is because of the over stay in power by Siad Barre. (Laughter)  So, the problems that Somalia went through and is still going through are a result of leaders. You can read President Museveni’s book when he said African problems are leaders who overstay in power; only for him to say “remove term limits, remove age limits”, to do exactly what he had written as a problem. Thank you.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able colleagues, I allowed Hon. Ssemujju. I gave a blank cheque to Hon. Ssemujju but he always finds a way of bringing President Mu -seveni in any situation. He has his own argu -ments in that line. Hon. Ssemujju, on the first point you raised, yes, that is what I could have done at that time but I knew there were some sentiments because I know where we are coming from and why it is coming back. Otherwise, I would not have allowed the Hon. Dr Batuwa who was not here when we were passed this clause.MR ODUR: Mr Chairperson, I was a bit hesitant, at the beginning, to point out that we cannot proceed to discuss a schedule without discussing the substantive provision since a schedule is an attachment. Without that section of the law that you want, you cannot come to the schedule.The reason I have risen is to draw your attention to this Fourth Schedule. This schedule is anchored on sections (2) and clause 93 and the Hon. Dr Batuwa sought to move under clause 90 of this Act. When you look at clause 93, you notice that we already provided for the minister, on the approval of Parliament, to remove or even add any. This means if there are any compelling reasons at some point to add or remove this plant, it can be done with the approval of Parliament.My understanding, from his submission, is that he wants to introduce the word “control” [Ms Alum]9949THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023which we substantially debated under clause 11. Remember, I raised objections on the use of the word “prohibited” because my point at that time was that if we say “prohibited”, are we saying strictly “prohibited”? Otherwise, the intention of the law was that it should be regulated. This is why you gave ministers powers, under clause 11, to licence anyone to grow any of the four listed crops.Can the Hon. Dr Batuwa be clear to us on his definition of the word “control”? You want to introduce a schedule on control so that we can see whether the control, as we understood it and provided for under clauses 11 and 93, is different from the control that you are trying to table to the House.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Dr Batuwa, but please, two minutes strictly.DR BATUWA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Let me start with the last comment. The list of prohibited plants has five products. Of these five, I would not personally support giving the minister power to allow the other four to be consumed even if it is in a controlled way. This is cocaine; basically, plants from which cocaine can be gotten. The very plants are giving headache to governments in South America where drug trafficking is at the rise.  So, with that in mind, we would like to introduce this controlled schedule where Catha edulis  will be, such that the minister can exert her power and authority to control who cultivates it. If it is Butambala, let it stay in Butambala. Let us not find another area doing it again. Two, how is it supplied? And three, how is it consumed? Cigarettes, which is one of the recreational products that is controlled, the Ugandan law requires one to be 21 years of age. The Japanese law requires 20 years of age. It is that control that we really have to see in our laws. And, we can only provide for that if we come up with controlled planting under this schedule.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able member, we have a very simple question. How is it different from what is provided for under clauses 11 and 93?DR BATUWA: Thank you very much . On how it is provided for in the law - for the cultivation, it is okay, the minister has powers to decide who cultivates. But this law is not explicit on how consumption is. The people allowed to consume are those with – THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please switch on your microphone, honourable.DR BATUWA:  The law as is, is okay with cultivation but the law also as is, is not okay with other parameters that are very crucial especially, the one on supply and consumption. The law recommends consumption by way of prescription and it stipulates who writes that prescription. It even says it is the pharmacists’ supply. Now, we do not see how khat will be prescribed for those people to eat as a recreation product.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson, for this chance. I think the hon. Dr Batuwa is using many words to say what is clear. This Bill is called the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance (Control) Bill. Where we had issues earlier – and the Hon. Dr Batuwa alluded to it was to reach the schedule but the schedule does not speak to the title. The schedule says “prohibited plants”. For consistency -  once you prohibit, by extension, you cannot licence. Once you have prohibited it, you cannot have another person saying “I can licence what Parliament has prohibited”. So, the argument for consistency of the title and the title of the schedule is that it should be “Controlled Plants” to speak to the headnote of the Bill. That is the argument, Mr Chairperson.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Attorney-General.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Mr Chairperson, if it answers our colleague’s issue, we can change the words “prohibited plants” to “controlled plants” and amend 9950THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023the definition from “prohibited plants” to “controlled plants”. Like Hon. Jonathan Odur had suggested before, we thought that we had explained this adequately but we are happy to do that. Thank you.DR BATUWA:  Mr Chairperson, I agree. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Now, colleagues, as you heard much earlier, the schedule is a result of a clause, meaning we have to go back to clauses 11, 2 and 93, which would be a consequential amendment. So, should we amend the clause - please, colleagues, when we make progress; I want us to move. I always read the mood. So, colleagues, should we now say that if we amend the schedule, as proposed and we say “control” we would have consequential amendments to the other clauses, including clause 2, which we have to redefine now? Yes, Hon. Dr Bwanika.DR BWANIKA:  I want to seek clarification. We are using terminology that is understood internationally when we talk about narcotics. Is cocaine a controlled plant? This Parliament wants to believe that it can put cocaine under a schedule for controlled plants? The two are different; you are talking about Khat  whose abuse is low. That can be a controlled plant. Cocaine on the other hand, is a high risk; it must be in the prohibited category. That is a language that is understood internationally. How can the Parliament of Uganda say that they have come up with a law where cocaine is regarded as only as a controlled drug? THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able members, the country is watching us on this and it would want to understand us better, leaving no room. The way I understood clause 11, is that it was an exception to the prohibi -tion because, to every general rule, there is an exception. Now, the exception - really because we are trying to cater for Khat , we weakened the whole Bill. Even the Hon. Dr Batuwa was concerned, but all because we wanted to ac -commodate Khat.  Hon. Dr Batuwa, when you look at the exception under 11; it should be sat -isfactory because it is a clear exception. DR BATUWA: The exception under 11 is an exception to cultivation and that is it. If we are allowed to introduce controlled plants, then the minister can have the power to control the supply and consumption of this product. That is what we are asking for. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Attorney-General.DR BATUWA: Number two, the public health concern of this product, in lieu of other recreational products like alcohol and tobacco, with tobacco, you all know about lung cancer -THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able member, we know the problems we have. Do not bring the things we know are not a big problem to the community because you want to try to convince us to move away from a bigger problem. Please, we know the problem we are facing as a community. Let us focus on that. Yes, Leader of Opposition.MR MPUUGA: Mr Chairperson, I actually thought we had made good progress because where the debate had ended, before Dr Bwanika threw a spanner in the works, was actually where we had a very long meeting this morning with my team over that clause. And your interpretation of clause 11 is my interpretation too. Probably where we lost it, is where the Hon. Dr Batuwa wanted to introduce Schedule five to take care of the long title of the Bill, that there is some degree of consistency that we have control, and also take care of Dr Abed Bwanika’s worry on prohibition. The learned Attorney-General is aware, as well as our lawyers, that when there is a conflict in the interpretation of laws, we go back to the original intention of Parliament. And so, this debate must inform the intention of Parliament. What is our intention? To wholly prohibit or to give room for a modicum of control of a particular substance so that we do not lose the entire purpose of this legislation? [Mr Kiwanuka]9951THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023Mr Chairperson, I would like to pray and plead that, may be as a movement towards the centre, you allow for accommodation of a Fifth Schedule to decipher prohibition from control. Thank you.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We already have a Fifth Schedule, which is said to be another schedule. But, colleagues, the country is watching. Not everyone will interpret the way you interpret these things here. You are going to go out of this place and people the message will be, “Parliament has allowed the use of drugs.” (Laughter)  I am telling you what the public is getting - I am giving you the true picture. So, let us be clear, and let the Attorney-General be clear. Under 11, the concern of the Hon. Dr Batuwa is to have control, giving an exception to the control of cultivation. Where is supply and trade provided for, Attorney-General?MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I am looking at the title of the Bill because the Leader of the Opposition talked about the principles of statutory interpretation. One of them is actually looking at the title of the Bill. There are now two contentious issues that need to be harmonised in regard to this title. I want to propose, as the Attorney-General comes in, to consider looking at this Bill to capture both aspects of control and prohibition. I want to propose that in the title itself, and this will capture the concerns of Hon. Dr Abed Bwanika, Hon. Dr Batuwa and all of us, we talk about the Narcotics Drugs, and Psychotropic Substances Prohibition and Control Bill; so that even as we are talking about consequentially in the schedules, whatever we want to do, both will be covered. Mr Chairperson, the worry that the public might misconstrue our intentions will be addressed by that title. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Attorney-General.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Hon. Dr Abed Bwanika. First, you raise an important issue, and I do not know whether this would cure it if we went to the Fourth Schedule and marked it “prohibited and/or controlled plants” –(Interjections)-  let me finish – because we have two categories - and as Hon. Asuman Basalirwa has just pointed out - we amend the title to deal with prohibition and control. We have two aspects that this Bill is dealing with. This Bill is prohibiting the use but also controlling. Even marijuana - we have had arguments that there are some medicinal purposes but we are only saying that, for you to use it for those medicinal purposes, you must have a licence issued by National Drug Authority and it is provided for in clause 14. So, your concern on how they will use - first of all, Section 11 deals with cultivation because it is the real issue today. If you want to cultivate it, get a licence. If you want to use it for other purposes, go to clause 14, get a licence under NDA and then export, sell and do whatever you want to do with any controlled or prohibited substances. In that way, we deal with the issue and put it – because tomorrow if we decide to control another substance, say; beer, we can put it here because it covers both controlled and prohibited substances.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Tinkasiimire, would that be a middle ground? MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairperson, the learned Attorney-General is trying to cure the problem. However, I would not want us to leave the public confused when we are introducing that schedule, as he said. We must write it as “prohibited” and bring the following a, b, c and d. Under control, it should be a, b, c and d. There, I will agree with you. (Applause)  Otherwise, to just lump them up, will leave public confused, including the courts. And a Judge is protected under Article 126. He can choose to interpret the way he wants, especially when you leave that room of coming to look for the intentions of the Legislature by extracting the parliamentary Hansard  at interpretation level. Thank you. 9952THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon-ourable colleagues, when I looked at this, the word “prohibition” I noticed that it is sending a message. When you are sending a message, you do not send it with a weak language. It was sending a message that in Uganda, this is pro -hibited. However, if you are to do it, you must follow a, b, c and d, provided for under the law. I do not know what the difference will be for licence conditions, prohibition and the ones for control when they are set by the same minister. What if the minister issues the same conditions? So, what are we really trying to – yes, Hon. Kanushu.MS KANUSHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to be on record because the people that we have been talking about in Butabika and rehabilitation centres are my constituents. I want this Parliament to go on record today that we are passing a law that increases the number of people with mental illnesses. I am reading a report here by the World Health Organisation that talks about the effects of Khat -  insomnia, depression, anxiety, malaise , depression and excessive talkativeness. All those conditions are described as mental illnesses or mental disorders. We are here saying that the number is small. Are we telling the world that we want to see the number of people with mental illnesses increase? (Applause)  As a representative of persons with disabilities, we have no intention, whatsoever, of increasing the number of any form of disability. That is why the NRM Government has kicked polio out of Uganda. It is because we do not want to see an increased number of polio cases, like myself. The same way I do not want to see the increased number of cases of polio like myself, I do not want the number to jump from the 2 per cent that the honourable mover is talking about, to 10 per cent. We do not intend to increase our constituents, Mr Chairperson and so, we cannot confuse the two words, “control” and “prohibition”. Whether you are a lawyer or not, those are two different words. Thank you. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, my role here is to make sure that we move, and I listen to you - please, do not usurp my power. It is very clear, for example, under our traffic laws, that it is prohibited to drive from the opposite lane. However, under that same law, ambulances and even I, as the Speaker, by the way, I am allowed – (Laughter) – but it is prohibited. So, let us use examples that are clear in our society. Honourable colleagues, I put the question that the Fourth Schedule be amended, as proposed by the Hon. Dr Batuwa. (Question put and negatived.)THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able colleagues, the other amendments, which had been proposed, would have been con -sequential amendments, if we had taken the amendment by the Hon. Dr Batuwa. MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUMETHE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able minister? Yes, point of procedure, Hon. Oguzu.MR OGUZU: Mr Chairperson, thank you for listening to me. I am acutely aware that this law is being processed without a regulatory impact assessment, which is needed, prior to processing any law. We should be able to understand the economic and social impact of any law we are going to process. Looking at the schedule we have just passed, there are people, as already submitted by colleagues here, whose livelihood is dependent on Catha edulis,  for which the Government must be able to take necessary steps before the law comes into force –9953THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able colleague, please take your seat.MR OGUZU: I need to know what the Government plans to do in transition. What is the alternative?THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able colleagues, we debated the law. My broth -er, if you can see on record, how many times my brother, Hon. Oguzu Lee submitted on this law; it is over 10 times. When you were submitting, didn’t you know that the Government had not done enough studies and all that? And this is an issue you never raised. So, colleagues, I do not want us to go into any tactics aimed at frustrating Parliament from doing its work. The record is clear; we have captured your issue. Yes, honourable minister.4.34THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. THE  DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.(Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE4.34THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the “Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Bill, 2023” and passed the recommitted clauses with amendments. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023”BILLSTHIRD READINGTHE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 20234.34THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled  the “Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Bill, 2023” be read for the third time and do pass into law.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that “Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Bill, 2023” be read the third time and do pass into law.(Question put and agreed to.)A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) ACT, 2023”THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, I would like to thank and congratulate you. (Applause)  When we are passing laws, it is lively for you to argue and present issues from your constituents. I would like to thank those who presented the issues of their constituents and those who listened. It is important for us to give you a chance. Luckily enough, there is none who disrupted; we were all well behaved.9954THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023Honorable minister and the committee, I would like to congratulate you and all of you honourable members. I also congratulate the Attorney-General; you really helped us.Chairperson, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, would you want to say anything?MR KAJWENGYE: Mr Speaker, I thank you and congratulate ourselves for a job very well done. The depth, length and width with which the House handled this debate was unprecedented. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, especially for your guidance and leadership when it was necessary that the two concerned committees – Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and the Committee on Health – do harmonise their positions. We needed leadership and you provided it. I would like to congratulate you on that. We greatly benefitted from that. I congratulate my committee members; you did a great job. I congratulate the Committee on Health that came in with all these health experts and provided the necessary guidance that we needed to pass this law. The Leader of Opposition and all the other people who guided us, we feel honoured that we have finally delivered this piece of legislation that has a direct bearing on our people. I also thank the minister. For God and my Country.  (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, committee chairperson. Vice-Chairperson, Committee on Health, do you have something to say?4.39THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMIT -TEE ON HEALTH (Mr Samuel Opio): I would also like to take this opportunity to, first of all, thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance that you gave. I also thank the Members for the great contributions. I also thank the members of the health committee.Our deepest concern was on matters of public health. When we looked at the statistics, we said: “Let us not just legislate for the 44 per cent, but let us legislate even for the two per cent and one per cent.” We are happy that, today, we have legislated for everyone who is affected and also legislated to protect those who have not been affected. We also legislated to ensure that those who have been affected can be able to access rehabilitation services. That is a very key inclusion and we would like to thank you for that. I congratulate and thank all of you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, honourable minister.GEN. MUHOOZI: Mr Speaker,  I would like to take this opportunity to extend my sincere appreciation to you, for steering and shepherding the process of enacting this important legislation. I relay our gratitude and we remain in your debt. To the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, through the chairperson, and the Committee on Health, through its able chairperson, we cannot thank you enough for the meticulous work and effort you put into the process that culminated into this work today.I also thank my colleague, the Minister of Health and the honourable Attorney-General. Your input was critical in forging a common ground and giving the process the requisite clean-up. To the whole House, you unreservedly and with unanimity gave it your all, with objectivity and without any biases. Your contributions were enriching.  I have faith that without a doubt, this law will serve the ends it set out to achieve. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, next time when you want to read from a prepared text, you may need to share your statement. (Laughter)[The Deputy Speaker]9955THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023Honourable colleagues, I really want to thank you. The problem of substances abuse is big. It starts small – Hon. Komakech guided us the other day. It starts with Shisha , Khat  and Kuber  and keeps going up slowly by slowly – upgrading. We need to talk to our children about it. In schools, it is a problem; we have had harrowing tales. Honourable colleagues, when you addict in your family, you do not know what it means. Personally, I have one. I want to confess: we are going through a lot, as a family. We have tried whatever means. The young boy started with small things. These ones, which you have in your compound – I hear for cows and to treat your chicken – is what will kill your children. That is where they will start from. This one, which you take in tea – just green leaves, as if it is mint, that you are treating COVID-19 – is what is going to kill your children; it starts in a simple way. We have many colleagues who are dying slowly; their children have lost control. From alcohol and now to social media abuse – social media has become a very big problem, but it mainly goes back to the parents: are we doing our job? I urge you, honourable colleagues, to go back and teach your constituents. Talk to parents in the constituencies. It starts small, with you bringing people to work for you and you want them to work for nearly 20 hours – and you say you have khat and they have extra energy and work for extra hours. Your children will learn from them. So, I urge you, honourable colleagues, to take up this matter seriously and ensure that, indeed, we fight it together. We cannot just leave it to the law and the Government. We have to take it on, as parents.Honourable colleagues, when I was starting, I had matters of national importance, which I want to handle before I allow anything else. So, I request that you spare me the issue of procedures and others - even procedure is at the discretion of the Speaker. So, I will allow them at the time I am able to take it.4.43MR JOSEPH ANDREW KOLUO (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the purported pastors who keep preaching on the roads and in markets, with loud speakers. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, I know some Members might take this thing as simple, but to be sure, the majority of the people driving on the roads have ended up causing many accidents, and most pedestrians, especially the children, have been injured because of these. My humble prayer is that the Ministry in charge of Ethics and Integrity, should control these people so that they are in their respective places, especially in churches. They should also be registered because the majority of them have ended up conning other people.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I have found these people on the streets; some of them start tormenting you. You do not have an issue with them, but they start bringing the Bible and it is as if they want to throw it in your face as if he is holier than me; he does not even know whether I am coming from church - they start harassing people, but I do not know where the solution is. Hon. Begumisa, I know you are a pastor. Do you want to say something?MS BEGUMISA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to clarify something – (Interjection)  - I agree with you my brother. I am a Pastor and I pastor a church here in Kampala, but I was putting you to order, on the words “purported pastors” because those are not pastors. Sometimes – (Interjections)  - protect me, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, you are protected.MS BEGUMISA:  In the same spirit, I want to defend the rightful servants of God. In the spirit which my brother has put it forth - attacking all of them, as though all servants of God are bad, it is in the same spirit that my brother would condemn noise pollution from discos, those 9956THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023marketing alcohol and bars all over up to on our doorsteps. You would have condemned everything in the same spirit. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister? Now, no minister is ready to talk about pastors. (Laughter)  Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.4.46THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Mr Speaker, it is of course disturbing, when you find somebody throwing books in your face, and others shouting because they are doing business. I will make a follow-up, in terms of managing the city. Thank you. THE  DEPUTY  SPEAKER:  Hon. Robbina Rwakoojo?4.47MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on the matter of national importance regarding, the Mpigi-Kanoni-Sembabule-Villa Maria Road, and the numerous accidents that are happening on this road.Recently, we had a very tragic one, where the person who was knocked, kept on being stepped on by the other lorries that continued coming, and all that was retrieved for burial was his leg, and pieces of flesh which were gathered from the site; it was terrible. Immediately thereafter, we had an accident involving a Jaguar  bus, where three people died. I understand the driver was trying to jump out but the vehicle fell on him and eight people were injured. I have complained about this road in the past, and it happened that when the Katonga diversion came about, this road was used by the big vehicles - the buses and trailers. They drive carelessly; they do not observe traffic regulations and they do double parking in the towns.My prayer is that the district local authorities should designate parking areas within the towns, where these heavy vehicles can park from 6.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. to avoid double parking and avoid accidents. And this has successfully happened in Lukaya and Njeru.Then, increase on the cases for designation of traffic officers in the area. For the intersect buses, the Ministry of Works and Transport should ensure that these buses have two drivers each, because one driver is not supposed to drive more than 300 kilometres.Then we should have a multi-sectoral District Road Safety Committee, chaired by the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) and including Ministry of Works and Transport, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), Transport Licensing Board (TLB), Regional Police Commander (RPC), District Police Commander (DPC), maybe headmasters, the District Education Officer (DEO) and others. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, please conclude.MS RWAKOOJO:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister. The whole of last week we did not have any Minister of Works and Transport in the House. I had issues from Members of Parliament regarding works and I kept telling them that when the minister comes in - it was difficult to address their issues. This business of saying, “Go back and bring a statement” - we clog our Order Paper. I have tried to make it easy for you, but if you fail to do that, then I will be asking ministers to bring here statements. For some of the issues, answers would be straight, and Members would be satisfied there and then. Let us cooperate on this. Now, Minister of Internal Affairs, this is more of accidents caused by reckless driving, and you have officers on the road.[Ms Begumisa]9957THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023GEN. MUHOOZI:  Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the concerns of the Member and we shall increase traffic police footprints on that route.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Work with colleagues in the area.  Please, colleagues I determine when I pick what point and I do not want it to reach a level of harassment. Hon. Lokwang Philiphs?4.51MR PHILIPHS LOKWANG-ILUKOL (NRM, Napore West County, Karenga) : Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here on matters of national importance. We have wild animals in the national parks, especially in Kidepo. The wild animals have migrated from the national park and entered the community. That has caused a lot of destruction. Over 10,000 households in my district and the surrounding community, are crying. The elephants have destroyed all their crops. I equally went with the minister and he saw how people are suffering. My prayers are:  1. I request, or I inform the concerned persons to provide adequate living conditions for these animals in the park because there is no animal left in the park; they have all come to the community;2. To fence off; to control the movement of these animals; and3. There is a process of compensation, which I am told is taking long and my people are going to get extinct because of no food. So, I request that the intervention be done much quicker. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities?4.52THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOUR -ISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugara Bahinduka):  I thank Hon. Lokwang, for raising the issue. Indeed, it is true; I was there with him, probably a month ago and I agree there are a number of issues in the Kidepo area. What we are doing currently is we are adding around 100 officers and outposts in the meantime to see how they can deter and keep these animals in the protected areas.We also discussed the issue of compensation with the communities. The money is not adequate but we have told them to register and we will be handling them in phases. What we are doing immediately in the circumstances is dig a trench and deploy ranchers. In fact, we have already deployed game ranchers.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. James Mamawi? 4.54MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. We appreciate the recess you gave us because we were able to discover very many things in our constituencies. When I moved around, I found a gentleman who was renovating a cotton store in my constituency which was built by the cooperative society at that time. When I asked him, he told me he bought the store from the Government. As a country, we are looking at revamping these cooperatives in our areas. I would like to know from the Government whether they have sold these stores to individuals. I would like to also know the status of these Government properties in our areas. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Today, I read in the press the issue of Soroti Golf Club land where the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) wrote to the Government Valuer to value it because they are planning to sell it yet people are protesting. I saw Capt. Mukula on Twitter saying, “Come for help” and all that. I am assigning the Attorney-General to handle that issue and give an update tomorrow. We 9958THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023need to protect this public land. Otherwise, it looks as if it is a deal between a few people and there is a lot of protest in Soroti. 4.55THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Mr Speaker, this matter was already raised here. It was referred to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. When the story came up yesterday, I spoke to her and she said she was handling the matter and that no such thing will happen. But I will remind her to bring a report. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Attorney-General. Honourable Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperative? 4.56THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr David Bahati):  On the issue raised by Hon. James Mamawi, I will follow up with him and check the facts on the ground. If the property belongs to the cooperative, then that should be held.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, this is an issue which you will not only sort out with Hon. Mamawi. It might be happening even in other areas especially, the land of cooperatives; people have targeted them. Give us a status of all land of the cooperatives starting with Hon. Mamawi’s. We shall give you space on the Floor. MR BAHATI:  We will be ready next week. Mr Speaker, could you give us two weeks because the work is much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We can give you two weeks. Thank you. Hon. Richard Gafabusa? 4.57MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. For the last four to five days, we have had catastrophic rains, hailstorms and strong winds as the rain is set in Bundibugyo; the Rwenzori mountains.The entire district, specifically in the subcounties of Nyahuka Town Council, Busaru, Mirambi, Buganikere Town Council, Ndugutu, Kagugu, and Sindila; a lot of property has been destroyed - crops and domestic animals. What is most urgent is that we have two secondary schools; Kakuka Hill Secondary School and St Mary’s Secondary School, Simbya where all the roofs of the classroom block and the laboratory have been blown off. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Prayers?MR GAFABUSA:  Our prayers – (Member rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER  No, you are MPs from the same area. MR GAFABUSA:  Yes, my colleague will add. Our prayers - One, we request the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) and disaster preparedness to immediately go to the ground. I know the CAO is sending reports to the OPM but the Ministry of Education and Sports should come in because we are heading towards the examination for senior four and senior six students. St Mary’s Secondary School Simbya laboratory roof and all the equipment were destroyed. We do not know what they are going to use. Therefore, we need an immediate response from the Government. The Ministry of Education and OPM should come to our rescue immediately. Thank you.4.58THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Mr Speaker, we are going to handle that urgently with the Ministry of Education and Sports and the OPM. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Tinkasiimire?5.00MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kagadi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Not long ago, this country COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [The Deputy Speaker]9959THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023experienced a calamity where a number of our serving soldiers were killed by Al-Shabaab in Somalia. One of my constituents, Capt. Donald Bagyenyi Kanyima was in that brigade. He was 35 years old, Number RO13648 and was formerly deployed at Kakiri Barracks. The administration of Uganda People’s Defence Forces(UPDF) in an effort to identify whether he was one of the people who were killed asked the family to bring people to Bombo and among them, was his sister. They took DNA samples to find out whether they matched any of the bodies they had in possession but it was negative. Again, they called both the mother and father and carried out a DNA test but it still did not yield results. The family is totally confused like other families in the same category. They are asking: If he cannot be identified among those who died, what happened? Was he abducted? Mr Speaker, these questions cannot be answered by me or any other ordinary person. It should be the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to tell this country - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, I told you that on matters of national importance, I do not entertain information. That is a very clear principle.MR TINKASIIMIRE:  Thank you very much. Please tell this country what happened to the soldiers whose bodies cannot be found. What happened? Where are they? Can they be accounted for? Secondly, their estates are going to waste. For instance, this particular captain had a wife and three children. They are school-going but they cannot access his bank accounts to pay fees in the meantime, as they try to manage the crisis of his absence. Three the -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, can you conclude?MR TINKASIIMIRE:  In the news, we received that some banking officers in a certain bank, stole the savings of these soldiers in a very short time. We want the Government to come clean, particularly the Ministry of Defence, and tell us how they are dealing with this matter and particularly from my constituent of Buyaga West Constituency, Capt. Donald Bagyenyi.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable Minister for Defence.5.03THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whenever anybody talks about what happened in Somalia, it is very heart-breaking. It is not a matter that we take lightly, and I want to implore Hon. Tinkasiimire to work with us so that we can get to the bottom of this. I am just hearing this scenario here and of course, as a leadership, whatever happened, we may not know who is missing in action- It is a process; verification and identification are going on. We ask that you allow us time to harmonise with Hon. Tinkasiimire who is going to give me the details - (Interjections) -  now he wants me to clarify on -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, that is within your powers.MR OLANYA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the honourable minister. The matter of our soldiers who are killed in Somalia is very serious. Right now, there are parents whose children are in Somalia; I have two from my constituency who told me that they used to communicate with their children, but after the incident, they have never heard from them again. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister, when they will release the names of soldiers who passed on from Somalia, the districts where they come from so 9960THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 2023that their parents are relieved. Let the parents know whether their children are alive or dead; that is the clarification I want to seek from you. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.MR OBOTH:  I am sure that is not a clarification. He is raising a new matter, but all the families whose siblings got involved in this matter, have been contacted. The issue of communication or failure of communication with those in Somalia - there could be several reasons. If there are concerns, my office and in fact, the offices of all the army leadership and the ministers are here; actually, two of us, are open to do that. I do not think that we- and Hon. Olanya is my very good friend, he is known in this Parliament for raising land matters more effectively. (Laughter)  We shall come back on this matter.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, take your seat. Now honourable colleagues, on these issues, I am very sure the UPDF leadership and the Government have records of all their contingent members in Somalia or even - This is a matter for which I would request indeed you handle without bringing a statement here. It is a very sensitive matter. In discussing it here on the Floor, emotions might run high, and sometimes we make statements that do affect the family seriously. But as has Hon. Tinkasiimire said, try to reach out to the family members of all the people and where a Member has raised - honourable colleagues, I advise you, when this comes, immediately link up with the Minister, if he does not, you inform us and we give you space. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Iddi Isabirye?5.08MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Yesterday afternoon, the National Forestry Authority (NFA) officials in Mayuge, specifically in my constituency, in Bugata village, Bumwena Parish, Malongo Sub-county, Mayuge District did an operation that led to the killing of one resident called Paul Kijama and another four were shot. As I speak now, two are critically injured and admitted at Jinja Regional Referral Hospital. Mr Speaker, this was as a result of a conflict that has been there for long. I recently raised this matter here and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister committed herself and on behalf of Government that they were going to solve it. Mr Speaker, the directive that His Excellency the President gave was the allocation of 48 villages to the wanainchi  and 14 villages to NFA to continue planting trees. But, what is happening there, you do not see trees but business being conducted. This year you see trees - as I speak now, they are harvesting trees. It would be good to plant trees to protect the environment, but you see them harvesting the trees instead of protecting the environment. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  PrayersMR IDDI ISABIRYE : Mr Speaker, my prayers are: i. The Ministry of Internal Affairs should investigate these matters and the culprits be brought to book;ii. The committee of Parliament responsible for natural resources should interest itself in this matter, go and investigate it and bring a substantive report for the House to resolve on these matters; andiii. I request Government to treat the ailing patients who are in Jinja Regional Referral Hospital because these were poor peasants who were just found in their gardens and shot. [Mr Olanya]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR9961THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 22 AUGUST 2023Those are my prayers, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Now, honourable colleagues, where we say the Minister of Internal Affairs goes to investigate, Parliament cannot go to investigate also. We first leave the ministry to do their work - we do not jump into; let us give the Executive chance to do their work, then we can come in once we are not satisfied. A Member can bring a petition here on behalf of the public and it would be a very good basis for us to go and study the situation on the ground and give very clear recommendations. Honourable minister, what I see, there is also a need to go on the ground and meet the people. Honourable minister?GEN. DA VID MUHOOZI:  Mr Speaker, we shall follow up with the line ministry responsible for the environment in addition to the investigation. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister who is the Woman MP of the area can also pull ministers to go and help the situation. Hon. Kirumira Hassan?5.12 MR HASSAN KIRUMIRA (NUP, Katikamu County South, Luweero):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the after effects of a hailstorm in Bombo Town Council and Nyimbwa Subcounty. On the 13th of August, a catastrophe befell the people of Nanywa Village and Nkokonjeru in Bombo Town Council. Gardens were washed away and rooftops of houses were swept away, but specifically, the roof of Nkokonjeru Primary School, and learners do not have classes to attend from. The school is adjacent to Bombo Barracks and children of soldiers attend that school. My prayer is for Government to pick interest in this matter, specifically the line ministries of Education and Disaster Preparedness to go to the ground and visit the primary school. Our people are suffering now. They do not have food; provide some relief to the people of Nanywa and those of Nkokonjeru. Finally, since their gardens were washed away, the ministry should provide seeds for them to plant because the rainy season is starting. Thank you.MS NAKADAMA:  Mr Speaker, it is bad to hear that the community lost their gardens and that the school roof went off. I request that we receive that in writing so that we make a follow-up. It should be from the district disaster committee and yourself. Thank you.5.14MR DENIS OGUZU  (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha):  Mr Speaker, I think the country is going through a lot. Climate change is taking a toll on us. I have a similar problem in Maracha District, where schools and churches have been devastated. Also, unquantified hectares of agricultural land all destroyed. We are praying to the Government and especially the Office of the Prime Minister to intervene by supplying food, seeds and restoring those schools because pupils need to continue with the learning. I hope the Prime Minister will bring an action taken report by next week so that we know if Government has been there for its people. Secondly, this is just a reminder: You directed that the Minister of Housing and Urban Development should bring a report on how local governments are complying with approved physical development plans. If we have slums mushrooming everywhere, we will have a problem. That report has not been tabled here. I would like to therefore, remind you to remind the minister to bring the report on local governments’ compliance with the Physical Planning Act. Thank you.9962THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES (CONTROL) BILL, 20235.16MR AMOS OKOT  (NRM, Agago North County, Agago):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true, the climate has changed. In northern Uganda, Gulu, Eastern Acholi Subregion; Kitgum, Lamwo, Agago and Pader used to start receiving the second rain by the month of July, but now we are in August when rainfall is supposed to be intense. However, since June, we have a very severe dry spell to the extent that the crops that were planted and germinated, have withered. And if the rains start, people are expecting to put some seeds down so that at least in some three or four months, they could be in position to harvest some crops. The problem is that they lack seeds. If the rain comes, they will have nothing to plant. Now that this is becoming a countrywide issue, Government should give us some seeds as quickly as possible so as to help these people within this period. Other than waiting until the end of August or September, we are going to miss the season’s rain. You can recall that the country has been suffering because of lack of posho and beans. A similar thing is being projected if nothing is done and next year is going to be worse. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I want us to be cautious as a House so that we do not contradict ourselves. Any money we never budgeted for, we cannot tell Government to provide. We are the ones who budgeted. We did appropriation and did not provide money for seedlings. Then, we come to the Floor and make a resolution that, “Give us seedlings or seeds.” You are more or less saying, “Go and process a supplementary.” I asked for one thing, which is coming very soon. I want us to be consistent. Someone, 100 years from today, will be reading what we submit and resolve here. Didn’t we know we wanted seeds and seedlings when we were doing the budget? How do we come now to say we ask for seedlings? I will not be part of that. I called the minister to come and explain it to us and we have a long debate on how the Parish Development Model (PDM) is going to cover inputs. If that statement comes, we can discuss and we say, “The last time we were budgeting we found out that you misguided us on this. Therefore, we shall take this route.”MS NAKADAMA: Mr Speaker, you have guided this House well because when the Member was submitting, I was telling my colleague that we gave money to PDM and that is where our focus is. Therefore, if we want seeds, then Parliament has to give ministries more money so that we can give seeds to those who are requesting for them now. However, like you have guided, let us wait for the PDM report. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  On Hon. Oguzu Lee’s question of disaster?MS NAKADAMA:  Mr Speaker, I request the Members to give us written reports because we cannot just act on hearsay. Sometimes, Members come here when information being given is not actually on the ground. Honourable Member, please, submit that in writing. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  House adjourned to tomorrow, Wednesday, at 2 o’clock.(The House rose at 5.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23 August 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR