


Wednesday, 17 August 2022

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

    1. Mr Eddie Kwizera Wagahungu
    2. Mr Derrick Orone

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Colleagues, I welcome you to today’s Sitting.  In the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have staff from the National Assembly of Zambia. They include:

    1. Mr Jeffrey Mumbi – Deputy Director, ICT;
    2. Mr Francis Nguni – Systems and Network Specialist;
    3. Mr Mulima Chibuye – Systems and Network Specialist; and 
    4. Ms Victoria Mwaba – ICT Officer.

They are here on a benchmarking visit with the staff of Parliament of Uganda and they are now in the gallery to follow the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

Once again, I would like to congratulate our colleagues who have just been sworn in. We are happy because in Parliament, we are a family. Losing one of us in whichever way makes us sad. Therefore, we are glad our two colleagues have come back.

Colleagues, if you have any colleague in Parliament who did not support you in the process, just take it that that was just politics. We are now back as a family. I do not want you to be moving around, saying, “You came to my constituency to fight me.” No, it happens that way. That is a process. It is part and parcel of the process. We are now one family.

I implore the Government Chief Whip to ensure these two colleagues are deployed in committees quickly so that they can catch up with business of the House.

Colleagues, today, I will not have matters of national importance. We have a clogged Order Paper. Thursday is usually a day for Members. So, tomorrow, I will give you more time with the Prime Minister. I really want us to proceed, but there are very few issues, which I wanted to raise. 

One is in regard to the flooding at Isimba Hydropower Station and the panic it has caused. I know that Umeme has released a load-shedding schedule, but we were told that we have an installed capacity of 1,378.1 megawatts and we consume much less than that. 

So, now, Isimba is a dam of only 180 megawatts, but we do not even consume 1000 megawatts as a country. I have already learnt that we are rushing to Kenya to import 60 megawatts. I have also seen a load-shedding schedule that was released quickly. 

The issue is not about the flooding and all that, but the panic it has caused. It has really scared very many. Today, I have received around nine Members over the same issue. So, because of how serious this issue is, the minister is required to appear tomorrow to make a substantive statement before this House, which we shall debate for some time, so that your views are heard and we can give a contribution on how best this challenge can be overcome.

Colleagues, in our oversight programmes – I remember there were very many issues on the quality of work at Isimba and Karuma. I do not know how it could be designed without anticipating flooding of that nature. So, we need to look into these issues seriously – the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. I am glad I saw the chairman on television saying he is going there. So, I hope indeed, they go and come back to update the House on what they found on the ground. However, the minister - in the meantime, it should be one of the first items we should have tomorrow. 

I would like to give an opportunity to our two colleagues who promised to lay on the Table some important documents. Hon. Kivumbi, you promised to lay on the Table the alleged resolution for the Atiak Company, which we passed here. Therefore, honourable colleague, I invite you to lay them on the Table –(Hon. Kivumbi rose_) - I will give you an opportunity. This is still part of my communication. I am still communicating. (Laughter)

2.31
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I have with me – this is 4th January; the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Kampala. I have a copy of all the resolutions that were extracted, as a result of our debate on this supplementary expenditure. In this resolution, specifically for Atiak, this is what it says:  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Signed by who?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: It is signed by Mr Henry Waiswa Yoweri, for Clerk to Parliament. This is what it says - I am leaving the details out. 

“Appropriation of Shs 108 billion to Uganda Development Corporation for mechanisation for Atiak Sugar Works.”

I have highlighted the paragraph I am interested in and it reads: 

“The approved supplementary expenditure includes Shs 108 billion to Uganda Development Corporation, through Vote 105, Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, specifically for the purchase of equipment to be leased to Atiak Sugar Works.” 

That is the resolution, Mr Speaker, that was extracted and I beg to lay.  

I have a copy of the Hansard of that day. I will specifically go for where the vote was put. It was chaired by the then Deputy Speaker and this is the question she put.

“I now put the question that the report of the committee, as presented by the Chairman of the Committee on Budget be adopted by the House.” 

The question was put and the report of the committee was adopted. I beg to lay.

I now go on to the report of the committee that was adopted and I will specifically go for where the Atiak recommendation is. This is what it says:

“The committee recommends approval of Shs 108 billion for acquiring additional equity shares in Atiak Sugar Works and that Government and all internal control mechanisms of Atiak Sugar Works are strengthened within three months.” 

The recommendation of the committee was specifically for the acquisition of equity. The resolution talks about donating money to UDC to acquire equipment. Consequently, the country lost Shs 108 billion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is that all?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Those are the documents. On the other one – that is why, Mr Speaker, I have a big concern with the Clerk because this is the way he communicates Parliamentary resolutions not through forwarding Hansards. That is why I am forcing him to give me the one on - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please, do not use the language of forcing. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: No, that is why I am going to court to ensure that I get the one on resolution and ascertain whether it has also not been altered. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, thank you very much. Clerk, pass on these documents to my office for consideration. Thank you. (Member rose_) No please, honourable. This is a closed matter; we discussed it yesterday. One, I need to verify the authenticity of the documents given. Now, you want me to start discussing documents, which I have not read first. It is one’s word against the other. Please, give me that chance. You can always guide him because he has not run away from you.

The other one was Hon. Gilbert Olanya. Colleague, you said that you have a list of prisoners who are on remand on the orders of ministers and you said you also had another list of people who were arrested on land offences. Yes, but then, now, they are charged with treason. We said that you should provide that list to us.

2.37
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You directed yesterday that I should bring and lay on the Table the list of prisoners under the minister’s order. I got those lists, which are signed by Milton Tiyo for the Commissioner General of Prisons. In total - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, can you read because you said they were arrested on minister’s orders. Just read the content not the total. I want to get where the minister’s order is.

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, according to the commissioner, he said, “Please, find the list of inmates who are pending minister’s order in our custody.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who are pending? 

MR OLANYA: Yes, they are waiting for the minister’s order. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are waiting for the minister’s order? 

MR OLANYA: Exactly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you correct your submission from yesterday? Honourable colleague, yesterday, you said that there are prisoners in prison on minister’s order.

MR OLANYA: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not pending minister’s order, but on ministers order. Those are two different statements. 

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, since I have laid the document, I think you will ask your Clerk to verify.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, I am only telling you that your statement of yesterday - You can take your seat. You said you have prisoners who are in prison on minister’s orders. Now, what I am just asking you is very simple; the document you have read is to the contrary. 

Therefore, I am just saying that you should clear the record of yesterday and substitute it with today's record. That is very simple. I am not saying withdraw your list or take it away.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Following your guidance, we have inmates in prison who are pending minister’s order. In other words -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which minister?

MR OLANYA: The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Mr Speaker, those inmates are 33 in total and some of them have taken 10 years and others 20 years in prison. According to the commissioner, he says they are confused and do not know what to do. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you pass on the document to me? 

MR OLANYA: I will and the orders are strictly in the hands of the minister. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, pass on the document to the Clerk. I would like the Clerk to read the document properly. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, please, read the document for us because I want a clear record. There is a letter and so, I want us to know the contents of the letter and the date.

Who is reading the letter? Is it the Deputy Speaker or the Clerk? 

This is a letter from Uganda Prisons Service, signed by Milton Tiyo on behalf of the Commissioner General of Prisons.

“To the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs

Attention - Hon. Gilbert Olanya and it is dated 17 August 2022.

The reference is List of prisoners pending minister’s order

Forwarded herewith, please, find a list of inmates who are pending the minister's order in our custody. 

Your letter of the same subject dated 16 August 2022 refers.

Our records indicate that there are 33 inmates pending the minister's order. Please, note that the Judiciary took up this matter and the office of the honourable Principal Judge is working on it.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Olanya, did you write to the Prisons authority as the Chairman of Defence and Internal Affairs - because that is how they have addressed you.

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, yesterday, as you directed me to lay the list, I wrote to the commissioner officially to avail me with the list and today, he has given me the list. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I request you, Hon. Olanya, to also lay on the Table the letter which they are referring to. 

MR OLANYA: Yes, I have a copy. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, lay it on the Table because they are responding to you as the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence. 

MR OLANYA: No, this letter is directed to the committee, but they say, “attention Hon. Olanya Gilbert.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are a Member of Parliament and you are the one who wrote. I do not know why they did not respond to you, but anyway, this is good. The record is now clearer. 

MR OLANYA: Exactly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The record is clear. I think you wanted to clear the record of yesterday and substitute it with today’s record. Clerk, please, take note. 

It is a serious issue and I refer it to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to investigate the matter and report back in two weeks.

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Secondly, I told the House yesterday that there are people who were arrested from my district on land matters. On reaching Kampala, they changed their charges to treason. Right now, they are being tried in the Court Martial. 

For someone who has never been a soldier - one is the Chairman LC 1 and another one is the Secretary for the LC 1. They were arrested on 16 June 2016 and seven years down the road, they are in Kigo Prison being tried in the Court Martial. I do not know why the Government behaves that way. 

The list is here; we have Charles Opio, Patrick Okello Ajur, Richard Oketch, Kenneth Otto and Sam Ojok. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is for noting because the Director of Public Prosecutions has the power to apply any charges on a person. Whether you have been arrested for murder, it can be reduced or changed depending on the evidence. 

Therefore, since it is a court matter, we cannot discuss matters before court here. This is for noting. Yes - there is no way I can go to the Judiciary and say they preferred wrong charges on someone when I do not have any details. However, the Chairperson of the Parliamentary and Legal Affairs wanted to guide us on one of the matters. 

Let me give her a chance.

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to offer some information. The orders, which are for the minister’s attention, like he is saying, can arise in two circumstances. 

If juveniles have been imprisoned together with adults, the names are forwarded to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs who is the responsible minister under that docket to decide that those people should be moved from there. Some of them get in when they are, say 14 or 16 and then they become adults. We know that a child is below 18. Those are also some of the cases. 

The second type is those who are mentally derailed. Those are the ones handled by the Judiciary. In the letter, there was a reference to the Judiciary handling them. Those are people that are reserved for those two offices. When they say, “Pending the minister’s order,” they inform him and he comes up to decide on that. 

On the second issue you are talking about, if you are a civilian and have a firearm, then you are bringing yourself under the ambit of the UPDF Act. If you are found stealing and have a firearm, you can be tried in a military court martial - you are not a soldier and so, if you do not have a license, why do you have a firearm? 

My advice would be that you should first contact the Minister for Justice before you alarm the Floor. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On one leg, I concur with my senior; those cases are real. What Hon. Olanya is pointing out is true to that extent. The juveniles or lunatics are not supposed to stay in prison, but they are kept there awaiting the minister's orders. Once that order is received by prisons, duly processed, then they –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us be cautious. We do not declare people lunatics when we have not yet verified the situation. We just have a list and we do not know. There is no other explanation. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, there is a medical process and examinations that take place before they are certified to be mentally challenged. That is the proper process. However, when the minister delays, it means that people who are not supposed to be kept in prison stay there. This causes a constraint to the prison authorities and to the liberties and rights of those who could be mad. 

The second leg is that there is a full judgment that stops the prosecution of unarmed civilians under the Court Martial. There is no reason that should be. Probably, what we would do is to task the Government - simply to explain how people who are arrested on matters of land, end up being accused of treason. That is disturbing. 

This Parliament should not shy away from tasking the responsible minister to come up with a position because this is happening. You disagree on purely family issues; the following day, you are arraigned before the court on treason charges. The fact that they have stayed there for long - seven years is too much. 

I think Parliament cannot gloss over that gross abuse of rights. The incarceration is costing their families and lives. We can now task the Attorney-General to brief Parliament about the processes under which land conflicts degenerate into a treason case. This Parliament is in a better position to task the Attorney-General. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I will not move into that line. These matters are very clear. These are people who have legal representation. The lawyers are handling it. If it had been specified that they are before the Court Martial, I would maybe, move otherwise.

However, treason can also be in other courts, not court martial. Therefore, I implore you, colleagues, to give people in the Judiciary chance to handle their matters. There are clear processes under the Judiciary on how those matters can be handled. Whenever we have attempted here – sometimes, it is a very thin line, which I would not want this House to be the one to cross.

On the one of those awaiting the minister’s orders, instead of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, I am going to refer the list to the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs for action and report back in two weeks’ time. I think that is okay. (Applause) Colleagues, let us move on. 

2.51
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John-Baptist Nambeshe): Mr Speaker, the shutdown of Isimba Dam plant has already plagued this country into an energy crisis. Already, some areas have started experiencing intermittent power supply. Yet, this power plant was commissioned hardly two years ago. It has already shut down in this short duration of time. Even if it is still under the period of defects liability, it raises a serious question regarding the structural integrity of the facility. 

Mr Speaker, an investigation must be instituted to find out what happened because this speaks volumes about the work, which could have either been shoddy or compromised. 

Most importantly, with the energy surplus we have - as you mentioned, I tried to aggregate the energy generation we have. From hydroelectricity, we have 1,073 megawatts. You aggregate that with thermal energy, which is 101, BAKAS Renewable Energy – 111, and solar energy, which is 60 megawatts. If you add all these, they come to exactly the figure you mentioned – 1,346 megawatts –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, 78.1.

MR NAMBESHE: Yes, 78.1. However, the maximum demand we have, as you mentioned, is about 700 and so, the excess is over 500. If you absorbed the 183 of Isimba, there would still be a cool balance of over 300 megawatts. 
Would we, therefore, be justified to import energy from Kenya? I am yet to see even the cost of the Kenya evacuation plan; whether there is logic in it, anyway. It is good that you have directed the minister to come. However, the truth of the matter is that our electricity generation supply is more than enough. We do not need to import –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Colleagues, we risk debating a statement, which is coming tomorrow. I want to allow debate on the statement tomorrow.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, the little information I want to give to the LOP is that as a country, we have been paying annually billions of money for dimmed energy. The argument is that we must have a standby capability in case of an emergency in the power mix. Every day, this dimmed energy is not used, yet, we pay billions of shillings. 

Therefore, where do we now stand with the money we have been paying? I know the company is in Namanve – wherever they are. At this time, where are they? They should have been handy to alleviate this situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, if your comment is on the Isimba question, please, reserve it for tomorrow because the minister is bringing a statement. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not want to depart from your ruling, but I would like to talk about Mulago. When the power cut occured, the first place that I was surprised could be shut down was Mulago National Referral Hospital. 

I request that as the minister - and the Minister of Health is here. I have even been sharing with her. If the minister is coming, then that matter - whatever situation happens in the power sector, let our hospitals not be affected. There are people in ICU. If you load-shed Mulago and other regional referral hospitals, what happens to the patients? The worst case scenario should never be in our hospitals, where there are patients and Ugandans struggling for life. 

Mr Speaker,

that is the matter that I wanted to request that, procedurally, you would even request the Minister of Health to come and address. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Colleagues, you are trying to sneak in matters under procedure. Do not abuse the rule. The rule is very clear. Let us be clear. For anyone raising the issue to do with Isimba and power cuts, I have directed the Clerk that it should be among the first items tomorrow. The minister is will bring the statement. I will give you time so that you question the minister from here. Let us do that tomorrow. 

2.55
MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to react to the issue of flooding of Isimba –(Laughter)- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please, honourable – 

MS ATIM: It is not in the context of power -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When the Speaker is speaking, you have to take your seat. Colleagues, if you want this Chair to be helpful to you, respect it. Tomorrow, you will have a statement. 

2.57
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue is not on Isimba. It is related to Hon. Gilbert Olanya’s issue -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already ruled on it. So, you cannot take us back. I am sorry.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON RELEASES TO THE UGANDA ROAD FUND FOR THE FIRST QUARTER OF FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a statement to Parliament on the disbursement schedule of road maintenance funds and the status of regulations on operationalisation of the Uganda Road Fund. 

During the plenary sitting of Tuesday, 9 August 2022, a matter of national importance was raised by Hon. Samuel Opio, MP Kole North County -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you give us a copy of the statement? Is it uploaded on the intranet?

MR LUGOLOOBI: As I left, it was being uploaded. (Laughter) I do not know if it has reached.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, ensure your statement is uploaded. Let us handle another item because even the Speaker does not have a copy.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I can avail a copy.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not about me; it is about colleagues. Honourable Minister, let the Clerk help you. Clerk, kindly, upload the statement as we work on the next item. 

Honourable Minister, we are still with you. We have your item on the Order Paper. So, we shall be handling others in the meantime. Get a copy and have it uploaded. I do not want to be disturbed during debate with Members saying “procedure”, “We do not have copies.” We shall come back. Let us stand over this item. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSION SCHEME BI-ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2021

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have Hon. Rwakajara or his representative. 

3.00
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I was looking around to see Hon. Rwakajara, but since he is not here, I beg to lay the Parliamentary Pension Scheme Bi-Annual Report for the period ended 31 December 2021. I beg to lay. (Member rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Colleagues, this is a statement for information purposes. All of us need to study it because this is our pension. You need to take keen interest so that you can generate ideas that will help us to grow our pension fund.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, there has been an updated position on the Parliamentary Pension Scheme, upping the threshold upon which they can lend to Members of Parliament. We thought they should have done us justice if they had updated that one to say that you must have 70 per cent of your emoluments intact before you can access a facility from the Parliamentary Pension Scheme. I find that it is way above the expectations of Members and our being able to access the funds, Mr Speaker. 

Can you, therefore, direct that they update that position, which is contrary to what has been in existence? It is arbitrary, untenable and goes against the interests of Members. Would you direct that, that be added so that we can have a comprehensive assessment of the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, they have just laid the report on the Table. You have not read it. You do not know whether it is updated or not. Therefore, I guide that you first read the report. If you find anything missing, you can handle it from there. 

However, colleagues, the issues of Members borrowing are not issues for the camera and plenary. Those are administrative issues. Please, let us be cautious. (Applause)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. People get these offices, given their responsibility. We have a person responsible for pension. It is not a matter of coming to bring a document and dropping it on the Table and waiting for anybody who is around to lay it. Assuming the Commissioner was not there, who would lay it on the Table? 

So, Mr Speaker, I request that responsible people in these positions do not abuse their power. They should not take their positions for granted – that they can go and have a cup of tea and leave the rest to handle what is there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, Hon. Rwakajara came to my office yesterday and sought permission. He said he would not be in office today and tomorrow. I granted him that permission. He is not taking tea anywhere. (Applause) He is handling other important business. What is important is that the document has been laid and any of the colleagues assigned can always do that.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am very grateful for this report to be tabled before Parliament.

Considering that this Pension Scheme is very important to us - I was once a member of this pension scheme/Board of Trustees? - there are many issues that need to be brought to the attention of Members. Can you give us a date so that we all come and ask questions? 

It is not just a question of laying because when they lay without giving us time to look into the issue, it will just be gone, yet some of these issues are very critical. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues,that is why I have told you that this report is for information purposes. The Pension Scheme has an annual general meeting and this is what you scrutinise, discuss and you present your views. Issues of the Pension Scheme will not be brought to the Plenary because these are our internal matters. 

There must be procedures. In case you need a special general assembly, it can be arranged. Therefore, there must be procedures on how that can be done. I would guide that, indeed, we need to follow that procedure. (Hon. Opendi rose_) Is it a point of procedure? 

MS OPENDI: No. Mr Speaker, I just want to reinforce what you have said. We just had the annual general meeting in April. In addition, arising out of that general meeting, we made recommendations, which the Commissioners and the board members have now come and brought an amendment to the Pension Act, which is before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Therefore, Members when the AGM is called, please, attend.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I remember when I was in the 10th Parliament, I would only be mobilised by those who wanted votes. I would feel I should go because I was going to vote. 

However, colleagues, this is your future. This is your pension. Like Hon. Opendi has said, when an annual general meeting is called, this is where they approve these reports or resolutions. Please, always ensure that you attend. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TO THE 26TH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF PARTIES TO THE UNITED NATIONS FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson of climate change or representative -

3.07
DR LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the delegation of the Parliament of Uganda to the 26th Session of the Conference of Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change held in Glasgow, United Kingdom from 31 October to 13 November 2021. 

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The report is also for information purposes. Colleagues, I urge you to read it. You are seeing issues of climate change that we are facing; it is very important. 

We are going to deposit this report in the Library. Please, refer to it because it will help you in your legislative agenda as colleagues of the House. Next item. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE THE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $20 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA, $30 MILLION FROM THE SAUDI FUND FOR DEVELOPMENT AND $20 MILLION FROM THE OPEC FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT FOR THE CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPPING OF THE UGANDA HEART INSTITUTE PROJECT

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, this motion was moved for the resolution of Parliament to authorise the Government to borrow up to $20 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA), $30 million from the Saudi Fund for Development and $20 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development for the construction and equipping of the Uganda Heart Institute project.

The motion was moved under Article 159(2), Rule 178(2)(b) and Rule 68 of our Rules of Procedure. I am meant to understand that the report is now ready for the committee to present it to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) Hon. Bahati, Hon. Fox Odoi, Hon. Keefa, Hon. Lillian Aber. The motion is seconded. Honourable Minister, would you like to speak to the motion?

MR LUGOLOOBI: It was already done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER Chairman, please.

3.11
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Robert Migadde): Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have 15 minutes.

MR MIGADDE: Mr Speaker, before I proceed, allow me to lay on Table the minutes of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee on National Economy with Uganda Heart Institute and Minister of Finance to consider the Government proposal to borrow; allow me lay.

In the same vein, Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table a copy of the report of the Committee on National Economy on the same proposal. I beg to lay.

Mr Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal to borrow up to $20 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa(BADEA) and $30 million from the Saudi Fund and $20 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development for the construction and equipping of the Uganda Heart Institute.

The Committee on National Economy considered the request by the Government to borrow up to those sums in accordance with Rule 178(2)(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure.

Background

It is estimated that non-communicable diseases account for 56 per cent of all deaths and 46 per cent of the disease burden globally. This burden constitutes one of the major challenges to development in the 21st Century in the developing countries, which bear the largest burden of non-communicable diseases.

Globally, over 76 per cent of cardiovascular deaths occur in low and middle income countries of which 80 per cent are due to heart attack - that is 7.4 million people - and death due to stroke is 6.7 million people. 

It is estimated that one in four adults - that is 25 per cent of Uganda's population - has high blood pressure, which can lead to cardiovascular diseases, stroke or kidney failure.

Accordingly, there is a 27 per cent chance of Ugandans aged between 30 and 70 years dying of non-communicable diseases, with cardiovascular disease accounting for 9 per cent of these deaths.

Mr Speaker, in consideration of this proposal to borrow, we held meetings with different stakeholders, but among them included the Parliamentary Committee on Health. 
Among the documentary reviews we had, was also a report of the Parliamentary Committee on Health. 

Mr Speaker, we also had field activities to Uganda Heart Institute in Mulago, the current location and the site at Naguru where the proposed Heart Institute is to be constructed. 

In terms of alignment of the project to the National Planning Framework, Mr Speaker, the Heart Institute Infrastructure Project is an NDP III core project intended to improve population health, safety and management. 

The committee, in scrutinising this loan, also considered and made a review of the previous loans under the Ministry of Health.

The committee noted with emphasis the poor performing loans. One of them being the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project Phase II, to which we shall return with a detailed response, probably when we get opportunity on the Order Paper, but which is still at zero per cent.

The other loan is the COVID-19 Response and Emergency Preparedness Project, which is at 22.8 per cent although expiry falls in December 2022.

The project objective

The overall objective of this project is to contribute to the NDP III Strategic Objective, as I mentioned earlier. 

Project outputs

The construction of the state of the art home for the Uganda Heart Institute – three blocks namely: 

a) 	the clinical block;
b) 	research and laboratories block - a ground floor, and nine typical floors; and 
c) 	staff and maintenance block and others.

Mr Speaker, when Members read the report, they will see a number of project components, including civil works, supply and installation, and consultancy, among others.

Budgetary implications

The Government has committed to provide counterpart funding for this project. The project is part of the Pub1ic Investment Plan and it is included in the Uganda Heart Institute budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023 under project code: 1526. 

The project has a Government of Uganda allocation of Shs 4.15 billion to cater for engineering and design services.

Project implementation arrangement

The project shall be implemented by the Uganda Heart Institute and it has a four year implementation period. 

The current debt situation of the country

Mr Speaker, allow me to read this specific paragraph. The interim total public debt stock, as at end of March 2022, was Shs 75.675 trillion. That is about 49.4 per cent of the GDP. This is a 7.8 per cent increase from the stock recorded in June 2021. 

The committee was informed that the increase of debt during this financial year is largely due to an increase in domestic debt by 14.1 per cent in comparison with that at the end of Financial Year 2021/2022. 

External debt continues to rise with the highest share of 61.6 per cent of the total public debt for Financial Year 2021/2022. 

Parliament approved Shs 2.9 trillion as domestic borrowing for purposes of financing the budget. There is no additional borrowing that was ever approved. 

The approval of this loan will increase the external debt exposure for public and publically guaranteed debt by $ 70 million.

Compliance with Parliamentary Rules of Procedure

There is a checklist, which is clearly cast on the board and the way it was assessed.

Observations and recommendations

The current state of the Uganda Heart Institute 

The committee undertook a field visit to the current premises of the Uganda Heart Institute at Mulago National Referral Hospital and observed the following: 

    i) Inadequate space for expansion of services. The current facility is located on level 1, Block C of New Mulago with no room for expansion. For instance, when the committee visited the Uganda Heart Institute, there were equipment lying in the corridors because they could not be installed due to limited space;

    ii) The Uganda Heart Institute has a modern cardiac cathetarisation facility and dedicated cardiac operation theatre with the capacity to handle over 1,000 operations/ procedures per year. However, it is operating below capacity, which is at 45 per cent due to limited supportive space and care services; 

    iii) Some of the supportive care services are currently undertaken in the staircases and refurbished containers; 

    iv) The current infrastructure conditions under which provision of Cardiovascular Medical Services are provided at the Uganda Heart Institute are unacceptable, especially for both the safety of staff and patients and are a gross contravention of medical operational standards. 

The committee recommends that going forward, the Government should immediately address the constraints that is; inadequate working space and medical infrastructure, in order to build a strong foundation for the Uganda Heart Institute for it to become a centre of excellence in cardiovascular medical services.

Increasing regional access to cardiovascular services 

The committee was informed that since 2012, the number of patients that seek cardiac care at Uganda Heart Institute has gone beyond the institute’s capacity. For instance, in 2014, the committee noted that one in four adults that is, 25 per cent of Uganda’s population, were applying for cardiovascular services.

The committee recommends that the Government should support the UHI in implementing its strategic plan by providing the Institute with adequate financial support, to strengthen health promotion and prevention of cardiovascular disease across the country.

Financing terms 

The committee noted that the share of the concessional loans has dropped by 16 per cent points in the past five years, from 74 per cent, in June 20l7, to 58 per cent, in June 2021. By December 2021, the share of concessional loans had declined to 56.5 per cent. 

In the recent past, the Government has continued to borrow on non-concessional terms on account of financing major infrastructure projects and budget support. 

The committee recommends that there is need for the Ministry of Finance to engage the financiers with a view of improving the financing terms to more concessional or semi-concessional terms, in particular, increasing the repayment period of the BADEA and OPEC Fund to at least 20 years. This will reduce the liquidity pressures of debt servicing and maximisation of the project investment returns.

Quality of completed works 

The committee noted that this project seeks to establish a state-of-the-art home for Uganda Heart Institute. The construction will follow approved drawings. 

Mr Speaker, we had a look at the drawings. All works will be done in accordance with the Uganda Building Regulations as well as Uganda Heart Institute and the Ministry of Health regulations for delivery of healthcare services.

The committee recommends, therefore, that the Ministry of Health and Uganda Heart Institute should strengthen technical supervision of the construction works that will be undertaken under this project to ensure quality work, minimise cases of delayed completion of works, payments for unexecuted works and paying for works that do not conform to the expected quality.

Availability of Land 

The committee was informed that the Uganda Heart Institute has been allocated 10 acres at Naguru with a land title. On opening the boundaries, Uganda Heart Institute noted that part of the land is being encroached on by Church of Uganda, Naguru Parish, KCCA, Nakawa Division and a one Mr Lukyamuzi of Lukyamuzi Investments. During the committee visit to the proposed site, it was observed that Uganda Heart Institute has already secured part of the land by fencing off 75 per cent of the land. 

The committee recommends, therefore, that Uganda Heart Institute should follow up with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to ensure that the remaining 25 per cent of the land is immediately secured. 

Performance of Ongoing Debt Finance Projects under Ministry of Health 

Allow me to read this, Mr Speaker. There are seven approved projects in the health sector that are ongoing and being implemented by the Ministry of Health; $180 million of which $129 million has been dispersed representing a disbursement rate of 71.39 per cent as at 31 December 2021. 

Despite improvement in absorption of externally borrowed funds, there are still a number of individual projects that were facing low absorption of funds as at 31 December when compared to their initial completion dates. These include the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project (Phase II), and the establishment of the Regional Oncology Centre in Northern Uganda, among others. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Health should expedite the execution of the Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project.

Like I mentioned earlier, we have a specific assignment as a committee on Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project Phase II and that report is ready. We shall delve into that when we get the opportunity on the Order Paper.

Mr Speaker, having listened, observed and some of us gone to some of these facilities or having some of our relatives and friends as patients at some of these facilities, having noted inadequate space in some of these facilities and having seen many people being flown out of this country including very important people in positions of power in this country, the committee therefore recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to $ 20 million from the Arab Bank of Economic Development in Africa (BADEA), $30 million from the Saudi Fund for Development (SFD) and $20 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development for the construction and equipping of the Uganda Heart Institute project be approved subject to the recommendations herein. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. Before I open up for debate, in the Public Gallery we have Ms Rushi Millns and Ms Sheba Sogol who are co-founders and joint CEOs of Ask Her to Stand Africa, a non-profit, non-partisan organisation, which is dedicated to increasing participation for young people and women in public life in Africa. They have come to observe proceedings of this House. Colleagues, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

There was also an announcement, which was very important and should have come as part of my communication. Hon. Susan Amero, would you want to inform colleagues?

3.30
MS SUSAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Sports club of Parliament, we are requesting Members of Parliament who are seated here to come for training for your health benefit. We do not want to wait until it is time to go for competition and then, you begin nagging the leadership. (Laughter) Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is for all disciplines, colleagues. You are invited to start training; those who are interested. I think the different disciplines have different captains and each captain will issue a rota that has locations and training time. (Member rose_) Let me allow Hon. Acon and Hon. Santa to clarify that quickly. 

MR ACON: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are all aware that sports is on individual merit. You cannot choose your relatives and family members to go and represent. Let us make sure you train and meet the required qualification or standards. Athletics is one of the most hectic and so, we have to be very clear. There is no hating Acon or running to the Speaker’s Office. Selection will be in the stadium not in office here. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, let us stop at that. I think what was important that we wanted to know was that training is starting. Hon. Santa -

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give Members information that we have netball, basketball, athletics and volleyball at Lugogo Indoor Stadium. Football is at KCCA Grounds. I invite all of you, Members to come for your health, but also for the December selection. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Time? They need to know the time. Please, come out with a clear rota and share it on platforms of colleagues. 

MS SANTA ALUM: Mr Speaker, the time is 6.00 a.m. That is when we start. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 6.00 a.m. Hon. Anywar, on the same? 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Colleagues, we are talking about our health and I am happy to hear about sports and netball. I wanted, additionally, to give information that when we established the gym - I applied for that gym and it is now in place. It is one of those facilities, which we encourage Members to use. When I applied for these facilities, we had lost one Member of Parliament and the essence is that we sit so much and do not do justice to our health. Those who can go for sports, please, do so. I implore that others do gyming for our health. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, we have taken note of that and I think Dr Omagino, the Head of Uganda Heart Institute who is seated on the technical bench, must be happy hearing that indeed, MPs are mobilising for this. Once we fail to exercise - we are his potential patients.

Colleagues, regarding this loan for which I am going to open up debate, in the 10th Parliament, when our specialists at the Uganda Heart Institute carried out sophisticated operations, we moved a motion and this House congratulated them. 

One of the demands at that time was having an independent home where they would be able to carry out more sophisticated operations. At that time, we were informed by Dr Omagino and the team that we lose 500 children every year, whom Dr Omagino and the team send away saying, “Go and die in your own way because we do not have where to handle you from.”

They have the expertise, they have some of the equipment, but they do not have where to operate from. The day you take a patient to  Uganda Heart Institute, that is when you feel the pain. I have ever taken one - you find these dedicated people trying to fix you in a corridor to work on you. Yet, their complicated machines cannot be taken anywhere. 

The only way as a legislator you can save that Ugandan who cannot have the capacity to fly to Kenya is by supporting the Uganda Heart Institute. You might bring issues of other areas - we have Lubowa - but the job Uganda Heart Institute is doing should not be mixed with whatever is happening in other parts of the country. (Applause)

Therefore, colleagues, the decision is yours. I now open the debate for 30 minutes. I am going to give you a chance, but two minutes each and Clerk, please, set the clock.

I will start with Hon. Ameede, Hon. Lucy Akello, Dr. Kamara – I am going to pick you, colleagues. Hon. Ssenyonyi, the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities, and State Enterprises) is the one who gets us stolen money that we can put into Uganda Heart Institute. Hon. Aber, the former Minister of Health, and then I will pick the rest. 

3.37
MS AGNES AMEEDE (Independent, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I thank the committee for this important report. It is not a coincidence that I speak first. I have been one of those clients at the Uganda Heart Institute and all those constraints explained in the report are real and hampering the performance of the doctors at the heart institute. 

I would have loved that this report also touched on expanding regional facilities for the Uganda Heart Institute in our regional hospitals and this should not wait. I pray that the Minister of Health and all those concerned should start work on the same because it is very hard for our constituents to come from upcountry and seek services in the central. Thank you.

3.38
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion and to thank the committee for their work. 

I support it because this is about life. I remember in the last Parliament when we were paying tribute to Dr Omagino for the good work he had done, we pledged to support him and this is the time for us to support Uganda Heart Institute. 

I would like to caution that as we do this, in good faith, as the Parliament of Uganda, it is usually abused. When it comes to the implementation, a lot of money is lost in procurement. So, we must be on the watch that the money that we borrow is put to good use for the benefit of Ugandans. 

I am one person who sponsored more than three children with the help of the Khartoum Government - they have a very good heart Hospital in Khartoum, but sometimes, they request about Shs 500,000 to do a bit of shopping. However, there are families that cannot even afford Shs 50,000. I am hopeful that by supporting our own institute in Uganda, such children and families will have the opportunity - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I am sure they are taking notes. Some of you, technical people, have good names and colleagues are saying, be cautious. So, do not fall into a trap of those they have issues with. Technical people, if we approve Uganda Heart Institute - you have been having a good name; please, keep it up. 

Colleagues, I had picked some of you, but you are committee members. The practice is very clear that if you are a committee member, you do not debate, whether you signed or not. 

3.41
DR NICHOLAS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I have been to Uganda Heart Institute many times and have seen the constraints. For example, there are only five ICU beds there, yet the need probably would go up to maybe 50 at a time. There are also only five High Dependency Unit (HDU) beds. 

As the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum on non-communicable diseases, I know that we are in a demographic transition where non-communicable diseases are accounting for more deaths than infectious diseases. Therefore, I would like to support the motion, Dr Omagino and the team and hope that we can do this as quickly as possible. I beg to submit. Thank you.

3.42
MR JOEL SSENYONYI (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to salute Dr Omagino who is somewhere at the back for his passion in this field. He has many times advocated that we do a lot more and this is one of the steps. 

I just want to emphasise the fact of being efficacious when it comes to utilising this money. Many times, money is released for a worthy cause; a good project, but it ends up being swindled, misappropriated and who suffers at the end of the day is the end-user. We are hoping that there will be a difference this time around. 
I also want to emphasise that we follow the procurement regulations as they are. Many of the challenges with entities we are having in COSASE is that people flout procurement regulations. They decide to do whatever they want to do because they think “we have a project to deal with.” 

Finally, with your guidance, I think it would be a good thing that we continuously get an update from Government on this project; maybe once in two months. That will enable us to track because many projects set off and Lubowa Hospital is one of those very many, but we do a post-mortem after a year or whatever. I think it is important that we keep track; every two months, we get an update about what is happening so that we know things are moving in the right direction. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The committee is very important –(Members rose_) Members of the Committee on Health, I will not give you the opportunity. This loan also came to the committee as a sectoral committee. You had your say on it.

3.44
MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I am glad that, finally, the Ministry of Finance has been able to find opportunity to provide money for the capital development expenditure, just like this one. 

I have been at the Uganda Heart Institute, where I took about two patients and I could see the struggles that they have had over the years. As Ugandans, we really want to domesticate some of this complex medical support. It would be very naive for us not to give this support. 

I would like to - just like other colleagues - caution us on the elements of implementation. We do not want this to be another Lubowa. As you have indicated, the Uganda Heart Institute has been a centre of excellence and they have done a lot of good work over a period of time. 

I would also like to ask my colleague behind me here, the Minister for Finance, as I indicated yesterday, to really fast-track some of these concessionary loans so that we implement what is in our budget, especially capital development programmes. I submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.45
MR ISAAC KATENYA (Independent, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion for the borrowing of the money for the Uganda Heart Institute. The only worry, which my friends and colleagues have talked about, is the issue of borrowing money and at the end of the day, the consumption rate becomes very low. 

The construction of the unit will assist to at least save some money, which Government and some individuals within the country have been spending in India, South Africa and other countries. Therefore, it will assist us to have some hope that when you fall sick or have a patient, you can easily get assistance from within the country. 

I support this, but I caution that the money be used very quickly so that we do not pay for money which has not been consumed within the period allocated for it. Thank you -(Interjections)- Okay, information allowed –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. You cannot say “thank you” and then -(Laughter) - Let me guide, Hon. Olanya – you know. Information is to enrich the submission of the one on the Floor. The moment you conclude, it means you have already finished. So, you cannot get information. It has to be in the middle of a submission. Hon. Olanya usually knows how to get his way. (Laughter) 

3.47
MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand here to support the motion. Thank you for the opportunity. First of all, I would like to thank the doctor and the team. What they are doing at the Uganda Heart Institute is commendable and this calls for all of us, as a country, to support this cause. 

Last term, I was on the Committee on National Economy – we used to sit on the same committee. You know, there is a tendency of borrowing and borrowing, but sometimes you find that the utilisation of these funds becomes a challenge to Government. 

First of all, it is a noble cause for us to support Uganda Heart Institute. Secondly, we really have to utilise – use this money – for the intended purpose. 

I also want to add my voice on this huge appetite for borrowing, yet at the end of the day, you do not utilise it. At the end of the day, there are loopholes; people swindle the monies.

This time, Mr Speaker, Parliament should be updated on how the monies are being spent and the implementation plan so that we keep track. Secondly, it is very important for us to have the Uganda Heart Institute because very many people in the country are suffering from heart conditions. 

Personally, I have ever visited Uganda Heart Institute. I see how people are struggling with no space. The working conditions are not well. So, I am here to support this to make sure that the House passes this loan that will help our people in future. Thank you.

3.49
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work and state that this particular loan is long overdue. I was in the sector in 2018, when we started talking about a home for the Uganda Heart Institute. Hopefully, before 2026, Uganda Heart Institute should be at its home. 

They needed 30 acres then. Unfortunately, they were given 11 acres only – now reduced to 10 – at Naguru. Uganda Heart Institute has built capacity over the years. There is no need for referrals abroad, save for maybe five or 10 per cent of the complicated cases. However, most of these cases can be handled here by the specialists and staff. (Applause) Specialists are now 58 and we can continue training.

However, Mr Speaker, the point I want to make is that we had recommended - because of the specialists who are still few and the need to train others - that the retirement age for these super specialists be increased to at least 70, if they can continue working. (Applause) That has not been done by the Ministry of Public Service.

Dr Omagino was retired, but we could not allow him to go. He is now serving on contract. We need these super specialists, who are few and are willing to continue working, to work. Ministry of Public Service, please, take up this matter.

I am glad the minister is seated there and listening. You are new. We left these issues on the Table when I was in the sector. Hon. Anifa, please, follow it up. You are the Minister of State for Health. I left these on your table. Thank you. 

3.51
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Mr Speaker, I would like to add my voice to the committee’s recommendation regarding the Uganda Heart Institute. I would like to assure Members that I know Dr Omagino – a few years ago, where the Uganda Heart Institute is, there was some fundamental development that was carried out. I would like to urge Members to support this loan, simply because we know Dr Omagino as a man who is very proactive and expeditious. I would like to urge Dr Omagino that you, maybe, train some others such that as you leave, they have that kind of heart for work.

Since this land is in Naguru, I urge Members that let us ring-fence the land in Naguru, especially when it comes to the Uganda Heart Institute, because we are all candidates for heart diseases. I submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.53
MR SIMON WOKORACH (NRM, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this very wonderful opportunity. 

Mr Speaker, like you guided, I realised that I am a member of the Committee on National Economy. So, I give that opportunity to another person. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is being honest.

3.53
MS SARAH NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in seconding the motion to approve this loan. 

I believe, together with most of my colleagues here, that we have been approached by many people in our constituencies, who are suffering from heart conditions. When many of them are referred to the Uganda Heart Institute in Mulago, they reach there and, sometimes, they cannot find these services there. 

They are, again, referred to India and then, you hear them coming back, lamenting when these patients die. Mr Speaker, approving these loans will save many Ugandans who are suffering from these illnesses.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us do one minute each because you are supporting.

3.54
MS SAUDA KAUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been tossing on Namisindwa - she has said my point, I want to add my voice. We thank the committee for the good report. I want to caution Dr Omagino and the other staff that they should remain with that good heart. We shall give them the money and everything will be put in place. However, when our ordinary people go there, they will wait for a call from “orders from above” to work on them. Those who do not have people to back them up will not be handled. Therefore, I want to caution the staff to treat everyone equally.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why they need the space to be able to work on everyone. 

MS KAUMA: Exactly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That has been the biggest challenge.

MS KAUMA: Thank you.

3.55
MR LUKE KYOBE (NRM, Luuka North County, Luuka): Thank you, Speaker. I am here to support the motion because this challenge of the heart disease cuts across board. All of us are candidates. Government should come up with ways of even subsidising the medication because some people have gone to the Uganda Heart Institute, they have been treated but the cost of medication is very high. So, I presume that in this, we should also handle that. Medication can be subsidised. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Colleagues, I now put the question that the resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $20 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA), $30 million from the Saudi Fund for Development and $20 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development for the construction and equipping of the Uganda Heart Institute project be passed by Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Colleagues, I have allowed over 20 people to speak and everyone was in support. (Member rose_) Hon. Tinkasiimire, you have just walked in and you start us off with points of procedure? Next time, please. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON RELEASES TO THE ROAD FUND FOR FIRST QUARTER OR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister of Finance - Colleagues, you do not just enter the House and you start on a point of procedure. We have been here since 2.00 p.m. So, please, honourable member, I will give you a chance but you do not just enter the House and start with procedure.
 
3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, I beg to present a statement on the disbursement schedule of the road maintenance funds and the status of regulations on operationalisation of the Road Fund.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable minister, we are waiting for the Road Fund statement.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, during the Sitting of Tuesday, 9 August 2022, a matter of national importance was raised by Hon. Samuel Opio on delayed release of funds for road maintenance despite the looming rainy season, which would worsen the state of seasonal roads. 

The Speaker directed me to avail Members of Parliament with the disbursement schedule of road maintenance funds to the various local governments and regulations on operationalisation of the Road Fund on the proceeding day, Wednesday, 10 August 2022. 

Disbursement schedule of Road Maintenance Funds

In line with the expenditure limits for this first quarter, the Uganda Road Fund vide their letter URF/ED/MOF/050/22 dated 28 July 2022 - which we have already circulated - submitted their releases warrant for this quarter, which included Shs 6,280,000,000 for maintenance of the district, urban and community access roads (commonly called DUCAR roads) and Shs 5,756,884,923 for maintenance of the national roads. 

Subsequently, the Uganda Road Fund released the schedule for Shs 6.28 billion for maintenance of the DUCAR networks, which includes funds for cities, municipalities and district local governments. The Uganda Road Fund has in their letters URF/ FIN/REL/DUCAR/001/2022-2023 dated 10 August 2022, addressed to the accounting officers of municipal councils, city councils and district local governments indicated the revised schedule of funds to URF designated agencies for maintenance of DUCAR for quarter one of Financial Year 2022/2023. 

Mr Speaker, due to budgetary constraints experienced in this quarter and the need to further prioritise the national road network, Shs 18.285 billion of additional expenditure limits - this is additional - was released to the Uganda Road Fund for emergency maintenance works on the national road network. 

The issuance of funds for the DUCARs has been delayed on the Integrated Financial Management System because of changes in the business process to enable a seamless flow of funds to local governments. These funds will now be directly remitted to the local government treasury single account holding account, A/C No.003300138000004 in Bank of Uganda. 

The reason for this change is that we would not have the same account for collecting revenues serving the purposes of disbursing these revenues. With this done, we expect the issuance of funds to have been completed by Friday, 19 August 2022. 

Mr Speaker, a copy of the disbursement schedules to the local governments from the Uganda Road Fund is hereby laid before this august House. I have already circulated it with this report.

Regulations on Operationalisation of the Road Fund 

Mr Speaker, before I present this, I wish to update the House that my ministry was invited to appear before the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 2 August 2022 and we presented this position. The honourable chairperson shall include this in his report to the House. 

Mr Speaker and members, as you are aware, Parliament on 12 May 2022 passed the following resolutions: 

The Minister of Finance should operationalise the Uganda Road Fund in accordance with section 49 of the Act by the end of the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

The Minister of Finance should ensure funds collected by Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) as road-user charges are remitted directly to the Fund as stipulated in Section 21(3) of the Act.

The Minister presents to Parliament the regulations made under Section 49 of the Act.

Subsequently, the Minister wrote to the Attorney-General on 12 May 2022 seeking legal opinion on the apparent conflicting legal provisions in the Road Fund Act, 2008; the National Forestry and Tree planting Act, 2003; the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 (PFMA); and the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995. 

The Attorney-General's office in a response dated 12 May 2022 advised that both the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 allow for the creation of other Funds apart from the Consolidated Fund and were, therefore, not in conflict.

A total of 15 special Funds have been created by the various Acts of Parliament. They include the following:

    1. The Uganda Road Fund;
    2. The Land Fund;
    3. The Tree Fund;
    4. The Rural Communication Development Fund;
    5. The Energy Fund;
    6. The HIV/AIDS Trust Fund;
    7. The Business Technical Education and Vocational Training Fund;
    8. Rural Electrification Fund;
    9. The National Environment Fund;
    10. Tourism Development Fund;
    11. The Immigration Fund;
    12. The Judiciary Fund;
    13. Project Preparation Fund;
    14. The Contingency Fund; and
    15. Petroleum Fund.

However, only the Contingency and Petroleum funds have been operationalised. 

Whereas the above special Funds were legally created, it is no longer tenable to operationalise them given the current trends, reforms and potential negative consequences. 

My ministry has implemented a number of PFM reforms aimed at improving fiscal discipline, budget credibility and effectiveness of fiscal and monetary policies. These include, among others, programme planning and budgeting and the Treasury Single Account. As a result, Government has been unable to operationalise the above Funds majorly due to resource constraints, but also to consolidate the benefits of these PFM reforms. 

Implementation of the Treasury Single Account has improved efficiency and effectiveness in liquidity management. 

Operationalising these special Funds will, therefore, present the following challenges:

    1. Erode the benefits registered from introduction of the Treasury Single Account of efficient and effective liquidity management.

    2. It would lead to unrealistic budgeting and planning by reducing the budget flexibility and fiscal space. Resources are locked up in special Funds, reducing money available for spending by other Government entities that may not have funds at a particular time.

    3. It undermines the benefits envisaged in the implementation of the Programme Planning Approach under the National Development Plan III as it promotes the silo mentality by scattering resources and could lead to sub-optimal utilisation with the limited Government cash resources.

    4. It would lead to duplication of the treasury management function coupled with unnecessary Fund management costs and delays because each of these Funds constitute a cost on management.

    5. It is fiduciary risky and poses accountability challenges. For instance, the Uganda Road Fund is not accountable for the funds released to it, but rather, the executing agencies - the local governments.

    6.  To set a precedent that could trigger demand for full operationalisation of all other Funds leading to the breakup of the Uganda Consolidated Fund into many small Funds, which is unsustainable.

    7. To legalise fiscal indiscipline associated with the poor management of special Funds. 

Mr Speaker, on the above account, my ministry is in the process of engaging Cabinet to reconsider the operationalisation of special Funds as we assess the benefits accruing from implementation of the Treasury Single Account. We shall inform this august House as soon as Cabinet provides us with guidance on how to proceed.

Attached to this presentation are the releases by the Road Fund to the accounting officers in district local governments vide a letter that I have already mentioned. 

We have also attached another list to the municipal councils issued by the Road Fund. All the municipal councils have been covered. We have also attached a list to all the city councils. These are all endorsed by the Uganda Road Fund. I beg to move. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, honourable minister. Colleagues, as you know, when such a statement is presented, we give the first right of call to the Member who raised the issue. 

Hon. Opio, are you satisfied with the response because you are the one who raised it?

4.13
Mr Samuel opio (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, honourable minister, for the statement on the disbursement. However, I would like to seek some clarification. 

On the statement, it is indicated that a schedule of Shs 6,280,000,000 has been provided for roads in the districts, cities and municipalities. However, when you look at what has been presented, it is clear that for cities it is indicated Shs 280 million, Shs 806 million for municipalities and Shs 3,375,000,000 for the district roads. When you total all these, it comes to Shs 4,461,000,000 and not Shs 6,280,000,000 as stated. There is, therefore, a deficit of Shs 1,819,000,000. So, I would like to seek your clarification on that. 

Secondly, the statement further indicates that there will be additional releases. Uganda Road Fund says that they are going to work with MoFPED for additional releases within this quarter. I want to find out again whether there will be those releases in this quarter. 

Thirdly, what has been provided is a schedule for releases to the districts, but not for the town councils and the subcounties. I just want you to reconfirm that. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. Honourable minister, do you know that what you are doing is just telling the public that it should be the MPs to go and work on their roads? If you say this money is what you have released for roads, then you are just telling me I should go and work on roads in Ruhinda North Constituency. 

And I want us to be honest on such matters. The rains are already here. Honourable, I want you to be honest - Maybe we can send the committee to visit Kayunga, your own constituency and we see. 

Secondly, you have not yet amended the law, but you have come here to say, “We shall not implement.” Do you want it to go on the record of Parliament that you are not going to implement it, yet you know that you have not amended it? (Applause) 

These Funds you were complaining about were your own creation. They were proposed by the Government. They were not proposed by these Members because we do not have powers under the Constitution. (Applause) It is you. 

Therefore, what do you want us to do for God's sake? You are just sending these MPs into trouble. Anyway, colleagues, I need to hear from you. 

4.15
MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo East County, Namisindwa): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker. My vote did not go to waste. It is the first time that I am speaking ever since you came into the Chair. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, the minister has given the statement. You rightly noted that it is now the duty of MPs. Indeed, I have been lost from Parliament for some time working on the roads in my constituency. The minister is probably not aware that even the little money released - which always delays anyway - may come in the second or third quarter so the district has no way – 

I am a former district chairperson and I know this by the way. Even then, the programmes that the money is released for are only for routine maintenance. You do not have the periodic - or if it is there, it is about one per cent and there is completely no rehabilitation. 

Comparatively also, is the minister aware that one kilometre of a district road - the money allocated and compared to the UNRA road for routine maintenance - is thousands of percentages apart? He should know that. 

Therefore, the districts, subcounties and mainly the town councils are grappling with collapsed infrastructure of roads. I wish that the minister constituted a committee to visit the rural areas and see for himself. I beg to submit. Thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, set for me two minutes for each Member.

4.17
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My little hope, which I had yesterday when you directed the minister to come and present this report, has disappeared. The problems that the people of Adjumani face cannot be handled with Shs 25 million. 

Yesterday, I was here – the people are already demonstrating. The statement of the state minister is confirming what the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said; that we are limping economically. Therefore, our Government should come and declare that our budget cannot be implemented so that as leaders, we are not put under pressure.
 
Let us not pretend. If we do not have money, let the Government go and declare so. What is Shs 25 million per quarter? That is my request. The Government should not babysit itself; it should tell us the truth. If we do not have money to implement the budget, let us tell the citizens. Thank you so much.

4.18
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am in pain because we fought so hard to be like any other country in Africa. Our roads were in a bad state. When the issue of the Road Fund came up, we were all convinced by these ministers. When I call them, “These ministers who do not have a map of Uganda on their desk” - I am absolutely right! 

If Hon. Lugoloobi took a ride to Karuma and then to Pakwach, he would see the lack of maintenance. Vehicles have diverted to the National Park and that road is completely forgotten. It used to take us 12 hours from Kampala to Arua then four or five hours, but now it has gone back to 12 hours. 

He talked about a fire fund and a tree fund. You cannot compare the Road Fund with any other Fund. (Applause) Hon. Lugoloobi, we have suffered. I said if I cannot get a place in a Government school, I can go private. If I cannot have a place for my mother in a government hospital, I will go to a private one, but for the roads, it is a mandate of Government. 

Go to Kenya and Tanzania, for example. Kenya and Tanzania were in a worse state than us. However, they talk of the Road Fund saying, “Add Shs 100 to one litre of fuel and that money is reserved for maintenance.” When you go and calculate it, it is Shs 1.2 trillion. Why can't we reserve such money for road maintenance? (Applause) 

Some of us were here in Parliament for a number of times because of roads. You make a road in the community and you are there - you fly, I can tell you. When I see ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development seated in those arm chairs –(Member timed out.) 

4.20 
MS ANNE MARY TUMWINE (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wait a bit. Hon. Opendi, the seconder of your motion has spoken. 

MS TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that I am a bit disappointed by the report from the minister, though thank you so much for bringing it so that we know what is happening. 

Roads are very important in our communities. Everybody is demanding for roads and when they are bad, they call us the leaders as if we are the ones who have all the answers to these roads. 

We are currently experiencing too much rain in the village, but there is no money for repairing district roads. We were given machines at the district to maintain the roads, but they have no fuel. The engineers tell you that there is no fuel, yet some of us come from hard-to-reach districts. It is even worse; the terrain is difficult and the district cannot maintain those roads. For example, in my district, they have given us only Shs 30 million; Shs 30 million to Ntoroko District is nothing. 

Mr Speaker, I beg that the money for the Road Fund be increased. Even this one shilling should go to three shillings because of the fuel increment. The price of the fuel has increased. 

Secondly, in 2019 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, what we are arguing here is that they have even diverted the little we put somewhere else. We should be fighting that what we put is brought back. 

Honourable minister, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tried to dodge it in each and every way. You even wrote to the Attorney-General and the Attorney-General wrote back and said, the Constitution commands you. (Applause) 

You are making it difficult for me to preside over a House where a minister can come to the Floor of Parliament and say, “I am not going to implement a law.” I cannot continue presiding over this House, I cannot. (Applause)

4.23
DR LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I must say that I am standing here as a woman who has lost hope. If we categorically analyse the challenges we have incurred in our constituencies due to poor roads - we have lost people. Some of these Members of Parliament have been very generous to buy ambulances, but they break down in two or three months.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I feel Shs 25 million is a joke. If we sit here and even continue deliberating on these matters - I think it is very important that this House takes action. We have done all these things before, but action is not taken. We need to remember the sick people we are passing the money for; those with heart problems who will not even make it to Uganda Heart Institute because of bad roads.

We need to also remember that the farmers who are right now in the garden trying to plant something cannot transport what they have produced. We need to remember that our children have lost lives when struggling to go to school. Therefore, I would like to request that the honourable Minister of Finance here acts nice and gives us the right procedure on how we are going to handle this issue.

4.25
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know what happens when people go to the frontbench. Hon. Lugoloobi was a strong and ardent supporter when we were creating the Uganda Road Fund, but now, he is speaking in tongues. (Laughter)
		
Mr Speaker, we have not lost hope because we have the powers. Until we censure a minister on this issue here that is when they will open their eyes. 

Mr Speaker, you have put it right that the Attorney-General, the legal adviser of the Government of Uganda, has made a pronouncement. Who are we, now to discuss an illegality brought here by Hon. Lugoloobi? We are just wasting time here. Honourable members, let us rise to the occasion and censure the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for violating the law. I do not want us to meander here and there. People are suffering; the roads are impassable. 

Mr Speaker, as you have put it, it is you, and me to realise that the road is very bad. Soroti UNRA office has only received Shs 40 million of the Shs 1.0 billion they have been receiving. Now, here comes a minister, after even getting advice from the Attorney-General - what has stopped him from bringing the law, if he wants to amend it? Let us just not generalise. This is an issue for the Uganda Road Fund. 

Mr Speaker, we need to start censuring ministers, especially starting with this one. If we can pass money to other institutions like Lubowa and others, yet we are failing on this one - it is you and me - Hon. Byanyima has put it that it is the roads that bring us back here; unless you do not want to come back to Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.27
MS SUSAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, when I allow a motion, then I will have suffocated all of you. I want your voices to be heard. 

MS AMERO: Mr Speaker, like the rest of my colleagues have spoken, I think there is a problem that happens to some people. Hon. Lugoloobi was a very good person before he became the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and subsequently a minister. 

Now, since he is driving a free car, where he does not know how much it costs to take it to the garage; he does not know how much fuel it costs to pass in potholes – but he can now come here and talk whatever he wants to talk. 

I would like to stand with my colleague, Hon. Okupa, that we move a motion of censure for some of the ministers who are spoiling the name of NRM party. We work hard to get votes and now, you come around and play with what we have worked for. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, we need money. What we need is money for the roads. Let us remain focused on getting money. 

4.29
MR JOHN TEIRA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Mr Speaker, those voices are coming up because we have put up with enough comedy from that frontbench. For so many times, we are stomaching insults caused by the frontbench. How can someone come, stand on the Floor of Parliament and say, “We are not implementing” with a clear law, moreover, on a fund, which was created out of thorough research? Hon. Lugoloobi, this is a joke of the century. I would like to advise you clearly, that the Fund must operate, short of which, you are carrying the consequences. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kangwagye. 

4.30
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (Independent, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think my brother, Minister Lugoloobi has easily seen, felt and sensed what is happening in our constituencies. Good enough, he is a sitting Member of Parliament and a minister at the same time. 

Hon. Lugoloobi, you know where some of us come from; a district like Isingiro to be given Shs 20 million. Just imagine that! Where do you expect such people to go? How do you expect such people to perform? How would you expect that part of the country of ours, the one we are trying to enjoy, to benefit really? 

Mr Speaker, I am of the view that if there is any problem as far as this ministry is concerned, the gentleman should stand and give us the real information on the Floor so we see how best we can get this money so that our activities can continue working and moving on well without having any challenge. Without that, we shall not allow this to continue. 

We want money and our people must move. We need development in our country. Hon. Byanyima talked about it; that the other time, we used to have this money, and our constituencies were doing well. Now, this is the time we need money for the good of our country; failure to do that no job at all. Thank you. 

4.32
MR ENOS ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I feel sorry for my honourable Minister of Finance –(Interjections)- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, your time is counting, and you are protected. 

MR ENOS ASSIMWE: Mr Speaker, my argument is that we reject the report from the minister. He should go back and call the Cabinet minister who is the honourable Minister of Finance to give us a proper way out. Otherwise, right now, we are actually lamenting. The problem is well known -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Hon. Enos, whatever Hon. Lugoloobi is presenting here is final; it is from the Ministry of Finance and he has full authority.

MR ENOS ASIIMWE: Thank you, for your guidance, Mr Speaker. However, what I would like to say is that we already know the problem. In the committee, we called the team and they told us they have no money. So, Parliament should decide on the next course of action. Otherwise, attacking Hon. Lugoloobi will not give us an answer because they do not have the resources. 

I, therefore, call upon –(Interruption) 

4.34
MR GEOFREY MUTIWA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join colleagues who have lost hope. In my district, Butaleja, the whole of last financial year received only Shs 80 million to work on all district roads. At that time, they told us that due to COVID-19, the money collected was not enough and we expected a better release in this new financial year. 

It is very unfortunate that right now, the minister is telling us there is no money. When I checked on the release, my district gets Shs 25 million vis-a-vis the number of roads that are already down; many bridges are down because of the current rains. 

I do not know, Mr Speaker, what we shall do. I would request the minister to come up and tell us the strategy that they have, as Cabinet, to see that monies are sent to the districts and our districts are able to work on the roads. The situation is currently out of hand. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.35
MR LINOS NGOMPEK (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is very interesting that when our finance ministers are coming here for loans, they are very excited. However, when we have matters that affect our nationals, ministers give us a deaf ear. 

For example, this money that goes to Uganda Road Fund is levied on fuel – and that is what the Act states. So, the minister should explain to us where this money, that is supposed to go to the Uganda Road Fund, goes. For example, we have a sub county called Masindi Port and we received Shs 1.0 million only to fix the roads. Yes. It is quite a shame. 

As Members of Parliament, we should not allow this to happen. We always come here and lament, but nothing happens. Because we lament a lot, the ministers take us for a joke. (Interjections) The issue of censure – we have failed to censure anyone. (Laughter) So, that one cannot help us. They should explain to us where these monies go and how they utilise them because we need money to work on the roads. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.37
MR RONALD AFIDRA (NRM, Lower Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Mr Speaker, this is my maiden speech since you became the Deputy Speaker of Parliament. I would like to congratulate you upon that.

The matter of Uganda Road Fund, as you have guided, is a matter of debating an illegality. I had wanted to inquire, through you: can this House take time to discuss an illegality?

If the House you are presiding over cannot discuss an illegality, I would rather propose, through you, Mr Speaker, that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development goes back to Cabinet and comes up with a supplementary to redeem this country. This is because throughout this country, different constituencies are suffering with lack of proper access community, district and UNRA roads. This cry has been here. 

Through you, Mr Speaker, I would rather propose, again, that if there is no supplementary, we better bring back the Constituency Development Fund – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, money was appropriated. This is a matter of release. It is not about a supplementary. 

MR AFIDRA: Let me conclude. If this money is there, then, that means the minister needs to be put to order. We need money for the Uganda Road Fund. Otherwise, our role, as Members of Parliament, is not to work on the roads. I submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, the way you feel is how I feel. Honourable minister – and I think this has to be very clear – there is no way it can remain on the record of Parliament that you came here and said you cannot implement a law because you are going to propose an amendment. What if we reject the amendment? The amendment has to be done by Parliament. 

So, I think that was the first wrong step. That is bordering on arrogance – telling the House that you cannot implement a law, which was proposed and signed by the Government. We are only saying implement it – and then you come and tell us that you can’t? No, please. That cannot be accepted.

Two, honourable minister, this is a Fund with a clear source of funding – like Hon. Linos brought it up. It means you diverted money from this Fund. So, all we are asking for is: return the money for the Fund. (Applause)

Three, Minister, I would like to hear what you have to say about what colleagues have said before I open up, again.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I have been in this Parliament for some time, but I have not received a roasting like the one I have seen today. (Laughter) 

That sends a very strong message to me and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I have consulted the Leader of Government Business and we are going to consult Cabinet, further, on this matter. 

The fact of the matter is that the problem actually emanates from the challenge that we are having on the cash flows and other challenges, as you know already, in the economy. In fact, we are ready to come and present a paper on this. You have seen that the general release in Government has been dramatically reduced from the usual 25 per cent of the budget appropriation to about 19 per cent. The net effect is actually felt in almost all sectors of the economy. 

However, as I indicated in this paper, the situation is being constantly reviewed and you saw that I indicated that we have given an additional cash limit to the national road infrastructure maintenance – to UNRA. The quarter is not yet over. Additional cash limits can be provided –(Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is that I am the one who brought a motion that was seconded and debated on this Floor. It was even supported with the guidance of the Attorney-General. The Attorney-General sits and guides Cabinet. The minister has come here, defiant and against the legal adviser of Cabinet on a matter that had been resolved – where his senior minister conceded. 

Mr Speaker, you even directed the minister that what this House needs are the regulations. This Fund was created by an Act in 2015. I don’t know how many of us were here –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima is correcting you that it was in 2008.

MS OPENDI: Yes, 2008. Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has consistently refused to operationalise this Fund for personal reasons. 

Just two weeks ago, we passed here their request for Shs 250 billion for Roko, but imagine that for all the roads in the country, Shs 6 billion is released. 

Today, Mr Speaker, we were interfacing with the Minister of Works and Transport. There are certificates that are not paid. Every day, this country pays Shs 25 million for every certificate that is not paid. We are bringing a report to this House: a lot of money is being spent for non-payment of these certificates and others. 

So, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to continue debating this matter, where the minister has defied your directives and the directives of this House? I take this as contempt. 

On that note, we are going to give notice to the Clerk; unless we shake up this Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Mr Speaker, we are  going to move as a House – that a Speaker can give directives and your directives are defied and we as Members look on, where else or what is our relevance as Parliament? 

Is it procedurally right for us to continue listening to the minister and even debating a matter that is a clear slap on your face; that you are actually toothless? (Applause) Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I guide on her procedure, I had allowed Hon. Ekanya on procedure. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure. I am armed here with the Public Finance and Management Act. It is a shame that this House passed the Appropriation Act based on forecast information of financial projection, revenue projection, expenditure projection, annual work plan, activity plan and procurement plan.

Mr Speaker, as we speak now, the minister has conceded that they are violating the Appropriation Act which was assented to by the President. That is total disregard and contempt of Parliament. 

Honourable minister, you are my friend and I feel pity that I am saying this in front of you. Mr Speaker, as we speak now, the cash release does not conform to the Public Finance and Management Act. Most entities are receiving 10 per cent and this breeds serious corruption because we approved here a procurement plan for every vote. We approved here a recruitment plan for every vote, but what most votes are receiving is salary only, and wage which is not more than 10 per cent. 

Mr Speaker, we cannot sit here; if Government wants us to amend the Appropriation Act, they should bring the Bill here. I know that the economy is hard worldwide, but what Government is doing – let me tell you colleagues, through the Rt Hon. Speaker – the Government is suppressing cash release in order to stabilise inflation. If you do that, you are going to affect growth and lead to poverty. That is the policy approach Government is adopting because we receive a cash-flow projection from Uganda Revenue Authority for the financial year for every quarter. 

Based on the performance of the previous year, we received a proposal, Mr Speaker, for Government to draw down from Consolidated Fund. We received a proposal for Government to draw down from Petroleum Fund. We received a proposal for domestic borrowing. Have you implemented all that? Nothing implemented-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. 

MR EKANYA: Is it procedurally right for this Parliament to be here when Government is violating the Appropriation Act? Is it correct? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I had allowed procedure. Honourable minister, you see how you have even pushed Hon. Ekanya? Colleagues, that is why I had allowed the honourable minister to first give us a response and then we see how best to move forward. Honourable minister, you can resume, then I see whether, indeed, you are moving in the right direction to always be heard in this House. Otherwise, this House has very many weapons it can use on anyone. Beyond censure, we have other weapons we can use, and I hope we do not invoke - Let us first listen to the minister.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I think I should first make clarification that what we have in the Uganda Road Fund are road maintenance funds. They do not include funds for road rehabilitation and upgrading of roads. The revenues arising from this area – we actually spend about 1.6 trillion on road construction alone, which is not necessarily in the Uganda Road Fund. So, I am trying to account for the money that comes from these collections indicated in the Road Fund - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, they have brought a point of order on you. Hon. Aleper?

MR MOSES ALEPER: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the minister to think that we do not know what happens to the money that we appropriated? We know what funds are for Uganda Road Fund, we know how much money is supposed to be collected from petroleum products that are actually sold in this country. So, this idea of meandering, talking about road construction, should not be tolerated. 

I wanted to tell you, Mr Speaker, that what the minister and Government is doing is like building a home without a road. How do you deliver services in this country without any road? So, is it in order for this minister to think that we do not understand what we appropriated? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, however much you try to explain – in my constituency, if I can use it as an example, I do not have any central Government road. I am in a rift valley. The money you have given Mitooma District – I am now the one who is Government; I am the one doing bridges, providing culverts, and this is happening to each one of us. And if I can tell you, our opponents have already started, and that is what they are using, especially for the new MPs. They are saying: “No, the former MP was working on roads; Government was working on roads; so when he went, he went with the money.” And they are the ones who are saying, “Colleagues, this one cannot fight for your roads.” And Hon. Lugoloobi is coming here and confirming properly how he will not give you the money. In short, you are condemning all these MPs into losses.

Honourable minister, let me make this very clear. They had a point of order. Take our message to Cabinet. On Tuesday, give us a response of what you, as the central Government, has resolved after listening to our voices here –(Applause).
 
On Tuesday, bring a statement responding to the sentiments of colleagues here. That statement will guide the House on what to do next - (Applause). For avoidance of doubt, that statement, which you will bring on Tuesday, will guide the House on what to do next.  Next item?

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON A MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO RESPOND TO THE PLIGHT OF KARIMOJONG CHILDREN ENSLAVED IN STREET BEGGING AND CHILD LABOUR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, 20 minutes. Colleagues, 20 minutes is 20 minutes; we have been with this report, I do not expect the chairperson to read for us. I hope you revised and you will be able to debate. 

4.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I can embark on the presentation of this report, allow me to lay on Table the minutes and the copy of the report. I beg to lay. 

Mr Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament Urging Government to Respond to the Plight of Karimojong Children Enslaved in Street Begging and Child Labour. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to take the Members to page 2. No, I will not take you to page 2; rather I implore the Members to read the background and the introduction.

Mr Speaker, allow me to take Members to page 4: Findings, Observations and Recommendations. 

We were establishing the extent of trafficking of children in Uganda, and I have a table which reports the submission by Uganda to the United Nations that paints a picture of the number of street children that have been withdrawn over the years, but when you look at that table, while the figures give an indication of the children rescued, they neither review the actual number of children on the street nor state their districts of origin and whether the same children were not re-trafficked. 

Mr Speaker, our observation as a committee on the third paragraph is that the absence of reliable data affects proper planning, resource allocation, programming and the designing of appropriate interventions, leaving these children in a limbo practically.

The dearth of statistics is made worse, partly due to laborious process of obtaining a birth certificate that is intended to offer the people of Uganda an identification, nationality and citizenship. 

The lack of these reliable statistics is also an indictment against the Government for failure to notice some of its most vulnerable human beings. 

Our recommendation on above is as follows: 

    (i) The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Uganda National Bureau of Statistics should carry out an audit of all street children in the country periodically, starting from within 12 months from the date of the adoption of this report. 

    (ii) The Ministry of Internal Affairs, through the police, should investigate, arrest and prosecute child traffickers. 

    (iii) The Ministry of Internal Affairs and the National Identification and Registration Authority should put in place measures to ease the process of acquiring birth certificates as a means of identity, nationality and citizenship. 

We established the factors responsible for the presence of children on the street and noted that the phenomenon of migration from Karamoja was not a new one; over the years Karimojong have removed - (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The chairperson is presenting a very sensitive report, which majorly touches two ministries, the one on Gender and the other on Karamoja Affairs yet when you check the frontbench, none of those two ministries is represented. 

Are we proceeding well when the two ministries are not represented at all yet they have enough manpower in those ministries?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Hon. Solomon Silwany, is it related to the same? 

MR SILWANY: Mr Speaker, we had an agreement that whenever we have a session – and this was stated clearly by the Speaker - we shall have 30 per cent of the frontbench representing Government and we boast of a big cabinet of 82 members. I think 30 per cent is not about demanding too much from Government.

Is it procedurally right for us to continue working with only two ministers on the frontbench? I only see this type of information maybe in soccer, where you can have only two people in the front. So, is it procedurally right for us to operate when we have only two ministers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this Order Paper came out early, I discussed it with your representatives in the Office of the Leader of Government Business and the Office of Leader of the Opposition; he is my witness. Where are the ministers for Karamoja Affairs?

4.58
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, some of the ministers sent me information that they were with the Finance minister, they had sent me their apologies. But right now, I have just  called for the Minister of Gender the Minister of Karamoja Affairs and that of Internal Affairs to come to Parliament because of this paper -(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I think this is a fundamental issue and when you were the Government Chief Whip you lobbied very hard to have the Cabinet expanded and I remember you called my house very late at night, to sponsor a motion with Hon. Fox Odoi.

Now that you are the Speaker, I would like you to convince the House that we moved in the right direction to expand Parliament and to ensure that the people were properly represented in Cabinet; so that anytime we have a session there would be a minister in the House to answer to some of the problems.

Now, do you think we should continue or review the earlier position so that we reduce the number of ministers because there is no need for us to have 82 ministers - the highest in the region - but we do not have even a single one from any ministry to represent the ministry in any debate? 

This is shameful to our country and the resources are being used to make sure that these ministers are given enough facilities to operate. Here we are every day lamenting until when?

So, I think it is important that you guide the House that we may have to ask you diplomatically to seek audience with the President to guide us because every day we are lamenting, quarrelling with ourselves and sometimes the Government Chief Whip has to answer to some of the problems of the different ministries. 

Now I can see the Third Deputy Prime Minister is suffering the same disease that the former Government Chief Whip suffered. She has to struggle to answer. Can we bring this to an end? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. The Government Chief Whip yesterday on the Floor informed us how he would be having a handover today to his colleague. So, he is in Nakasero State House for the handover. 

I have a few notices from ministers who would not be here, but in line with the guidance of the presiding officer then, I am constrained to continue with the House when I have only two ministers on the frontbench. (Applause) 

So, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. and Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we shall have a meeting over this matter.

(House rose at 5.01 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 August 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 

