

Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Tuesday, 27 August 2019

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like you to join me in welcoming a number of guests. 

In the public gallery, we have students and teachers of Forest View Primary School in Bukwo District. They are represented by hon. Reuben Chelimo and hon. Evelyn Chemutai. You are welcome. (Applause)

Also join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Paurinah Nursery and Primary School in Agago District. They are there looking very smart and are represented by hon. Edward Otto and hon. Franca Akello. You are welcome. (Applause)

Join me also, in welcoming another delegation of students and teachers of Yivu Primary School, Maracha East. They are very smart. They are represented by hon. James Acidri and hon. Rose Ayaka. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, you may recall that sometime during the last session, Parliament considered and passed the Minimum Wages Bill, 2015. It was sent to the President for assent as provided for by the Constitution.

However, on 21 August 2019, the President wrote to me, under Article 91(3) of the Constitution, notifying me that he had objected to the assent of the Bill. I am required, under Article 91(6) (a) of the Constitution, to present the same Bill for your re-consideration.

Here is the text of the letter from the President:

“I have received the Minimum Wages Bill for assent. Having received advice from the Attorney-General and pursuant to Article 91(2) (c) of the Constitution, I hereby refuse to assent to the Bill for the following reasons:

    i) There are no gaps in the Minimum Wages Advisory Boards and Wages Council Act that the Bill seeks to cure. The current law is adequate and enforceable.
    ii) Cabinet directed the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to review a report on the implications of fixing a minimum wage to investment and the economy. The said report was prepared by the Minimum Wages Advisory Boards. Cabinet still awaits the report from the ministry so as to make an informed decision.”

Honourable members, this is not the usual situation where the President indicates the areas where he wants us to adjust. It is a total rejection of the whole Bill.

Therefore, I direct the Member responsible for this Bill that the Clerk shall give him time on the Order Paper so that we take a decision as a House on the entire Bill. We shall put it back on the Order Paper. Thank you.

2.52
Mr kassiano wadri (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Madam Speaker, I do not know whether –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill will come here and we shall have time to debate it.

Mr WADRI: Yes but there is something related to it. In the letter from the President that you have just read, he says that he has declined to assent to this law on the advice of the Attorney-General.

The Attorney-General is a member of this House. Why did he deny us his technical advice at the time when this law was being considered because that would have saved the time?

However, if he is supposed to be the legal advisor to the Government and a member of this House and he is not here to give the advice but waits until when Parliament has done its work, sent it to the President then the President says, “…on the advice of the Attorney-General…” Is he not doing a disservice to this House as its Member?

The Speaker: Definitely, he is. He is supposed to be here to help in guiding. However, we shall have a thorough debate when the matter comes back to the Order Paper.

There are a few matters of national concern. 

2.53
Mr Robert ntende (Independence, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On 25 July 2018, this Parliament hosted the Prime Minister of India, His Excellency Narendra Modi.

While here, the Prime Minister made a number of pledges to this nation. As honourable members who assembled in this august House, we applauded him and all that he had carried with him.

One of the pledges was to build a heritage centre at Jinja in memory of a great man, Ghandhi. The other issue was on credit grants to this nation, amounting to $141 million. He pledged that this credit would go in line with establishing cottage industries in sub regions. The President committed himself to follow up on this very important matter.

However, it is now a year and our people have been waiting to see what the Prime Minister of India promised in vain. We need Government to come out clearly and brief us on the progress in regard to that Prime Minister’s pledge to this nation.  Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, as you may recall, on that historic visit, the Prime Minister of India pronounced his support for Africa from this House. Therefore, it was very significant that it was done here. 

It is true we have not heard – hon. Mary Karooro Okurut, what is happening to the line of credit; the convention centre or the small scale industries?

2.56
The minister, Office of the Prime Minister (general duties)  (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Thank you, honourable member for bringing up that matter. 

Indeed, we were all very happy and elated when the Prime Minister of India made those commitments. We have lost time but I am going to inform the Leader of Government Business this afternoon so that a follow up is made. A report will be made available here, verbally, not later than this week.  Thank you.

The Speaker: We expect an answer on Thursday.

2.56
Mr Gordon arinda (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance on the imminent attachment and sale of Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipal Council property by Best Associated Auctioneers and Court Bailiffs arising out of a court case that Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality lost in regard to the taxi park. 

On Friday 23 August 2019, an advert ran in the newspapers for sale of staff houses and Kabagarame Pork market, which is one of our biggest pork markets in the region. 

Yesterday, I met with a big number of about 1,000 women who sell their products in that market. Majority of the people controlling that market are women. We had a meeting and the women asked me to come and make sure that I present this matter on the Floor of this House because they are going to be deprived of their livelihood. Over 1,500 women operate in that market and over 1,000 families derive their livelihood from this market. Therefore, a lot of money is raised weekly in this market and they are losing it. 

Madam Speaker, my prayers are: 

    1. We request the Attorney-General to help Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipal Council reach an immediate amicable settlement with the plaintiff, Mr Manfred Muhumuza. 

    2. We also request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with the Ministry of Local Government to bail out Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality with compensation because the compensation – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, is this a judgement date? Or is it in execution of a judgement date? 

MR ARINDA: It has already been decided. As Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, we are supposed to pay. However, these are costs, which touch on the properties of Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, arising out of the court costs. 

There is also compensation for the taxi park, where we are supposed to pay about Shs 2.5 billion. The court costs alone are almost Shs 300 million and the municipality does not have that money. That is why they are attaching all these properties. 

We are seeking for help from the ministries of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Local Government to bail us out to ensure that our women and men continue to earn a living out of this big market, which we are about to lose. 
I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: It is a difficult one. Does the minister know about it? 

2.59
THE MINISTER OF GENERAL DUTIES (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, my brother and colleague, hon. Gordon Arinda, for bringing up that issue.

This is a very serious issue because Kabagarame is not just for Bushenyi District but it is also a tourist attraction - if you have not heard. I, therefore, invite everybody to come there, but you can only come if the place is not sold. 

I am behind the petitioners. We shall do everything possible. My brother has said that there are about 1,500 women in that market. However, we have more than 2,000 women operating in that place and their livelihood depends on it. 

Madam Speaker, we all know your zeal and passion for the women of this country. That is why we shall all step in to make sure that Kabagarame is not sold. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Arinda, do you have a copy of the order of execution? When is it dated? Are the 30 days over? 

MR ARINDA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, this advert ran in the Daily Monitor of Friday, 23 August 2019. It says that it will run up to 30 August 2019. If we have not settled this issue, they will go ahead to attach and sell the properties. 

I have all the court documents in regard to this case. It went to the Chief Magistrate Court in Bushenyi and Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality appealed to the High Court in Mbarara. Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality still lost the case. They went to the Court of Appeal in Kampala and lost the case. Therefore, it has been a court case for about 25 years. 

Finally, the costs are so high that Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality cannot manage them. That is why we are seeking the intervention of the Ministers of Finance, Planning and economic Development and Local Government to bail us out. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have looked at the advert. I would just like to remind the bailiffs that they cannot execute the order before the end of the 30 days. They can only execute the order 30 days after this advert; so it can only be executed in September, not in August. They must wait for the 30 days before they take any steps to sell off the properties. 

During those 30 days, I am directing the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to study this, help the people of Ishaka and save the women who have nowhere to work from. These are Government properties.

MS KAROORO: Madam Speaker, since I am standing in for the Prime Minister, I am now committing that Government shall take up the matter. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, one must act decisively. 

3.04
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning information that was published in the New Vision of Saturday, 24 August 2019. 

The story’s headline reads, “Ministries illegally hold Shs 1.06 trillion for districts.” From the story, it states that the ministries, among others, are: 

    1. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries – Shs 281.4 billion; 
    2. The Ministry of Education and Sports – Shs 257.2 billion; 
    3. The Ministry of Health – Shs 217.8 billion; 
    4. The Ministry of Water and Environment – Shs 196.4 billion;
    5.  The Ministry of Works and Transport – Shs 96.1 billion. 

Madam Speaker, retaining this money by these ministries has a direct and negative impact on the performance of Local Governments. We all know how UPE schools are struggling in the constituencies, the state of health centres and we do not even have extension workers at the district level to help our performers. 

Therefore, I would like the ministers responsible to come and explain to this Parliament and the nation why this money is held by their ministries. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is an extremely serious issue. First of all, that money is appropriated by this House and we expect it to go and do the work. Already, local Governments are underfunded.
Therefore, can we direct the Prime Minister? This is very urgent and we need to have an answer about this issue on Thursday, from both the Prime Minister and all these concerned ministries.

MR ITUNGO: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the paper on Table. (Laughter)

3.07
THE MINISTER OF OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We will take up the matter immediately. I do not know whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has anything to add.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, why is the money stuck in the ministries? Are you aware of this or you did not deliver? 

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we will crosscheck the facts because this is very surprising. When we release money to these ministries, we expect them to effect the release because this affects service delivery. Tomorrow, not only shall we inform Parliament of what is happening but as soon as we get information and there is need for action, we shall instruct the ministries to effect the payments to these departments.

THE SPEAKER: Tomorrow, we expect to hear from you in any event. Thank you.

3.08
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu County North, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. Last week on Thursday, it rained very heavily in my constituency. It rained with hailstorms, destroying crops and houses and killed a number of animals. The name of households that were affected is about 489 and the District Agricultural Officer who was sent to the fields, found out that food on 2,826 acres of land, which was supposed to be harvested, had been destroyed. 

The number of villages that were affected is 24 include; Lagen, Labuto Oyeng East, Acut Omer South and East and Lopur North. This has caused a lot of suffering not only to the children and mothers but also to the men as the head of households. 

Furthermore, people are dying due to lack of shelter. I am requesting that if it were possible, we would be supported with shelter, where the Government can deliver to us iron sheets, food and household items.

My prayer is that the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should organise and rush to Pader. Madam Speaker, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is instructed to proceed to Pader and address this situation in Aruu North Constituency. Thank you.

3.10
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Otuke District has 10 sub counties and five secondary schools. Out of the five secondary schools - and many years, we have written to the ministry but there is no response - Orum Secondary School in 2014 had 500 students. To date, there are only 100 students. 

Similarly, Otuke Secondary School, which is also in Olilim Sub-county, in 2014, there were over 500 students but as we talk, the school has only nine students.

The situation in Otuke District is that when the teachers are deployed, they abandon the school because they do not have accommodation. Last Saturday, I was at the constituency and noticed that the situation is getting worse. 

Therefore, my prayers are: one, the ministry should send their technical team to assess the situation in these schools and verify the challenges that have been mentioned here and two, if the ministry, aware of the many requests that have been written - I would like to request that the teachers’ quarters – (Member timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I remember in the Ninth Parliament, we passed a loan for staff housing for the schools and health centres. However, I have not heard anywhere in the country where Government is building staff houses. In the meantime, the Minister of Education and Sports should come and give us an update, first, why the student numbers are depleted from those schools in two years. Why student numbers have depleted from the schools, which have been mentioned and the plans they have to address the situation. 

Furthermore, do they have district inspectors of school there? The Minister of Education and Sports, come and update us by Thursday this week.

And before we get there, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, where is that loan for staff housing? I have not heard anywhere that staff houses have been built in this country. Is the Minister of Health aware of this?

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been constructing health facilities and trying to put up the staff houses. If you visit most of our regional referral hospitals, you realise that we have put staff accommodation at health centres III. Although they are not adequate, at least there are some staff houses.

Currently, as we construct health centres III or upgrading the health centres II to health centres III, we are also factoring in the component of the staff housing. However, it is not adequate; that is what I can state.

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister explain to us about the staff houses for teachers.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we will check whether we borrowed money to construct the staff houses and report back to the House tomorrow. If we did, we shall also give an update tomorrow. 

3.15
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last financial year, there were about six new districts that were created and started operation, including Kassanda. The expectation was that those districts were going to hold elections and have leadership positions filled because the law talks about six months for the new leadership that has been put in place to act. 

Recently, we heard the Electoral Commission announcing that there will be a by-election in Hoima District. The roadmap was put up and the elections will be held in September. Kikuube District, which was curved off Hoima, is a new district and in Hoima, they are holding elections.

The people from the new districts like Kassanda are wondering why there are elections in Hoima but there are no elections in Kassanda and elsewhere. We wonder why Government is choosing to pick some and give them rights and others are not attended to.

Madam Speaker, you were here and you indicated to us that it would be appropriate that elections are held in the next general elections. All of us thought that that was going to be the case. However, the Electoral Commission, I do not know who –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General come and explain to us the circumstances under which elections are being held in some new districts and not in others? Please, come next Tuesday. Thank you.

3.17
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. After the 2016 elections, many election petitions were raised in the courts of law. Most of the irregularities identified were attributed to the conduct of returning officers. Many officers were implicated in these petitions. Take for example Kalungu, where I come from; election petition No.13 of 2016, against Musoke Emmanuel and Richard Kyabagu, the returning officer was implicated. In some cases, costs have been awarded and indeed, Government has lost money because of their officers.

However, the officers implicated have not been disciplined and they are still serving. My fear is that these officers are likely to continue in 2021, serving as returning officers.
Therefore, I pray that the Attorney-General, in consultation with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs present to this House a comprehensive statement on how the issues of those officers implicated in electoral malpractices have been handled. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Does this apply to the whole country or someone in particular?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I have reserved some facts that I want these people to give when they give us their report. When you look at the judgments that were read in all these petitions across the country, a number of officers were implicated. I pray that I am allowed to lay only one on Table for emphasis.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you want an answer about a particular area, mention it. If you are going to say that the minister should come and talk about all the judgments in the whole country – 

MR SSEWUNGU: No. The Electoral Commission, as a body, is aware of all those officers who were implicated. They know them very well and some of them were even – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, please, help the House and help the minister by telling us the names of those you are interested in, that are still in office, so that they can answer specifically.

MR SSEWUNGU: Most obliged. I will produce it.

THE SPEAKER: The decision is deferred until you produce the list of those in whom you are interested. Thank you.

Honourable members, we have additional guests in the strangers’ gallery - Mr Godfrey Kasujja Kato, the Speaker of Mityana District Local Government. He is represented by hon. Lukyamuzi and hon. Judith Nabakooba. You are welcome.

I shall be altering the Order Paper to allow a motion by hon. Waluswaka concerning Fistula Hospital in Soroti, which we opened last week. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE NEED FOR GOVERNMENT TO SUPPORT THE FAMILIES AFFECTED BY THE FATAL ROAD ACCIDENT AT KYAMBURA TRADING CENTRE IN RUBIRIZI DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: This is deferred to tomorrow. 

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO ISSUES RAISED
ALLEGED IRREGULAR AND FRAUDULENT DEDUCTIONS FROM EMOLUMENTS OF CIVIL SERVANTS IN AGAGO DISTRICT BY SOME MICRO-FINANCE INSTITUTIONS

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Kasolo? He was not here last week and on other occasions -  He cannot be on the Bombardier; he is not the Minister of Works and Transport. Where is he?

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I am informed that hon. Kasolo is out of the country and will be available next Tuesday to make a statement.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter has been on the Floor of this House since 26 February 2019. Every now and then, when this matter is raised, you direct that the minister comes before this House and explains the circumstances under which my people, my employees, are being defrauded. I would like to believe that hon. Kasolo is part of this fraud. 

Are we proceeding correctly? Why is he not – I am sure he is not out of the country. And even if he is out of the country, he knew today he was supposed to appear before this House to present this matter. That ministry does not have only one minister. 

Are we proceeding well for a matter of national importance to be delayed by more than half a year when deductions are being made and the employees are continuously losing their money every month? They are not getting money. They are not able to take their children to school. Their children are hungry and they are not able to provide for their families simply because someone is seated in their offices defrauding them and Government is not taking action. 

I am going to be forced to let my people do what they want to because we have been constrained as leaders of Agago District. We have been asking our people to hold the fire because they wanted to take action and demonstrate but we have been asking them to wait for the decision of Government and of Parliament.

I beg your guidance, Madam Speaker, on the procedure. 

MADAM SPEAKER: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, as a ministry, we were respecting your directive that hon. Kasolo comes here personally but if that is not the case, we can make a statement tomorrow. We can get the facts and I can make the statement tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you have the facts, please, come and answer tomorrow. We tasked him because that is his docket. If you are ready, come and answer tomorrow because this kind of thing should not go on. 

Even if he was going away, he should have told the Speaker “my statement is here; a colleague will read it.” You do not just take off.

DELAY BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TO FULFIL THE PRESIDENTIAL PLEDGE ON BICYCLES FOR LOCAL COUNCIL LEADERS

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, regarding this, a statement was uploaded on our iPads but I would like to make a short summary of this statement. 

We had allocated resources to buy bicycles for LCI chairpersons and everybody knows what happened to that first consignment - where there was some corruption and the process was stopped. This financial year, we did not provide resources to complete the procurement of the bicycles for LC I chairpersons; we are providing money in Financial Year 2020/2021 to buy the bicycles.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you are talking about the former LCs. That was the pledge made during the Ninth Parliament. Those bicycles are not for the new LCs but for the former LCs. We must also provide for the new ones but the former LCs are the ones asking for the bicycles.

MR BAHATI: As we budget in the next financial year, we will consider both pledges – for the past and the current LCs.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Bahati should not have pretended – by looking at a copy of the Order Paper – that he was reading a statement to us here. Can he lay it at the Table if what he was holding was not a copy of the Order Paper, yet, he was pretending to be reading a statement? (Laughter) You embarrass me by laying it at the Table. 

Hon. Bahati should not take this House for a ride. The LC I chairpersons have suffered for a very long time and there are no bicycles. So, why does the minister come here with a copy of the Order Paper and pretends to be reading a statement? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, is the statement there? Okay, I have asked the Clerk to check if the statement is available but in any case, he must come and - the Clerk will check and we know whether the statement is there or not. 

I also direct the Committee on Budget to take note of that issue and make sure that there is money for bicycles for both the new and former LCs because that is what the minister is saying. 

3.29
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are talking about the facilitation of our ‘presidents’ in local councils. These are the first people to witness and monitor Government programmes. So, I do not know why we should push it to next year. We have always had supplementary budgets to cater for many issues. We are the Parliament that should cater for these people in terms of budgeting and allocation of resources. 

I pray that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brings a supplementary request here so that we meet this once and for all. The LC I chairpersons have waited for long. It hurts me when I move around and I see someone moving on foot, taking the message of Government and monitoring programmes. I pray that they bring a supplementary budget to that effect.

3.30
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, if I heard the minister well, he said they did not provide money for that item but that they plan to provide for that money in the Financial Year 2020/2021. What that means is that money will be available in September or October of 2020 and thereafter, the procurement process will begin. That will be after the elections.

The LC chairpersons that originally were supposed to benefit served for more than 15 years and that was enough for them to get a reward of at least bicycles. On several occasions, we have seen the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development bring supplementary requests saying they are going to do this and that but we sometimes get to the end of the financial year when the work has not been done. 

Can the House instruct the minister to specifically have money, in form of a supplementary request since he said they did not budget for it, to cater for that item so that before or after Christmas, these LCs get their bicycles?

3.31
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka County South, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of bicycles has gone out of hand. As members of Parliament, when we visit these villages, we are under pressure. They say: “The Government promised us bicycles and they are not providing. Can you as member of Parliament now give us bicycles so that we are able to execute our work?” This is the pressure we are facing in the villages. 

Therefore, this matter should be given serious consideration. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide this money. Many times, we have seen loans and supplementary requests come here. Why can’t we have supplementary budget or loan for our people who are serving in the villages to get a mere bicycle of around Shs 300,000? This money is available in this country, Madam Speaker. 

3.31
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, my colleague, hon. Itungo – made it clear here that ministries have decided to hoard money meant for districts and the money is languishing in the ministries in Kampala here. That means there is enough money that can be used to buy bicycles for our LC I chairpersons in this country. That is why I would be happy, comfortable and proud if we did not talk about next year. We should be talking about now. We should look for a solution to the issue of bicycles this year, not next year. 

Remember that according to the Independent Electoral Commission, nominations are supposed to start in August and we shall be talking about elections. That might cause a big problem for all of us. That is why Government should look for money now to buy bicycles for LC I chairpersons. These are very important officers in this country. We should not ignore them but we should support them as Parliament. If we agree with what the minister is talking about, we shall not be able to achieve what we want at the end of the - (Interruption)

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, my colleague. Madam Speaker, the information I am giving my friend is that we need to be patriotic enough. These people have served for long and some served for more than 15 years. The reason we are saying these people should be rewarded is because of what they have done on the ground.
 
As members of Parliament, the moment we step in the constituency, the only question they ask is: “We have been seeing you passing a series of loans and even facilitating many activities, why is it that you have adamantly refused to see how you can reward us based on what we have done?” 
It is high time Government saw how we can help these people so that they in turn continue serving Uganda diligently.

MR ABALA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, we must be patriotic. If we are a national Parliament, we should talk about providing bicycles to the LC I chairpersons of this country. True, they are over 60,000 but I am sure that money can be got. That is my appeal to you, Madam Speaker. We should look at this thing with seriousness and without delay. Thank you.

3.36
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, it is very painful. The NRM chairman for Butaleja died today and it is because of pressure - yes, the LCs I are NRM flag-bearers. They could go to the NRM chairman to ask for the bicycles. When you read the post-mortem, it was Hypetension and other things. We are losing people. 

Recently, the car of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was still okay but they bought for him a new one. There is money and not only for LCs I but LCs III also do not have motorcycles.

As they purchase bicycles for LCs I, let them also include motorcycles for LCs III. There is money. If Government brings any motion, we should support it because this loan is self-justifiable.

Sometimes, they bring loans here where you need to take a different angle before you justify - you know what I am talking about.  
However, this loan for LCs I will not need justifications. The ministry does not want motions, which are self-justifiable. They want motions where they hide to get money.

3.38
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need to be clear of when the term for these LCs expires. The bicycles should not be taken as a token. They are to facilitate the activities of the LC leaders.

When does their term expire? If they are serving in the elections, their term is also expiring in 2021 but that is when you give them bicycle facilitation. 

Secondly, Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) should be looked at in a special way. Bicycles may not be very applicable in Kampala. –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, with due respect to my colleague, we are discussing bicycles for LCS I. If a colleague has interest in motorcycles or another item, he would bring that special item in his own request.

Is it in order for my colleague to divert us from our interest of pushing for LCS I to concentrate on the interests of KCCA?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the first distribution was done, it was for LCs I across the country. It did not distinguish whether they were in urban or rural areas. Therefore, we are dealing with the bicycles for LCs I everywhere.
	
MR KASIBSNTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was expressing some fears because even the first batch – in Kampala, it is not applicable.

Honourable colleagues, you cannot just have a bicycle and you are moving on roads in Kampala as a leader. Instead of bicycles for KCCA, motorcycles should be given to the leaders to do their work. (Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, whether in Butaleja or here, LCs I are the same and when we were amending the KCCA Bill, we had suggested that councillors and LCs in Kampala should have higher qualifications but they refused. The LCs I of Butaleja, Kamuli and Kampala are the same.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much. That is why instead of having a chairperson LCV in Kampala, we have a Lord Mayor and instead of a district, we have a capital city authority. This is in response to the information from my colleague. Thank you.

MS BAMUKWATSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the minister’s statement, the bicycles were supposed to be given to the LCs I in the Financial Year 2010/2011 but up to today, they have not received them.

He further stated that the money and the procurement process were mismanaged. They know the culprits and they are still in Uganda.

He went on saying that due to Government over-committing resources in infrastructure development coupled with resource constraints, it has not been possible to identify and provide funds to procure these bicycles.

I would like to get clarification on whether the LCI chairpersons are not important people in this country. To first put them aside in order to buy vehicles for LCV chairpersons and Resident District Commissioners whereas their process started in Financial Year 2010/2011? Thank you very much.

3.43
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have had a meeting of minds with hon. Kasibante. The important roles played by the LCI chairpersons in the various parts of this country cannot be underestimated.

They are responsible for security in their villages and for monitoring implementation of Government services in their areas of jurisdiction; the more reason for them to have had this facilitation already.

We should not just look at a bicycle per se but facilitation just like we Members of Parliament. The moment you are voted into Parliament, you are facilitated with money for buying vehicles.

It is also on record that when a person who is elected as a member of Parliament is facilitated to procure a vehicle, it is not automatic that he or she goes to buy a vehicle of a specific model.

There are those who already have vehicles and they may not need a brand new vehicle but that does not mean that they do not receive the facilitation.

There are also those who come from areas where they need 4x4s and they will not go for a Premio. There are those who feel that their constituency is very smooth and they do not need 4x4s. They will go for a Premio.

There are areas in this country, which are quite difficult. Look at the Sebei area. What will a bicycle mean to a Sabiny up there in the mountains? 

Even if you bought a bicycle and took it there, I do not think a Sabiny will get an opportunity to mount for once to go and monitor Government programmes because it is so mountainous that you cannot ride a bicycle.

If we could agree in principle that the LCI chairpersons be facilitated to buy a bicycle and the price of that bicycle is determined by Government so that if I am the LCI chairman of Kololo, I do not need a bicycle.

The Shs 200,000 or 300,000 might be used for a different item but I would have been facilitated. If I am the LCI chairman in Suam - that part of Kapchorwa - I would have been facilitated and then, it is up to me to either top it up so that I can be able to buy a motorcycle for myself or a vehicle –

THE SPEAKER: Or a donkey.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, there should be that consideration of the areas where these people come from, so that we look at facilitation and not simply a bicycle. You might buy your bicycle and give it to me but it will not facilitate me in carrying out my duty. I wish the technocrats could think about that consideration and judge every case on its own merit to have these people facilitated. I rest my case, Madam Speaker.

3.46
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. My prayer and support is that the issue of facilitation of LC1 chairpersons should be a priority to us.

The reason for our existence and appropriation during the budget process is to ensure service delivery. We need to ensure there is value for money. If we are able to provide money for activities, how do we fail to provide money to have value for money?

The LCs I are in trouble. From morning to evening, they are handling issues. Developments go to the villages; all of us belong to the villages yet, that is where the resources reach last and that is where development is seen. Therefore, I feel the facilitation or support to the LCs I has not been treated well, including their ex-gratia. In a year, it is given once; that is 120,000. If you divide it by 12 months, it means your LCI chairperson is given Shs 10,000 per month. Is it worth it? What if we were the LCI chairpersons? They handle issues of indiscipline, law and order, managing domestic violence cases at preliminary levels. 

As we relate the issue of LCI –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on this debate, we really cannot take a decision today. However, I would like to say two things: one is that we want a commitment on the outstanding debts. The former LCs must get their bicycles and the present LCs must get theirs. We should then have a separate motion on facilitation, which will take into account Kampala, the highlands and so on; it should be a separate debate. Otherwise, we want a commitment on what is due. The LC chairpersons need their bicycles because they were promised but 55 districts did not get, including mine. You can imagine wherever I go, including church, they say “Aye maama, egaali.” (Laughter)

Honourable minister, when are you bringing a supplementary? I think we can include the money for these bicycles in that supplementary, which you are bringing.

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, of course, everybody understands the importance the NRM Government attaches to the LC system. This was a creation of our own Government, right from even before power was captured. So, the importance to the LC system is undoubted by everybody.

Resources have been an issue. We attempted to buy bicycles but unfortunately, corrupt people could not allow us. Now, we have reached where we are. The commitment we are giving – Madam Speaker, you know the issues surrounding the budgets; the competing demands. 

I agree with you when you say that let the Committee on Budget now monitor for 2021 and ensure that Government commits itself on the old debt for the LCs who never received and that the new LCs 1 who are currently in office should get their bicycles next financial year. That is a commitment on behalf of the NRM Government on this Floor of the House.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on Budget and the Members, please, take note of that. We would like to see that figure in the next cycle. It must be very clear in the next cycle.

Honourable minister, you see the amount of interest; it is a serious issue even in Ndorwa. (Laughter)

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. RUTH KATUSHABE ON THE INADEQUATE DOMESTIC WATER SUPPLY IN BUKOMANSIMBI DISTRICT PARTICULARLY IN THE SUBCOUNTIES OF BIGASA, BUKANGO AND KITANDA

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Dr Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, at the 21st Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament held on Tuesday, 13 August 2019, hon. Ruth Katushabe raised concern over the inadequate domestic water supply in Bukomansimbi District, particularly in the sub counties of Bigasa, Bukango and Kitanda.

Bukomansimbi District, over the last four financial years - that is financial year 2015/2016 to 2018/2019 - has received a total of Shs 1,014,612,413 under the District Water and Sanitation Condition Grant. With this funding and support from the ministry, the district has been able to serve the people of Bukomansimbi and the current access to water stands at 85 per cent of the population. 

Out of the four sub counties of Bukomansimbi District, only one sub county, Bigasa, has safe water access of 69 per cent, which is below the national safe water coverage of 75 per cent. The other three sub counties - Butenga stands at 95 per cent, Kibinge 95 per cent, Kitanda 85 per cent and Bukomansimbi Town Council at 95 per cent.

Madam Speaker, Bukomansimbi District has a total of 255 villages, out of which 227, representing 89 per cent of the villages have a safe water source. In Bigasa sub county, there is a total of 68 villages, out of which 54 villages have a safe water source. In Bukango Parish that falls under Bigasa sub county, there are 19 villages, of which 15 have safe water. Kitanda sub county, which comprises 60 villages, has a total of 48 villages, each having at least one safe water source.

The interventions the ministry has for 2019/2020 include the following:

    1. The construction of two valley tanks in Makululu Village, Makululu Parish in Kitanda sub county and in Kyaziinza village, Bukango Parish in Bigasa sub county;
    2. Drilling of two production wells in Kitanda and Kibinge sub-counties;
    3. Rehabilitation of 17 boreholes across all sub counties; and 
    4. Construction of a urinal at an excising public latrine at Butenga Rural Growth Centre.

Madam Speaker, as a ministry, we have a few challenges and these include, among others, limited funding to the sector and this is what hampers us covering all areas to 100 per cent.
With these answers, Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see hon. Katushabe and so, we cannot verify the facts. I think let us go to the next item. (Member rose) It was from Bukomansimbi. Yes, hon. Kulayigye, supplementary -

BRIG. FELIX KULAYIGYE: Madam Speaker, Bukomansimbi is my home district. I would like the minister to task her team to cross-check the facts. That is what I could say. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have been to Bukomansimbi a number of times and each time I go there, the people talk about water. So, I am not satisfied with your figures of 69, 85 and so on, because I have been there. Please, check again.

THE IMPORTATION OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE-STRICKEN HEAD OF CATTLE FROM TANZANIA AND COUNTERFEIT ACARICIDE-DEXTATIX FROM ZIMBABWE BY A ONE, MR MULINDWA

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is not here to respond to this issue.

POWER BLACKOUT AT NSAMBYA POLICE BARRACKS THAT HAS LASTED OVER TWO MONTHS AND ITS CONSEQUENCES ON THE SECURITY OF THE AREA AND ITS SURROUNDINGS

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs is not here to respond to this matter.

THE PROVISION OF SANITARY PADS TO GIRL STUDENTS

THE SPEAKER: The Minister, Office of the President is not here to respond to this issue.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we raise these issues, we call for urgent attention by the Government. Almost 90 per cent of the Cabinet is absent, including the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. I am saying this because whenever they call a ministry, no one is coming up to make any commitment on what Government is about to do on the issues raised. Therefore, are we proceeding well?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, fortunately, the public is seeing that the ministers are not here. Let us continue with our business. Let us continue naming all the items and say the ministers are absent. 

BLOCKAGE OF SIRONKO-MUYEMBE-NAKAPIRIPIRIT ROAD DUE TO FLOODS

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is absent.

THE STATE OF FIRE-FIGHTING EQUIPMENT OF THE UGANDA POLICE

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs is absent.

THE ARREST, DETENTION AND TORTURE OF MS JAMILA ASHA ATIM BY OPERATIVES OF THE INTERNAL SECURITY ORGANISATION (ISO) AT A SAFE HOUSE IN KYENGERA

THE SPEAKER: The Minister, Office of the President (Security) is absent.

THE POOR ROAD NETWORK IN SOME PARTS OF AGAGO DISTRICT, PARTICULARLY KILAK CORNER-MOROTO VIA ABIM; LUKEE BRIDGE-PATONGO-KALONGO-BULUGI SECTION BETWEEN LUKEE TO KALONGO; AND ADILANG-LIRAKATO-LAPONO-PAIMOL-OMIYA-PACWA TO NAMUKORA

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is absent.

THE STATUS OF THE BKK FERRY AND ATTEMPTS TO SHIFT THE DOCK FROM OKILE IN KOBULULU SUB COUNTY TO AKAMPALA IN OCHERO SUB COUNTY

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is absent.

THE PLIGHT OF SUGARCANE GROWERS IN BUSOGA REGION

THE SPEAKER: I thought I saw the minister. What has happened to him? The Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives was here. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we can call the next item as we look for him. He is around. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We defer that matter and go to the next item.

THE SHOOTING AND INJURING OF A ONE SOWEDI SADIQUE BY ANTI-
SMUGGLING UNIT OPERATIVES IN BUSIA

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Madam Speaker, during a sitting held on 24 July 2019, hon. Geoffrey Macho rose on the issue of national importance on the incident of shooting and the injuring of a one Sowedi Sadique by the Anti-Smuggling Unit operatives in Busia due to suspicion of smuggling goods across the border.

This statement is in response to a question by hon. Geoffrey Macho on the Floor of Parliament under Rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure. This statement provides the current state of affairs of the Busia Border and the plans of the Ministry of East African Community Affairs to sensitise the security agencies and the local population on cross-border movement.

The current status at the border

Madam Speaker, in July 2019, a gun was stolen from a police lady in one of the police units around the border and it brought a bit of tension within the security organs. Arrests were made as the police tried to find the gun.

Accordingly, this particular incident that happened within the past few weeks came after the first one and in the same format. The Anti-Smuggling Unit was on patrol and stopped some bicycle riders who were moving on one of the neighbouring routes around the one-stop border post and just to check what they were carrying. In response, the cyclists stopped.

The Anti-Smuggling Unit was using a patrol vehicle, which was parked at a distance from the cyclists. One of the Anti-Smuggling Unit’s personnel remained behind to check the goods as his colleagues moved a short distance away. Within the same distance, the riders jumped onto him and tried to grab his gun. In the struggle, the Anti-Smuggling Unit’s personnel fired his gun downwards but the bullet bounced on a stone and hit one of the cyclists who had been stopped. At this point, the gun grabber got scared and ran away. 

Madam Speaker, this can be confirmed by the report of the doctor who removed the bullet from the victim, confirming that the bullet landed on something before hitting the victim and also the statement by the police on the same matter.

Madam Speaker, immediately after this incident, our officer at Busia Customs Post had a discussion with the customs officer in charge and they agreed to sensitise the border population and the markets near the one-stop border post at least every quarter. They also agreed to continue talking to the community and present themselves as trade facilitators and as people who mind about the livelihood of the border communities.

In that regard, as a ministry, we intend to organise sensitisation for all the one-stop border posts’ personnel on the integration and border procedures (mostly the security personnel who work around them) since most of these personnel are frequently rotated. Usually, the police officers, especially the new ones who come into force become inefficient with the knowledge of the operations of the one-stop border post and matters concerning the integration agenda.

The environment they come into can be a cultural shock since the integration is something that is still new for some citizens we intend to move with.

In conclusion, in the narrative of the shooting incident, the victim did not have anything threatening on his life, since it was managed by the doctor. The bullet was easily removed without any operation done by the doctor and the situation at the border is calm.

Madam Speaker, we need to appreciate that the East African Community is implementing the Common Market Protocol, which has in it the free movement of goods, people and services. It has also introduced the use of the national identity cards as travel documents but require authentication by immigration to endorse and issue of interstate passes.

Madam Speaker, allow me to quote the legal provisions into the operations at the border. 

The protocol for the Establishment of the East African Community Common Market was signed in 2009 and became operational in July, 20l0. The strategic thrust of the Common Market Protocol to create one flawless single market across the EAC partner States is right now, seeking to accelerate regional economic growth and development by introducing the free movement of goods, persons, labour, capital, services as well as the rights of establishment and residence. 

It is also expected that the protocol will strengthen coordination and regulate the economic and trade relations among the partner states.

Madam Speaker, the East African Community Affairs’ officer has put these interventions in order to strengthen the EAC Common Market Protocol. The Ministry of East African Community is undertaking the following measures: 

The Bilateral Security committees were formed at all border points to mitigate issues pertaining to the community within that jurisdiction of the border and for Uganda, it is the Resident District Commissioners who are in charge of the border committees while in Kenya, it is the County Commissioner responsible. In Rwanda, it is the Provincial Governor. This is a bilateral arrangement that has been done to ensure that we resolve day to day issues that escalate at the borders.  

We are also sensitising the people to form groups especially cross-border traders associations to resolve non-tariff barriers around the border points. Under Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, we carry out sensitisation programmes along border districts. We also inform the people of the rights and obligations under EAC and prepare them on how to undertake procedural requirements.

We have also recruited staff and posted them on border points of Busia, Malaba and Elegu. Our staff who was at Mutukula was withdrawn pending a few issues that will be put right and then we post them back.

Madam Speaker, on the elimination of non-tariff barriers, the EAC is implementing the Protocol on Customs Union and Common Market. The one-stop border posts have been constructed to facilitate 24hour operations around all gazetted border points. 

The single customs territory has been introduced where all customs operations within the systems are linked to clear cargo. This has also helped to reduce the time for the movement of goods, from Mombasa to Kampala, from l5 days to only 4 days as of today.

There has been also the introduction of the single customs territory and tax collection with Uganda Revenue Authority and payment of taxes, which is now a direct delivery to owners’ premises in Kampala.

Madam Speaker, we can now report on the non-tariff barriers by only dialling *201# using a mobile phone and the relevant authorities will be notified to resolve this matter. One does not need to run to Kampala but only *201# and if the issue is about police around customs or trade, these people will definitely respond to resolve your matter. 

There is also the introduction of simple certificate of origin to facilitate the fast clearance and exemption of goods produced in EAC from tax payment once they are below the threshold of $2000. 

We stationed officers with collaboration of the Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies where we have Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, we shall get the quarantine and crop officers at the border points to facilitate export and import of goods of agricultural nature. We shall have an officer from the Ministry of Health to manage issues that pertain to drugs. Under Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, we have a UNBS officer at the border in addition to the EAC officer. All these officers have been posted to the border points to help in processing of goods into and out of Uganda. 

The Community has the EAC Elimination of Non-Tariff Barriers Act, 2017, which we are implementing within partner states. The elimination follows the mechanisms below: the mutual agreement of the concerned partner states; the implementation of the EAC time bound programme for elimination of identified non-tariff barriers and the laws, regulations, directives, decisions or recommendations of the Council of Ministers. This is under the Elimination of the Non-Tariff Barriers Act, which we are trying to implement.

Madam Speaker, the way forward and as I conclude, I beg to reiterate that we all appreciate that the EAC is the way to open access to markets in the region. As a ministry, we commit ourselves to further play our role to sensitise our people on the new developments and procedures as they come in order to further the integration agenda for the benefit of our country and EAC as a whole. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not see hon. Macho and hon. Nabulindo and so, there will be no supplementary questions.

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE PLIGHT OF SUGARCANE GROWERS IN BUSOGA REGION RAISED BY HON. MAURICE KIBALYA, MP BUGABULA SOUTH

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, on 26 June 2019, the ministry presented a paper here alluding to several factors - and this was in response to hon. Kibalya’s issue regarding the production and sale of sugarcane by farmers in the Busoga sub region.

Consequently, the ministry was required by Parliament and given time to farther investigate the issues regarding excess sugarcanes and table a detailed report to this august House.

As result of that directive undertaken by the ministry; first, there was a meeting with the out-growers in Busoga sub region. On 3 July 2019, the ministry held a meeting with the out growers from greater Busoga sub region at the Office of the Prime Minister.  In attendance were a number of Members of Parliament from the Busoga sub region and a number of issues were raised. However, I will not go through that but straight to the field visits under paragraph 3.2 on page five.

Field visits to sugar factories in Busoga sub region and meeting with all sugar millers. 

From 4th to 5th July 2019, the technical team from the ministry visited five sugar mills, namely; Kakira, Sugar Corporation of Lugazi Limited (SCOUL), Kaliro, Kamuli and Mayuge.

The objective of the field visit was to witness operations at the sugar mills and establish key challenges regarding reduced actual milling capacities compared to licensed capacities.

Meeting with sugar manufacturers

On 09 July 2019, the ministry held a meeting with all the millers to discuss the findings of the field visit and recommend a way forward towards normalising the situation of excess sugarcane with out-growers. Of course, a number of issues were also raised and discussed.

I will go straight to consultations on paragraph 3.4 with Kenya on imports of sugarcane.

The ministry also consulted the regulators, namely; the Directorate of Kenya Sugar and Kenya Plant Health Inspectorate Services (KEPHIS) regulators under the agriculture and full authority in regard to requirements to allow importation of sugarcane into Kenya. These indicated that the exporter of cane into Kenya requires applying for a permit from KEPHIS for agricultural products including cane seed and sugar from Kenya Sugar Board under the sugar directorate.

Kenya Plant Health Inspectorate Services provides an import permit for agricultural products after they have undertaken inspection and testing for the quality of sugarcane.

Sugar exporters are supposed to apply to Kenya Sugar Board, which grants the permit to importers into Kenya and the ministry writes to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) to clear the sugar consignment as per the permit.

Consultations with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries informed us that the export of plant and animal products requires issuance of a sanitary and phytosanitary certificate. The certificate can be obtained at the border post. This information has been given to farmers who wish to export sugarcane to Kenya.

Resolutions from the consultations undertaken by the ministry 

The agricultural team from the mills will hold meetings to discuss the planned annual shutdown schedule and furnish the ministry with details within two months.

The ministry and the sugar manufacturers will be holding meetings on a quarterly basis to update and review challenges in the sector. The next meeting in this case will be in September this year.

The ministry, sugar millers and the district leadership, including honourable area members of Parliament will:

    i)  Undertake sensitisation of cane out-growers regarding the need to synchronise cane supply and demand by millers through collaboration with millers
    ii) Enable the community to also grow crops for food security instead of concentrating on growing cane. This will enhance technical and economic performance of the sugar sector.

Recommendations and way forward

The model of cane harvesting, which is independently carried out by individual out-growers is insufficient. The ministry will initiate and facilitate the millers and out-growers’ association to establish cooperatives to facilitate collective bargaining power and efficiency.

The ministry will fast-track and follow up the implementation of agreed quotas of sugar for export to partner states and ensure that these are regularised and avail market for surplus sugar and promote trade in sugar exports within the East African region.

The approval of the sugar Bills is also something that should be fast-tracked in order to address the gaps in institutional coordination and regulation of the sector.

In order to export sugarcane to Kenya, the out-growers need to apply for permits from the Sugar Directorate of Kenya, which provides permits to the sugar industry for the raw materials and Kenya Planned Health Inspectorate Services, who are the regulators of agricultural sector, including agricultural imports. 

There will be an established framework comprising district leadership, out-grower association millers and area local councils in order to ensure that the cane harvested genuinely belongs to a private farmer. 

A farmer that has been aided to grow sugarcane by a miller and has a cane production contract will not be allowed to sell cane to another buyer without the miller’s consent. Such a framework should include the local leadership and the out-growers association.

Since the sugar mills have grown from three to 12 already in production and 18 are at different levels of establishment in addition to jaggeries, we need to retain enough sugarcane to supply all these mills and jaggeries.

In conclusion, the sugar industry has a value chain from growing of sugarcane to processing and marketing. It is because of these that regulations developed by countries involved in the sugar sector address the entire value chain.

Adhoc measures that address single stages of the value chain disrupt the operations and negatively affect the entire value chain.

Therefore, I urge all those who would like to export sugarcane to Kenya to apply for permits from both KEPHIS and Kenya Sugar Board. The ministry will continue to monitor the operations of domestic sugar manufacturers to ensure that they increase efficiency of milling to reduce the excess sugarcane. I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Do you have a supplementary question, hon. Kibalya?

4.24
Mr henry kibalya (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need to thank the minister for the statement but there are two or three issues I wish to raise.

The farmers that wish to get permission to export cane got the permit. Here is the import licence and I wish to lay it on Table.

Secondly, they were asked –

The Speaker: You can come together with your papers and present from here.

Mr kibalya: Madam Speaker, the minister is interested in knowing the nature of the permit. This is the Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development and Kenya Plant Health Inspectorate Service Plant Importation Permit. I beg to lay on the Table.

Madam Speaker, they were told that much as they had got the permits, they needed to get the inspection license, which is got from Kawanda and the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO). 

The second requirement was that they are supposed to get a letter from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

Therefore, I need to bring that to the attention of the minister so he gets to know that much as the permit was got, the ministry still has to clear these people to have the sugarcane exported. 

The minister in the statement said that those that have contracts with millers are not allowed to sell their sugarcanes. However, those farmers that have contracts with millers have written a letter to the ministry also expressing their dissatisfaction because they get loans to supply sugarcanes of 18 months, which is stated in their contracts. However, because these millers also have sugarcanes, they first use those and by the time they start buying from the farmers, it will have made around 24 to 25 months. 

The farmers wish that the ministry and the Government helps them enter an agreement with the millers to say that in case the millers take longer than the expected harvest period of 18 months while the farmer’s loan is growing, the milers should be penalised for that because there is nothing that is done in that line to protect these farmers. 

There is a cry for immediate action but the minister has said in the statement that they will visit the areas. The other time they visited only millers but not the farmers. We need to implore them to, when in the field, also hold a meeting with the farmers.

Lastly, we need Government to also hold discussions with the millers on certain things - as we said the other time, Kakira Sugar Works only issues licenses in January and April. After that, they will not issue again until the next January, while the supply is heavy and the contract is big. We need Government to also bring Madhvani on board to negotiate with these out-growers and enter an agreement. 

Outside Kakira Sugar Works, these other millers do not have contracts with out-growers. What they do is to issue out growers with permits to supply. They will give them tonnage that they cannot supply in a week or a month but will allow them to use one vehicle, which takes two days to offload. 

Therefore, they will issue the out-growers a permit knowing very well that they will not be in position to supply. When it expires, the out grower only has three months to apply again. Remember, by that time, the out-grower will have cut half of their plantation, yet, it will take them another three months to secure another permit. 

Further, when an out grower gets a permit and their vehicle fails to deliver sugarcanes, in three days, they cancel the permit yet they have to wait for another three months to secure another permit.  

Those are the conditions that these people are going through. That is why we want Government to come to the cry of these farmers and see how best they can rescue them. 
I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister for East African Affairs. When we were sensitising people in Kamuli, you will remember that I asked you whether a farmer in Namasagali must go to Entebbe to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to get that certificate; you told me they are at the border. 

Now, you can see hon. Kibalya saying the certificates are actually issued from Kawanda. Please, clarify. Does the farmer have to go to Kawanda just to export something to the border? Do you remember what we discussed in Kamuli? 

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are 17 areas under which the Ministry of East African Community operates. The lead agencies in the implementation of this programme are the ministries; we just do coordination. 

What I know is that for a person to secure a simple certificate of origin, they must have certification from the importing country. When the importing country has appreciated that they require a certain amount of goods, then, they use that certificate, which has accepted those goods, for example, Kenya, to come to Uganda and apply to get a simple certificate of origin. 

The simple certificates of origin, which are issued at the border, are those of the threshold of goods in value of less than $2000. Anything above $2000 must be done by the lead agency at the ministry. 

Madam Speaker, I may need to get clarification whether that exporter had goods that were below the value of $2000. Then, we would be able to make a follow up and establish as to why they did not issue the certificate at the border. Otherwise, that is the clarification.

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are talking about an important thing. We are aware that sugarcane growers, like any other person participating in agriculture, are looking at it for their livelihood.

Honourable minister, the way you are explaining and how the other minister was talking about the process of acquiring rights to import or export, shows me a very bureaucratic and long process. 

How is the integration helping a common Ugandan? We are investing a lot of money there. How are we being helped to shorten this process? Otherwise, it looks like we are still operating from 1900 arrangements. 

MR MAGANDA: The most important thing is sensitisation of the people on this matter. There are protocols on which we operate in trade. What is most important is the faster flow of goods and services, especially their free movement across borders. 

While there is an exporter from Uganda taking goods to Kenya, the process today is faster than it was, just like my brother, hon. Kamusiime claims, in 1900. We are now able to sell our goods in Kenya faster and cheaper with an easier process than it was before. 

However, what is important is that each country protects itself, in terms of importation. We also have quotas that are issued. As much as we say “it is free entry” there are also quotas issued within the partner states. Therefore, one must definitely secure an import permit before the country of export issues an export permit so that the person does not have the goods the other side but when there is nobody taking them up in the stores. That is the first step. 

The second step is that if one has the certificate of origin, then, it exempts them from the external tariff. Where the exporter would have paid goods assumed to be outside Uganda, they pay for them as local goods within the country, where they are importing them. Then, they differentiate from those ones outside Uganda, which are attracted to the external tariff.

Therefore, there is a big improvement that the East African Community has done because goods produced within the East African Community are taken as local goods within the partner states and such goods attract less tax compared to those ones from the external areas. Those are the areas that we believe we need to appreciate. However, I can also say that we need to do more sensitisation, even to us, colleagues, to appreciate what the EAC has achieved so far. 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I thank colleagues who have made observations and contributions. However, to specifically respond to hon. Kibalya’s issues, I would like to say that as a ministry, we are ready. Once you have a permit from from Kenya, we do not hesitate to clear you to go and proceed with the export of the cane. I do not know what happened but I would be interested if you brought to me that case; I would handle it.

Secondly, I agree with his proposal that we need to bring the millers on the table so that all of us address the terms and conditions between the out-growers and the millers. That is why I had alluded to it in my submission, that we would be having periodic meetings with millers, out-growers and even the local leadership, including honourable colleagues so that if there are any impediments, we clear there and then. 

What we want is to facilitate the excess cane to be sold so that farmers get their money.

All the other issues - we will be handling them during the round-table meeting. We have put in place a mechanism of addressing that. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. PAUL AKAMBA ON THE ALLEGED ABUSE OF OFFICE BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS, ON ACCOUNT THAT HE CAUSED THE ARREST OF A TURKISH NATIONAL, MR AZIZ DURMAN.

THE SPEAKER:  The Minister of Internal Affairs is absent.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. ELIJAH OKUPA ON THE INCREASING DEATHS OF DOMESTIC LIVESTOCK OCCASIONED BY WILD ANIMALS IN SERERE DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is absent.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. HENRY KIBALYA ON THE UNBECOMING CONDUCT OF SOME STAFF OF MULTIPLEX UGANDA LIMITED, WHO ALLEGEDLY CLAMP VEHICLES ON STREETS OF KAMPALA ON ASSUMPTION OF VIOLATION OF PARKING REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES
4.37
THE MINISTER OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Beti Kamya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to apologise that this statement is not uploaded on the Members’ iPads but it is a very brief statement. I would like to request for the indulgence of this House to allow me to make the statement. It is very brief. 

THE SPEAKER: Parking in Kampala is important. Please, make your submission and send it for our records.

MS KAMYA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I will send the statement. 

Statement on the matter of some staff of Multiplex Uganda Limited, who allegedly clamp vehicles on the streets of Kampala on assumption of violation of parking regulations and guidelines, which was raised by hon. Henry Kibalya. 

I would like to apologise to my colleague, hon. Kibalya, for the inconvenience that was caused to him. I was in Parliament on 15 August 2019, when he narrated the excruciating pain, anguish and humiliation that he suffered on the day that his car was clamped. I would like to extend the apologies of Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) to the honourable member, colleagues and Ugandans, who might have suffered in the same way. I brought this matter to the management of KCCA and Multiplex. I would like to say that this is neither the policy of KCCA nor the policy of Multiplex but an errant employee, who has since been identified, rebuked, punished and taken through the protocols of managing street parking in Kampala.

KCCA has a very elaborate and comprehensive contract with Multiplex, which lays out, among other things, even guidelines on when, how and why to clamp a vehicle. Clearly, the experience of hon. Kibalya is not one of them.

Multiplex has also assured me that they pay a lot of attention to the recruitment and exercise of their employees. They also train them and have refresher courses for their staff. 

Therefore, this kind of conduct is definitely one of an errant employee, which will not be tolerated or repeated. On my part, I undertake to take more keen interest in ensuring good quality and customer-oriented service, to the people of Kampala.

I also wish to appreciate the vigilance and proactive attitude of colleagues, who when they notice such errant behaviour, bring it to this House for responsible officials to take care of the matter - by raising the red flag on time.

Madam Speaker, finally, although I am the line minister, I appreciate the collective responsibility to be vigilant and to call to order anybody who abuses their office. I would like to assure this House that care will be taken not to repeat such actions. I beg to submit.

4.42
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, we need to thank the minister for, at least, being around and responding. The other ministers have gone to the Bombardier. When I was raising this issue, we had discussed it in the lobby and most of the members of Parliament had several issues around this. However, hon. Waira Kyewalabye was bitter. 

I would like to request you to allow hon. Avur to make a statement, since I have already raised it. In my submission, we had received complaints from female Ugandans, who were suffering. At least, I am a man and can argue but there are several ladies that are suffering. We would like to request the minister that she continues to instil discipline in these guys and they should have a listening ear. They are very arrogant.

With your permission, I wish –

THE SPEAKER: Let hon. Avur speak on behalf of the women of Kampala.

4.43
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the response. I doubted it when the minister said that Multiplex informed her that they follow a recruitment process and scrutinise these boys and girls on the street. 

I think they are limited to recruiting desperate young boys and girls. On one occasion, I parked in Arua Park and went shopping. It was not even three hours but the young lady told me that I had spent over three hours. I only had three receipts in the vehicle and I told her that I know where the offices of Multiplex are. I told her to take the three receipts because I wanted to pay taxes to the Government. She said: “Since you have three receipts, give me Shs 1,000.” I said: “Fine, I will pay. Give me the receipt for the Shs 1,000.” She started arguing with me until she brought some boss. Fortunately, she had already printed out the receipts. I told her: “I will not pay any coin unless you are giving me a receipt against it.” 

Eventually, she gave up because I was not ready to bribe her in any way. I was willing to pay to Government what is due. 

On another occasion, I was in industrial area – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter was raised and it has been answered and the minister has heard.

MS AVUR: Madam Speaker, I would like to say that it is not only about arrogance. These people are not well supervised. You find a whole street, like 7th Street Industrial Area has only one staff. When you park there, you come out and look for whom to pay to but when there is nobody. Then the next time you park there, they clamp your vehicle. When they are there, they want to extort money from you; they do not want one to pay genuinely. They are high handed.

Honourable minister, Kampala as a city is losing revenue because they have recruited desperate young people who think that they can make more money by taking Shs 1000 instead of issuing a receipt.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I know the minister has heard and she has undertaken to monitor more effectively. If she fails, we shall call her out on the letter. 

THE ESCALATION OF THREATS OF LAND GRABBING IN BUGOMA AND KANGOMBE FOREST RESERVES IN KIKUUBE AND KIBALE DISTRICTS

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, I refer to the issue raised by hon. Andrew Kaluya regarding the attempted land grabbing and encroachment in central forest reserves in Bunyoro sub-region affecting Bugoma and Kangombe Central Forest Reserves. I wish to respond as follows:
The National Forestry Authority (NFA) has, since its inception in 2004, frequently encountered standoffs With Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom in regard to the ownership of the central forest reserves in the region. The kingdom is claiming ownership of some of the forest reserves which were not part of the returned properties and assets. 

The memorandum of understanding between Government of Uganda and the Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom for the return of the properties to the traditional leaders under the Restitution of Assets and Property Statutes 1993 is very clear. Forest reserves were not returned to the Bunyoro Kingdom save forests planted by the kingdom and it categorically provided that the kingdom shall not lay claim on natural resources.

Bunyoro Region is home to 43 central forest reserves, both natural and plantation forests. 

In April 2015, the NFA, with guidance of the district leadership, undertook joint boundary re-survey for Bugoma Central Forest Reserve with the Bunyoro Kingdom representatives, in order to ascertain the forest boundaries and decisively address the claim of land in the Bugoma Central Forest Reserve by the Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom. The boundaries of Bugoma Central Forest Reserve were re-surveyed and mark stones placed on ground. 

In June 2015, Hoima Sugar Company Limited using earth moving equipment started to clear vegetation in Bugoma Central Forest Reserve. NFA promptly stopped this and reported the case to Hoima Central Police under case SD 58/09/06/2015. 

Hoima Sugar Company Limited disclosed that the land they attempted to take possession of had been leased to them by the Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom. 

The certificate of titles of approximately 5779 hectares was verified and found to fall in Bugoma Central Forest Reserve gazatted under Legal Notice no. 87 of 1932 and subsequently re-gazatted under Legal Instrument No.41 of 1948, Statutory Instrument No. 176 of 1958 and Statutory Instrument No. 63 of 1998 with area of 40,144 hectares and legally under the effective protection and management of NFA as successor in title to the forest department.

On 23 August 2015, NFA petitioned the Commissioner, Land Registration in respect to the illegal land title in Bugoma Central Forest Reserve. NFA requested the commissioner to exercise her discretion as enshrined under the Registration of Titles Act to cancel the said titles to enable NFA secure the integrity of that central forest reserve.

On 13 September 2015, the Commissioner Land Registration cancelled the leasehold certificate title for Hoima Sugar Limited leaving the mother freehold title of the Omukama of Bunyoro-Kitara intact. However, the high court later reinstated the cancelled title. 

In September 2016, NFA sued the Omukama of Bunyoro-Kitara, Hoima Sugar Company limited and the Uganda Land Commission. The case was heard to conclusion and judgment was delivered on 25 April 2019 handing over part of the forest to Hoima Sugar Company Limited.

The implication of this judgment is that approximately 5,779 hectares, which is 14 per cent of Uganda’s prime tropical high forest, renown for bi-diversity conservation, tourism potential, provision of environmental services and needs of the local community is being demarcated regardless of the gazette, which created it 86 years ago. 

This has set a bad precedence where one fraudulently creates a title in a gazetted and protected area and goes to court and secures it in total disregard of the legal instruments in place. 

NFA appealed against this judgment and applied for stay of execution to deter the execution of the judgment, which is yet to be heard by the court of appeal. Our concern is that Hoima Sugar Company Limited may descend on the forest to start clearing it just like they attempted to do three years ago and also days after the judgment had been delivered in April 2019.

Further guidance was sought from the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA), the lead agency on matters of environmental impact assessment, which issued a notice to Hoima Sugar Company Limited not to undertake any development unless they have obtained environmental and social impact assessment certificates of approval since their intended developments involves change of land use in an environmentally sensitive eco-system. 

As the ministry and NFA have been grappling with the above issue, another claim of part of the Bugoma Central Forest Reserve emerged towards the end of 2018. It emerged that other titles had been created at Kisaru in Kabwoya sub county in the names of MZ Limited and Mr Stephen Baryahaka, Chairman, LC III Kabwoya Sub-county.

MZ Limited tried to enter the heavily forested land and was stopped by deployment of soldiers but damage had already been inflicted to about 10 hectares of the forest. 

Prior to this in 2017, a one Francis Atugonza, the former mayor of Hoima Municipality, claimed part of the forest at Rwempunu, in Kyangwali sub county and rented it to the community who started clearing the forest for maize-growing. But they were later stopped by NFA. 

Atugonza has since petitioned the High Court seeking to stop the activities of NFA in the area. The High Court has directed the Attorney-General to work with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to carry out a boundary re-survey in this claimed part. 

We hope this does not turn out to be like the case of Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom that I presented above.

Finally, Madam Speaker, a group of people claiming to be veterans is agitating that the forest at Nyairongo in Kyangwali sub county was their ancestral land and wants to forcefully occupy it. This claim started way back in 2010, forcing the ministry and the NFA to re-open the forest boundary in the presence of the claimants’ surveyor and Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom. The boundary was thereafter marked with concrete pillars and the claimants evicted from the forest in 2012. Forceful re-entry attempts by these veterans have been stopped by the deployment of a UPDF detache in the area.

On another note, Kagombe Central Forest Reserve (11,331 hectares), situated in Kagadi and Kibale districts faced serious encroachment and by 2015; about 90 per cent of the forest reserve was severely encroached upon. Most of the encroachers have since been evicted and the forest is recovering. Encroachers, however, still remain in a small portion where they have been allowed to stay after securing a court injunction against the NFA.

To resolve the issue and upon the application of the plaintiffs, the High Court ordered the Commissioner for Mapping and Surveys – as an independent party – to open the boundaries of Kagombe Central Forest Reserve at the expense of NFA.

The Commissioner for Mappings and Surveys opened the boundaries and filed a report in court, indicating that the plaintiffs were occupying land forming part of Kagombe Central Forest Reserve. This case has been fixed for hearing on 10 October, 2019.

Madam Speaker, the above issues point to a conspiracy by some people who see forest reserves as free land for illegal occupation. My ministry is doing everything possible and will soon hold a meeting with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to discuss stopping the creation of illegal titles in forest reserves in the country.

Challenges faced by the forest sector

Madam Speaker, we face many challenges and one of them is inadequate law enforcement capacity. This has already been reported to Cabinet. The NFA needs more soldiers and we would need a dedicated force like the Uganda Wildlife Authority has.

For example, in Bugoma Central Forest Reserve, we have only 22 soldiers and police personnel and 30 in Kagombe. These cannot monitor such big areas. 

In the past, forest boundaries were not marked by concrete pillars. most boundaries were marked by directional trenches and cairns. Today, most of the trenches have disappeared, making the boundaries unclear. This has also fueled encroachment. The ministry, through the NFA, has embarked on boundary re-opening and marking with concrete pillars. The only challenge that we have is the budgetary constraint.

Another challenge is the lack of effective management of forests outside protected areas. The National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 vests the management of all forests outside the protected areas in the District Forest Service (DFS). The DFSs are ill-staffed and ill-facilitated and have proved inefficient to manage these forests and a lot of deforestation we are witnessing in the country has affected this category of forests.

Another challenge is the creation of illegal certificates of titles in forest reserves. Many of these titles are later sold to unsuspecting people. Before one attempts to take possession of the land, it is difficult to even know that a title has been created in a forest reserve. This is in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development where we do not have any way of monitoring the titling process.

Finally, expansion of indigenous settlements in central forest reserves in Karamoja sub region is also affecting Timu, Moroto, Kadam, Napak and Morungole central forest reserves, yet these forests play a very important role in water catchment.

Madam Speaker, these are some of the challenges that we face under this very critical sector of forestry, given that the impacts of climate change are now biting. At the international level, we have been tasked to plant at least one trillion trees. We are going to host the Climate Change Summit in March next year on behalf of Africa.

As a ministry, we are planning to plant 500 million trees just within one week, working together with the Ministry of Education and Sports. I will, at an appropriate time, write to you so that I have champions within Parliament joining me. I know you are already a champion and I thank you for all the support you have given us. 

During that week, we plan to also recognise you as a champion of protecting the environment. (Applause) We also plan to recognise another Ugandan who passed on but what he left behind in Bushenyi is commendable. Recently, I represented the President there and much as the man is gone, we still remember him for leaving behind five acres of a protected forest in Bushenyi District. I urge my colleagues to leave a legacy by creating a few acres of a forest in their areas. I beg to summit.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see hon. Kaluya. Maybe, let me ask a neighbour, hon. Godfrey Onzima, to ask a supplementary question to the minister.

5.03
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard the response by the minister. However, when you look at most of these destructions, particularly in my area – somebody was asking whether I have a forest in my area. In fact, I am next to Kei National Forest Reserve. Most of the destructions in these reserves are not by outsiders. If you go there, you will find vehicles carrying logs and the rest. These vehicles even pass near the checkpoints by       the NFA officials. It is even believed that NFA officials are the ones cutting some of these trees. 

Therefore, as the minister is trying to raise some of these issues, I would like to assure her that my home is one kilometre to the boundary of the Kei National Forest Reserve. One day, I even went to Koboko where the sector manager stays. Some time back, they would issue certificates for people to go and harvest timber. The timber is harvested using machines that make a lot of noise. Of late, many of the patrolmen have taken off because we threatened to arrest them.

Therefore, these destructions are not by outsiders but they are promoted and encouraged by the NFA officials themselves. I think we need to be honest and serious with the people who are supposed to take charge and preserve the forests.

5.05
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources and recently, we visited Bugoma Forest Reserve. 

On one hand, the forest reserves in this country are under the watch of Ministry of Water and Environment and National Forestry Authority but on the other hand, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is busy issuing titles to grab forest reserves. This is unbelievable. This is happening under the same Government. These are ministries of the Government of Uganda but you can imagine the mess.

My second concern regards enforcement. This process of land grabbing has taken long. When you go to Bugoma, you will be amazed at the extent to which we are losing our forest reserves when the minister is just talking about a submission to the cabinet on issues related to enforcement. This is something that you could have probably done many years ago. We need to be a lot more serious. Thank you.

5.07
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for the response given to this effect. We are struggling with the mitigation of climate change in this country and so, it is very saddening that a country we diligently serve under the different ministries is watching when all this is being done. 

Who are those destroying the strong and the most treasured forest cover in this country? Going to sugarcane growing, maize plantation and we are watching yet, we are struggling with climate change.
I think the question of forests in this country needs a much wider discussion and more time because we have lost almost everything. If we cannot save these forests and go ahead with planting new forests, yet, we are destroying the natural forests, we are doing ourselves a disservice.

I implore the ministry to save the few forests that are remaining. These so called investors who are investing in these forests could be given land elsewhere to do their investments other than destroying our forests that we have very much treasured as a country. I beg to submit.

5.08
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that titles are being issued on such important natural areas like forests and wetlands by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

As you are aware, for the last three years and three months, I have been in this Parliament. I have had a lot of land wrangles in my constituency and I have interacted a lot with the lands office. I can give evidence of how messy that office is; they can offer a title without due diligence and without any evidence of what is required within the rules to issue a title.

There is a lot of corruption in this ministry. We need a forensic audit of the titles. I suggest that we make an audit of the titles that have been issued in a period of 30 years. I am sure the mafia will not allow this to happen because there are people behind this.

Secondly, Government has set a bad precedence. We have offered natural forests to companies to plant trees. Imagine destroying a natural forest where we get firewood, herbs to plant trees, which do not have of any climate importance.

People tend to think that forests are not important - at one time, there was a scuffle in the Ninth Parliament and a member of Parliament earned a name, Mama Mabira because she fought hard for that forest.

We need to see far and so, I am of the opinion that Government does something to clean up the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and probably, stop with immediate effect, the issuance of titles in respect of land in such important areas as forests and wetlands.

Above all, an audit would do us good and to set a good foundation where we can base to protect our climate. Thank you.

5.11
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in thanking the minister for his good submission.  However, I need to find out from the minister whether she has any information concerning the South Busoga Forest Reserve in Mayuge District. If she does not, we request her to pick interest in what is happening to that forest now.

Secondly, the minister talked about the 500 million trees that we have in plan to plant. She has been around to see how we have been struggling with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development claiming to have provided for this and not the other.

Last time, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives had an exhibition in Dubai but the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not provide for money; that is what we are going through.

We need to know, from the minister, how prepared she is so that when that time comes, we do not go through the gymnastics of what has been happening.

Further, the minister has told us about the environmental summit that we are yet to hold. Which picture are we going to show on how we protect the environment? 

Before we came to Parliament, we used to see members of Parliament distributing trees in their constituencies. One time, the commissioner promised to give us trees to plant in our constituencies but when you go to NFA, they do not give you anything. They say they do not have the budget for seedlings.

If we aggressively went to our constituencies with seedlings and showed those people how to plant trees, some of those people would fear to continue cutting them.

Therefore, which plan does the minister have - if we can get maize seeds - these days, they give us maize seeds that do not germinate. If we get other seedlings - can the minister also plan for us to get tree seedlings to plant them so we can lead by example? Thank you. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: We are not going to conclude. How shall we resolve by just talking? I have been trying in Busoga - I told people that if they have a wedding, they should plant five trees in the girl’s home, five in the boy’s home and five where they are going and to also plant trees where there is a death, graduation and if someone gets a new baby. If we did that, we would increase our forest cover. Otherwise, it is worrying.

5.14
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, Moyo County West, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are a very hospitable community in West Nile; we received the refugees. However, honourable minister, there is a lot of environmental degradation in the whole of West Nile sub-region. Refugees have felled all our trees and they are using the logs for fuel for cooking, construction, charcoal and so on. As a result, in two to three years to come, we are not going to have tree cover in West Nile. I do not know where the refugees will get trees or fuel from if they continue at that rate. 

Therefore, honourable minister, my humble appeal is that you liaise with the implementing partners for the refugees, like the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), so that we have massive tree planting in that subregion. Otherwise - I repeat this – in two to three years to come, we are not going to have tree cover in West Nile. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not going to resolve these issues; we are simply talking. The mover is also not here. Hon. Abala and then we close with hon. Agaba.

5.15
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister. However, I have a few questions to ask. 

Government used to have a policy that before you cut one tree, you must plant many - about two or three. I wonder whether that policy still exists. I would like her to tell me and Ugandans. According to reports, every year, about 2,000 hectares of forest cover are destroyed in this country and the minister is telling us stories here and encouraging statements yet at the same time, there are these problems. 

Two, I would like to ask the minister - We were talking –(Member timed out.)

5.17
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for her statement and I have two rejoinders.

The first one is that there is a lot of corruption in the allocation of forest reserves to those who are managing them. It is an assumed partnership between the ministry and those who are managing the forest reserves. However, the worst is that people who are distant from the localities are awarded those forests to manage and they do not give the local people an opportunity to manage them. It is worrying and disappointing and a lot of money changes hands.

Secondly, the preference of these trending trees, like pine and others, against our own indigenous trees, is also a big problem. There was a drive by the ministry to promote indigenous trees like mivule and others but it seems it ended somewhere and has been overtaken by events.

The promotion –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have any concluding remarks? This was really a question for one Member. I have allowed others because forests are important.

MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank all of you for your contributions because this is a subject which is now hot on the agenda. Next month, there is going to be the United Nations Secretary-General’s Climate Change Summit in New York, alongside the United Nations General Assembly. The Secretary-General is going to declare a decade of restoration. This is because of the worrying trend which we have. The rate at which we are cutting trees is worrying all of us. For Uganda, if we do not change, our projection is that we might warm by three degrees and that means a lot of problems for us in addition to the worry once we lose the trees.

There are issues which have been raised by colleagues on lorries or officers within the ministry or the NFA, who participate in committing offences. I think since we came to office, so far 10 officers have lost their jobs. I would like to task colleagues not to sit on information when you see things going wrong. Inform us so that we are able to act and replace these people with cadres who can protect our forests. The forests sometimes are big and far and you are the people who are on the ground. If you do not inform us, some of these wrong things can go on. Kindly bring these reports to us; we can act.

On the issue of the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Prime Minister has already held a meeting with both of us and we have raised our concerns. We have requested that my ministry should also have access to the system that registers titles. 

There is now a digital system in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development but the process of making us at least have a computer, so that we can monitor what they are doing, is taking time. However, the Prime Minister has already taken charge of that. Sometimes we receive whistle-blowers. Recently, we stopped about four titles which were again going to be issued in the Bunyoro Subregion. So, we are acting and once you tell us, we normally respond very fast.

On the issue of climate, that one is common knowledge to everybody. 

A Member was concern that trees are being cut down. By the way, we have lost more trees on private land than in the forest reserves. Madam Speaker, just to inform the House, in 1990 we had about four million hectares of forest - 1.5 million under the NFA and UWA and 2.5 million was under private land. However, as I speak now, in 2015 when we carried out stocktaking, we had lost 400,000 hectares under the NFA and UWA, and under private land we only had 800,000 hectares remaining. That is why I have pressure on the Government Central Forest Reserve. I had already told you the reason why we lost that.

In the past, the Government had control over forests on private land but when they enacted the 2003 law, this was left under districts and was also not really strengthened. When we had issues in the north, for example, the only way out was to come up with an instrument banning the cutting of certain trees. Otherwise, our powers were limited in that law.

There are other issues like those concerning the South Busoga Central Forest Reserve. Please allow me to bring a report on that. We also have reports on that. 

As for refugees, we have also engaged the United Nations and proposed that refugees should be allowed to plant their own trees like bamboo. These can grow within two years, so that they are able to - We are working with the UN to see that they are able to plant their own trees, instead of moving around cutting trees on either private land or in central forest reserves.

On distribution of seedlings, I thank the Member who raised that. Madam Speaker, I need more seedlings. I cannot satisfy the demand for tree seedlings. I actually have four tree seed centres. Each region has a tree seed centre.  I have the capacity to distribute tree seedlings to all Ugandans but my limitation is the money that I am normally given.

This quarter –(Interjections)– Please, Madam Speaker, I need protection from Members.

THE SPEAKER: Order! Allow the minister to complete her statement.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable minister. You just told us that you have the capacity. National Forestry Authority gave us an offer – let me speak for myself – of 10,000 seedlings; they said that I should go and pick them from Mbale. However, to date, they have failed to give me those seedlings. It is not only me; so many other Members got offers from NFA but they cannot get them; they are not there.

MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, I meant the technical capacity. I am, however, lacking the financial capacity, which I plead for before the Speaker. It is Parliament which appropriates the budget and many times, this item is not massaged very well. If you give me the financial capacity, I can be able to supply the seedlings.

I would like to answer – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. I would like to go to some other issues.  

MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, on the allocation of forests, I have fast-tracked this process but I was told that it followed the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) rules where they advertised and called on all Ugandans to apply. Whoever applied was given whatever he or she wanted. So, it was competition.

Madam Speaker, this has been a challenge to us because we cannot do anything unless we challenge it under the PPDA law. As ministers, we try to do our best. We try to manage some of those things which are within our means. That was what we were told.

We have noted the issue of exotic trees. Very soon, I will present a paper before Cabinet on how we can control the planting of eucalyptus and pine in some of our areas. Scientifically, there are certain species of eucalyptus which should be planted in certain areas. What is happening is that we are just planting it anyhow. I am hopeful that after that, we shall be able to govern and control the planting of particularly the exotic trees. Otherwise, we are now promoting the natural trees because this is where you earn carbon credit. With the exotic trees, you will not earn any carbon credit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister talked about the UN Secretary-General declaring a decade of trees. We do not need it. Ethiopia did a decade of trees without the UN Secretary General. They identified their ten years and each year, they planted 100 million trees. Now, they have 120 billion million trees. They did not wait for the UN Secretary General. I think we are not serious.

MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, I have heard what you have said and I am going to work to see that we also declare a decade of trees.

THE SPEAKER: Give us money, declare the decade, and we move on. Thank you. 

Before we go to the next item, honourable members, I just would like to communicate a matter that has come up. Again, the President has written to me concerning the Genetic Engineering Regulatory Bill. You may recall that Parliament considered and passed that Bill. It was sent to the President in accordance with the Constitution to seek his assent to the Bill. Yesterday, he wrote to me to say that he is giving me notice, that he rejects the law in its current form and he is unable to assent to it. 

Honourable members, this presents a new situation because he had sent it back before and we reconsidered it. When he does that, we may have to proceed under Article 91 (6) (b) of the Constitution, which provides as follows: 

“Where the President- 
(b) refuses to assent to a Bill which has been reconsidered and passed under paragraph (a) or clause (4) of this Article, the Speaker shall, upon the refusal, if the Bill was so passed with the support of at least two-thirds of all Members of Parliament, cause a copy of the Bill to be laid before Parliament, and the Bill shall become law without the assent of the President.” 

Honourable members, as I said, this situation is very interesting because he has written to me and now proposed new additional clauses that were not in his original Bill. These are afterthoughts. Let me just read the letter.

“Genetic Engineering Regulatory Act, 2018

I would like to thank all the various stakeholders who have contributed to the development of this law. I, however, regret to inform you that I reject the law in its current form. I am unable to assent to it for reasons I will elaborate in this letter. 

Several of the critical issues I raised in my previous communication have not been fully addressed in this amended law. The issue of GMOs and genetic modification of our seeds, livestock, and now I hear GMO mosquitoes, touches not only on science but agriculture, ecology, food and national security and the sovereignty of our nation. It is, therefore, of the utmost importance that we proceed with caution and include the necessary safeguards in this law. 

I understand that Parliament was unable to address some of my concerns because of a narrow interpretation of parliamentary procedure, which limited the number of clauses that were debated on the Floor. I think this is unfortunate. Parliament should allow for free deliberation and if necessary, the addition or subtraction of clauses until a harmonised position can be reached among all stakeholders. 

We must have a law that allows our scientists to carry out research and make scientific breakthroughs while at the same time safeguarding the beautiful ecology and diversity that God has bestowed on our country, as well as the interest of the wananchi who continue to depend on the land for their sustenance.

I do understand that there are large commercial interests behind the promotion of this technology. I welcome these interests. Uganda is a market economy and as the NRM Government, we believe in the contribution of the private sector in creating jobs and driving growth. These commercial interests, however, need to be balanced against the need to protect the ordinary Ugandan citizen from real or potential harm. Health and wellbeing, rather than profits, must be our primary concern.

I have read through the law and noted the adjustments that have been made. For emphasis, I will outline the crucial gaps that remain. It is my prayer that Parliament will make the necessary adjustments, if necessary, by amending the existing clauses or inserting new clauses. Without these adjustments, I am confident that this law will not serve the people of Uganda well and these are the people I represent…” 

His proposals include:

    a) Benefit sharing between the breeder/inventor and the indigenous communities.
    b) Co-mingling of GMO materials with non-GMO seeds or materials. He wants to address clauses 28 and 29 and insert a new clause on isolation measures.
    c) Scope of the law, which is a new clause.
    d) Home of genetic engineering, which is another new clause;

The others are: 

    e) use of poison and other dangerous viruses and bacteria; and 
    f) Strict liability. 

Honourable members, I will give this letter to the committee to look at it together with the Bill again. In the meantime, I would like to instruct the Prime Minister to get space on the Order Paper to lay the Bill again on the Table or he can instruct any of the ministers to do that not later than 11 September 2019 so that the House may reconsider it. 

As I have indicated, the proposals he made are difficult under the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure. However, I will allow you people to do the needful.

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I oblige; we will bring the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Clerk will arrange to place the matter on the Order Paper for re-tabling. Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF INDEBTEDNESS, GRANTS AND GUARANTEES AS AT JUNE 2018

5.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the state of indebtedness, grants and guarantees –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, we have just been with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and he knew that this item was on the Order Paper. Is it within your means to instruct the Prime Minister to summon him to come back and listen to this crucial issue that we wish to discuss?

THE SPEAKER: It is true; we need the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here because this is his docket. I do not know where he has gone to but he was here earlier.

MR MICHAEL WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, he stepped out and indicated that he would be coming back. However, I need to find out.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Can we defer this and go to the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DEVISE LONG-TERM MEANS OF STOPPING THE RAMPANT MURDERS AND ROBBERIES SUFFERED BY BODA BODA RIDERS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, we had an extensive debate on this matter and what remained was the responses and clarifications by the following ministries: Ministry of Health; Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Ministry of Works and Transport; Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs; Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Ministry of Internal Affairs; Ministry for Kampala Capital City; and the Office of the Prime Minister.

5.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I remember that you directed Government to come with a comprehensive response to some issues. However, the issues are many and we can present them during the course of the week.

THE SPEAKER: Can you ensure that all these ministries are available on Thursday, because we need to conclude this matter?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, Madam Speaker.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO ESTABLISH AND IMPLEMENT POLICIES AND STRENGTHEN EXISTING LAWS TO STOP TEENAGE PREGNANCIES IN UGANDA

5.36
DR MICHEAL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to move a motion under rule 55 and 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It is a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to establish and implement policies and strengthen existing laws to stop teenage pregnancies in Uganda.

“WHEREAS Article 34 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda recognises the rights of the child that include the right to health, right to education and right to protection from exploitation;

AND WHEREAS Uganda in 1990 ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which imposes an obligation on Government to ensure that all children, without any form of discrimination, benefit from special protection measures and assistance, have access to services such as education and healthcare, have the ability to develop their personalities or talents to the fullest potential, and participate in achieving their rights in an accessible and active manner;

AWARE THAT Uganda’s population has drastically grown from 34.6 million in 2014 to an estimated 40 million - thus an annual growth rate of three per cent - which reflects a high fertility rate of 5.4 and one of the contributing factors is teenage pregnancy, which according to the Ministry of health statistics increased from 24 per cent in 2011 to 25 per cent in 2016 among women aged l5-19 years;

AND AWARE THAT more than 600,000 teenagers become pregnant annually with 3 in l0 teenagers becoming pregnant before they reach 20 years of age, 10-40 per cent of young girls having unintended pregnancies, and over 300,000 babies born in Uganda to adolescents aged l5-19 years;

FURTHER AWARE THAT teenagers in rural areas are more likely to have started childbearing (27 per cent of women aged l5-19 years) than those in urban areas (19 per cent), and 45 per cent of uneducated girls have a child before their 18th birthday compared to 16 per cent of girls who have attained secondary education;

COGNIZANT THAT the main driver of teenage pregnancy is a large sexually active youthful generation with limited access to contraceptives and sexuality education, and according to Uganda Demographic and Health Survey of 2016 among women and men aged l5-19 years, 10 per cent of women and l7 per cent of men had sexual intercourse by age 15;

FURTHER COGNISANT THAT the risk of death during childbirth is two to four times higher among teen mothers wherein teenage pregnancy accounts for about 70,000 deaths annually, and the mortality and morbidity rates are higher among infants born to teen mothers, believed to be at 30 per cent or more among babies whose mothers were aged l5 -19 years;

NOTING THAT in developing countries like Uganda, where health care is limited, teenage mothers are at a greater risk of experiencing negative consequences because of their physical immaturity, vulnerability to older men, and limited education, skills, finances and other resources, teenage pregnancy accounts for about 25 per cent of the 20 million unsafe abortions in Uganda every year;

FURTHER NOTING THAT teenage mothers are unable to support themselves and are most likely unable to support their children in terms of providing for their needs like education, healthcare, housing and other basic needs, and also teenage pregnancy leads to devastating health consequences for girls as adolescents are not yet physically ready for pregnancy or childbirth and are therefore more vulnerable to complications like fistula;

CONCERNED FURTHER THAT the absence of a robust streamlined Government strategy to establish and implement national policies, strategies and programmes on reproductive health and sex education to eradicate teen pregnancies as well as weak relevant laws against cultural practices that encourage child marriages have greatly contributed to the challenge of teenage pregnancy;

CONVINCED THAT there is an urgent need to conclude and pass the National Policy on Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights and the National Framework for Sexuality Education as a means of reducing on the burden of early pregnancies;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Government-

    1.  Fast-tracks the passing of the National Policy on Sexual and Reproductive Health and implements the recently approved age-appropriate sexuality education national framework. 
    2. Fast-tracks the effective implementation of the National Strategy on Ending Child Marriages and Teenage Pregnancies in Uganda, 2015. 
    3. Develops a comprehensive multi-sectoral strategy to avert the challenge of teenage pregnancy and harmonises laws on marriage to provide for 18 years as the minimum legal age to marry. 
    4. Strengthens the enforcement of laws against defilement, rape and other forms of child abuse and establishes youth-friendly corners at health units. 
    5. Increases the efforts in meeting women’s contraceptive needs as a critical strategy to help women and teenagers avoid unintended pregnancies. 
    6. Reviews the adolescent health policy to update issues of adolescent health in national and global development trends and context.
    7. Expedites the development of the school health policy to guide and rejuvenate school health programmes.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion Seconded)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by several Members. You can justify. 

DR BUKENYA: Madam Speaker, briefly, as contained in the motion, one in four girls less than 18 years of age in Uganda gets pregnant and delivers or has a miscarriage or an abortion. That is a terrible statistics. This is one of the highest levels of teenage pregnancy in sub-Saharan Africa. Unfortunately, this is done by both young and adult men, possibly excluding the ones in this House. (Laughter)

Teenage pregnancy contributes up to 25 per cent of the high maternal mortality rate in Uganda. Up to 70 per cent of the girls who get fistula in Uganda are teenagers. It contributes almost 50 per cent of the morbidity around child birth. It also contributes significantly to the dropout of girls from school yet there is no clear policy to address this. We are aware that if a girl gets out of school, it is a big disservice to the nation. Research has shown that when you educate a girl child or you support them to remain in school, when they start earning they reinvest 90 per cent of their income into the family and in educating others.

Madam Speaker, Government has been working towards policies to improve this. In 2001, Government started developing a school health policy, which would help teenagers access relevant health information services and skills but for 18 years, the policy has not been produced. Still around the same time, Government started reviewing the adolescent health policy to make it commensurate with what happens now. This policy aims at promoting a system response to adolescent problems by providing quality health and information services to adolescents, including those in hard-to-reach areas, but nothing is being done.

In as far as culture and legislation are concerned, we still have laws such as the Customary and Registration Act, which has a provision that allows 16-year-old girls to get married, which is not in agreement with Article 31 of the Constitution. This is all within the same Government.

Whereas a big contribution to teenage pregnancies is the family and religious beliefs, Government still has to put in effort to play its role wherever it has control and help reduce this problem, because it consumes a significant portion of our national budget and also creates more poverty. When a teenager produces a baby, there are two babies who have to look after each other; this is a big challenge.

Madam Speaker, allow me to stop my submission here and leave some room for my seconders to debate other issues. I beg to submit.

5.47
Ms spellanza baguma (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjonjo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion on the following grounds: 

To begin with, the policies that are to support adolescents will help in promoting our universal primary and secondary education. Currently, these programmes are funded by Government yet most of our girls drop out of school along the way. Thirty per cent of the girls who start primary 1 do not reach primary 7 and never sit for Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) and 24 per cent of these drop out mainly because of early pregnancies. Therefore, if such policies are put in place to support the adolescents, then we shall have these children get information that will help them stay in school at least to complete the primary and secondary school cycles and possibly attain some skills at tertiary level.

Secondly, we have a very high maternal mortality rate in this country. It stands at about 335 mothers per 100,000 live births. The biggest percentage of this rate comes as a result of early pregnancies, where these adolescents attempt to undertake unsafe abortion. If these policies are put in place, we would be able to have the girls saved from unwanted pregnancies.

In that regard, I recently talked about the issue of the adolescent health policy, and I will still pose this question to the minister. We need to know the real timelines as to when this will be ready and passed. Where there are some gaps, where the minister needs help from this Parliament, we should get to know so that we can offer help and expedite the process of having this in place.

Lastly, I would like to talk about our population growth rate, which is very high, together with our fertility rate, which stands at about 6.4 and compare it with the productivity of our population. Most of our population is non-productive; we are not able to harness the demographic dividends and we are heading towards a population explosion.

If these policies are put in place, we shall have the girls stay in school and take longer to begin producing. In that way, we shall have a manageable population, other than when they are left to produce at a very early age, have so many children and continue with a very big unproductive population. We may reach a level where the country is not able to provide services, and more so basic services that are commensurate with the population and we would be heading towards a population explosion.

Madam Speaker, on those grounds, I stand to second the motion.  Thank you.

5.51
Ms robinah ssentongo (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion and its prayer, which is of critical importance to our generation. The motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to establish and implement policies, which have been shelved, is critical to the Ugandan child. 

Today’s Uganda, as the mover of the motion has said, faces a big challenge of teenage pregnancies and the negative consequences that arise thereof. The Uganda Demographic Health Survey Report, 2016, indicated that teenage pregnancy increased from 24 per cent in 2011 to 25 per cent as of now. Alarmingly, by the age of 16, 9.4 per cent of the Ugandan girls have begun child bearing, which is a risk to their lives. Ten per cent of these young girls who are 15 to 19 years are already involved in sexual intercourse by the age of 15. That does not save them from the HIV scourge which prevalence among these young people is at 2.1 per cent. The statistics that we are mentioning are so overwhelming and are an indicator of the magnitude of the problem faced by the young generation.

Indeed, early pregnancies expose our young girls to complications. So far, one of them is fistula for which we are going ahead to fundraise. I think we should use those resources to fight the cause of fistula, which is reducing pregnancies among the young ones.

Madam Speaker, if children under 15 years run a risk that is five times higher than the rest, we need to act. About 80 per cent of –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS SSENTONGO: Let me conclude, Madam Speaker. These prevailing circumstances warrant our Government to intervene by fast-tracking the passing of the national policy on sexual education. It is critical that Parliament passes the resolution granting prayers in the aforementioned motion. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am alive to our Rules of Procedure. Rule 120(1) provides every private Member the right to present a private Member’s Bill.
Madam Speaker -  

THE SPEAKER: There is no Bill.

MR AGABA: True, it is a motion, but let me build my point. I would like to be guided if we are proceeding rightly, Madam Speaker. The mover of the motion, who is also the chairperson of the Committee on Health, is moving a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to establish and implement policies as well as strengthen existing laws to stop teenage pregnancies in Uganda. 

I support the intentions of the motion. However, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to be briefed about the attempts before? This is because, as Parliament we are the ones who monitor implementation of policies. When it comes to strengthening existing laws, it is Parliament that makes the laws. I do not know which Government we are urging to establish and implement these policies, especially for a motion moved by the chairperson of the Committee on Health. 

Wouldn’t it procedurally be right, Madam Speaker, for us to be briefed about attempts that have been made before, and maybe be told that they have failed and so we must go by way of motion? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No. This is just expressing concern and asking Government to take more interest in the issue. If there are policies, which are not being implemented, please implement them. If there are laws you are not implementing, please implement them. That is what the motion says. They are just expressing concern. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, when hon. Abbas Agaba was bringing this out, I was just trying to think aloud. I think he has a point. Given that the people moving the motion are both chairperson and vice-chairperson of a committee, wouldn’t they have summoned the Ministry of Health and expressed these issues? Unless they are telling us that the ministry failed to appear before them or they have given recommendations and the ministry has failed to act on them - 

Under these circumstances, at what point does the committee stop monitoring and ensuring that Government agencies, which have provided these policies, are not following them up? It is not that we want to gag them but it would just help us move in a very systematic way. 

I thought the chairperson has good powers to summon hon. Opendi, express these gaps and ask her what she is doing about them. If they fail, then that is when they can come to the House and tell us what they did; for example, they could say that they are soliciting the help of the whole House to bring the minister or the ministries to order because of what they have failed to do or what they were supposed to do. 

If they have failed, then there is also the other window that they can move a private Member’s Bill to amend the laws as they are asking. They could say that they have urged the ministry and it has failed to amend the laws and now they are bringing a private Member’s Bill to address these gaps. 

THE SPEAKER: This is not a Bill. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I have not talked about the Bill. I am talking about the second aspect of it. (Interjection) Members, let us listen to one another. It is not that we want to gag the committee. We would like to move systematically because there is the second aspect of it. 

The first one talks about the policy and the second one is on the failure to implement the laws. There is that part of the laws. If there are gaps there and we have urged the ministries and they have failed, we can bring a private Members’ Bill to address that gap. That is why I am bringing the aspect of the private Member’s Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like you to tell me whether you are not aware or you do not believe that teenage pregnancies have increased in this country. Do you believe it or not? Do you believe that there is a high rate of attrition in our schools?

About a month ago, hon. Ssentongo raised an issue here concerning the policy, which has been “sleeping” for 18 years. Therefore, they are asking Government to do its work. What problem do we have with that? This is not a Bill; it is just a motion.  

MR AGABA: We are with you totally, but the procedural issue we are raising and our interpretation – 

THE SPEAKER: Which rule is that?

MR AGABA: It is rule 2 of our Rules of Procedure under interpretation - the definition of a motion. “‘Motion’ means a proposal made by a Member that Parliament or a committee of Parliament do something, order something to be done or express an opinion concerning some matter”. 

Madam Speaker, this is the basis of our procedure that the Committee on Health’s chairperson and vice-chairperson are relying on. Have they made an attempt to do their work and failed so that they have to go through the motion of the House? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not understand your objections. 

MS RWAKIMARI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would just like to inform my colleagues that last year in April, when we were commemorating International Maternal Health Day, I made a statement on the Floor of the House imploring the Ministry of Health to look into the matter of teenage pregnancies in this country. I also asked them to bring the policy. For a year now, they have not responded. Hence, it is only fair that my chairperson and vice-chairperson further raise these very important issues, which the ministry has failed to answer for the last one year. 

Madam Speaker, I think the chairperson and vice-chairperson are in order to bring the motion so that the ministry can respond. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS BAGUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the Members who are trying to oppose this have just not looked at the details of the motion. When you look at the title of the motion alone, we are talking about policies. 

These policies that are to help the adolescents stay in school are not only drafted by the health committee. Sometime back, for example, we banned the comprehensive sexuality education framework and gave time to the ministry and the sexuality education framework was introduced. The policy was even launched but it has never been implemented because religious leaders have raised issues. Hence, there is nothing happening in schools and it is not the health committee that is concerned about this. We are talking about all these policies being worked on, being concluded and implemented to help our adolescents stay in school, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much. 

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In such a motion, the movers are not only informing Government, centrally, through the institution of Parliament, but are also sending a message of the gravity of the problem to the public so that it can spark some discussion towards control and prevention. 

In my opinion, being chairperson and vice-chairperson does not take away their right and the opportunity to use the Floor of Parliament to air out such a grave public health problem. Honourable members, I think that we should move ahead to lay out a few ideas on how Government can move to control this scourge because it is very big. 

6.03 
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support this motion. 

The district where I come from has over time, been registering very high levels of teenage pregnancies. In one of the subcounties in Erute North, it was found that about 70 per cent of deliveries at the health centre were actually girls who are under the age of 18 years.

If you look at the way this motion has been presented, first, it goes beyond the health sector. If you are going to talk about contraceptives, the quality of contraceptives that are available in the Ugandan market alone is problematic; we need to discuss issues around that area. If you are talking about education, I think the Ministry of Education and Sports has a bigger role to play. I think it is an opportunity for us to address this challenge because it is real. 

About three months ago, I appeared on a television show with some teenagers. They told me, “Whether you like it or not, we are having sex. As parents, you must deal with it and devise mechanisms that can help us to deal with teenage pregnancy.” Therefore, I stand here to support the motion and the House should bless this motion so that it achieves the results.

6.05
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I also would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Health and his colleagues for coming up with this motion. 

Teenage pregnancies are a real threat and a problem to this country. If colleagues have been reading stories in newspapers, the problem is increasing day by day. This is a situation where we are having young girls having babies. As legislators, this is not something that we can shy away from.  As a country, we need to wake up. 

Much as we have made losses, it is high time we implemented these laws. The way they are, they are not solving the problems because some of the policies are not even in place. As far as the demographic dividends are concerned, we are not going to reap a lot from teenage mothers, who are having children when they are also children.

Secondly, I would like to call upon the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education and Sports and local governments, - this vice needs the whole community - religious leaders and cultural leaders to come together to address this problem. When you look at our education system at primary level, especially P.1, we have very many girls who join school but when they reach P.7, there are few girls who sit for PLE. This means that most of them are dropouts. To make matters worse, most of these girls get pregnant. In my district, for example, this problem is real, so we need to sensitise the parents to make sure that when girls become pregnant when they are still young, as parents and a nation we do not reap much.

I would like to thank my colleagues for coming up with this motion. I call upon the ministries and ministers who are present to make sure we implement this policy. It is high time we woke up from the slumber to help the young children so that we have a healthy population. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to give my ruling on the matter of procedure. There was an issue raised as to whether they were within the meaning of the word, “motion.” I would like to confirm that the motion brought here falls within the definition “to order something to be done or express an opinion concerning some matter”. They are expressing their opinion concerning teenage pregnancies. Nobody should stop them. Being a chair does not take away your rights to speak in this House. So, we can now proceed. 

THE SPEAKER: If the motion is already supported, let us go on record for just two minutes each.

6.08
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion. 

Last year, in October, we had some celebrations in Agago District to commemorate World Contraception Day. I was very excited that the district was chosen to celebrate this great day. When the Minister of State for Health was addressing the people, she said that she had chosen Agago District to celebrate the World Contraception Day because it had the highest rate of teenage pregnancies and early marriages in the whole country. I got so perturbed. This is the reason I would like to support this motion that Government must implement the policies that we have and strengthen whatever laws that we have within our reach to make sure that we are able to save the girls who give birth at an early age.

Secondly, I would like to ask the mover of the motion to include in the prayers that this Parliament also urges parents of this nation to strengthen their parenting roles. This is because I think that part of the reason that our young girls are producing at an early age is because parents have neglected their duties. When we were carrying out hearings in the east, for example, I passed by Ngora District and I saw parents drinking alcohol past midnight with their young children. Parents were drinking and the children were dancing and it was past mid-night. It is unacceptable –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometime back, I went with hon. Alum to her constituency. We went to a school and they told us that when the children started, there were over 100 girls but when I got there, there were only nine girls in P.7. I came back crying. It is a serious issue.

6.11
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the causes of teenage pregnancies is the inability of some of our young girls to go to school. One of the reasons some of these girls drop out of school is because there was a pronouncement that Universal Primary Education (UPE) is free, but parents are required to pay a certain amount of money which they fail to pay. As result, the girls are sacrificed to stay at home in favour of the boys. Therefore, they end up going with their parents to the markets to sell merchandise.

If we can harmonise some of these polices like those in the education sector, I think we can help our girls to go to school. I have seen instances where girls are not able to go to school because they lack sanitary pads. We know that Government has pledged to offer these but it has become a growing concern. Therefore, I stand to support this motion and urge Government to streamline its polices, especially through the inter-ministerial
collaboration, to ensure that the parents are compelled to take their girls to school and keep them in school. 

I have seen girls drop out of school and they end up doing household chores in people’s homes. Most of these young girls are now working as house maids in people’s homes because they cannot afford schools fees. In the end, the boda boda riders start poaching on them and they end up pregnant. That is how we have lost people who were even doing well in class; because they are not able to pay their schools fees and stay in school, they end up becoming teenage mothers. 

Furthermore, most of these Members of Parliament support groups of young mothers. The problem is now coming to Members of Parliament. In the long run, it is going to explode. I beg to submit.

6.13
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. 

Sometime ago, in the Ninth Parliament, I was part of a delegation of Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) members who moved around the country to some selected districts to find out the level of implementation of some existing laws in this country. These included laws on gender-based violence, trafficking in persons and female genital mutilation. What we found on the ground was that the stakeholders are not aware of some of these laws, including the police and schools. They did not have copies of these laws. I, therefore, concur with the mover as he urges Government to establish and implement policies that we already have. 

There is need to intensify sensitisation about these laws because parents are part and parcel of this problem. They are the ones who marry off the girls at an early age; they connive with defilers. So there is need to bring on board all parents, both in urban and rural areas. 

The problem of fistula is serious. A child is supposed to come out with a lot of force, so the young girls end up leaking with urine and sometimes faeces and being burdened with early motherhood. They cannot manage to treat themselves. I call upon Government to help these young girls who may develop fistula because it is very traumatising.

6.15
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Health as the mover of this motion and the seconders. Our society is an open society. Promiscuity is very rampant and the young girls are vulnerable. This is, therefore, a real problem that we have in our midst. 

This is a matter that needs an inter-ministerial approach. We feel that the ministry responsible for youth affairs, the Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Health should work hand in hand to ensure that we have positive interventions to arrest this situation. If our young girls get pregnant at such an early age, how are we preparing such a big population of young people for the future and development of this country? Of course, the future will be very bleak. 

We have seen the Speaker leading many crusades in the fight against fistula, cancer and others but all these are done here in Parliament. We require Government and Government ministries to come and supplement the efforts that Parliament has been –(Member timed out.)

6.17
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. This motion is very timely, and I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Health for presenting this motion. 

Hon. Abbas Agaba, you worked in the east, in Serere; I am sure half of the cases you handled were about teenage pregnancy. The east leads in the prevalence of this problem. The newspapers once published that Ngora was leading in teenage pregnancies. We are right inside this problem. It is very timely that we discuss this issue and urge Government to do something.

One thing that is not being mentioned is the issue of young girls getting pregnant and dropping out of school and then after giving birth, they are not taken back to school. They could actually be very bright and intelligent children. However, for most of the parents, once the girl has got pregnant at an early age, she becomes a social reject. We need to urge Government to do something. 

When you look at some of the Government programmes like the Youth Livelihood Programme or the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) for women, these girls are finding problems in fitting in. Girls between 12 and 16 years old are rejected by the youth who claim that they are not part of them. When they go to the women, the women say, “No, you are still young; you are not a woman”. Therefore, they find no ground to access some of these Government programmes. This is a real problem.

There is one social problem that is coming up in the east, and that is what we locally call okadibong - I do not know how to translate it. Once one has a function or an occasion and there are visitors, a group of youth can come from as far as Katakwi to Soroti and they mobilise themselves in huge groups, both male and female. They come and totally take over the function at night. They are uncontrollable and they cause a lot of damage. This problem is growing day by day. They steal property in the host’s home and some rape girls. The communities are really feeling it. 

This motion is, therefore, very timely. We have to urge the line ministries to address this big social problem and if we do not address it –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Esiangu has reminded me; we asked the finance minister to bring a paper here on the population so that we can discuss the population. During the census, there is a column for people between 10 and 17 years old who have ever been married. It is there. Look at your districts. Government knows these people but they have no plan. We want that paper on population and we discuss it. They had undertaken to bring it.

6.21
MR GERSHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise to support the motion. 

Teenage pregnancy is a big problem. I propose that the Ministry of Education and Sports takes centre stage. Information is power. Our children are taught the contrary on how to become sexually active. We have Ssengas on TV and radio shows and children listen to them. We need to change that direction and teach our young women how to respect their bodies, how to know which parts of their bodies are no-go zones. 

We know very well that poverty has escalated this problem. Young girls sleep in the same room with about 10 other people in a very small hut - both adults and children. What goes on at night is captured by the young children. It is unfortunate that these children learn these things from the Ssengas, the parents and from every direction. It is unfortunate that our society is very unfair to the young girl –(Member timed out.)

6.23
MS MARGARET BABA-DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. 

The issue of teenage pregnancies is very serious because it is ruining the future of the women of Uganda. It prevents them from going to school. Once you become pregnant at an early age, you become disabled and you also become psychologically affected. You would think that those who are defiled are different from those who are not defiled; we need to take the issue seriously. 

Everybody must know that defiling a child is wrong. The parents must know that a child must be protected. The men must know that it is wrong to take a young girl as a wife. This must be put at the back of people’s heads. The teachers must also learn to protect these girls. Both boys and girls must also be told that it is wrong to have sex at an early age because it can lead to early pregnancy.

The Government has tried to bring a policy on adolescents but where is the policy? Why can’t the Government implement the policy? Is it because of the lack of money? We need this policy brought here so that children are sensitised right from P.1 to S.4 or S.6. We also need a sexuality framework, which we can use to do sensitisation from childhood up to when one is mature. If we can implement this national sexuality framework, it would help to bring up children in a good way. 

If you are a girl, nobody should –(Member timed out.)

6.25
MS MARY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion. 

It is on record that Butaleja District has the youngest grandmother in the world. I think she is now 29 years old. When I got that report, I got amazed. If this is happening in Butaleja, what about other districts? These days when you go to a function, you may get surprised to see that the population of the children is more than that of adults, especially the girls between 12 and 15 years. When I look at the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), especially on education and health, we may not achieve them if we do not deal with the problem of early pregnancies.

Madam Speaker, fistula is becoming a silent killer among the teenagers. In Butaleja, women still think this is witchcraft. As leaders, if we do not come out openly to tell these young mothers and their mothers that this is a silent killer, which can be treated in hospitals, we are going to lose many of these young girls just like that.

Lastly, I have always begged on the Floor of Parliament - when it comes to skilling Ugandan girls, why can’t Government extend this programme to the rural districts, especially those that have this problem of teenage pregnancies? In places where girls cannot go back to school, we can help them by skilling them like they are doing in Wakiso and Kampala –(Member timed out.)

6.27
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the mover of this motion. This motion is timely and it evaluates the performance of the Ministry of Health. 

I have been in Parliament for more than three years but it was only last week when the Ministry of Health brought a Bill on health insurance, yet that is such an important issue in the country that should have come earlier. Madam Speaker, I would like to request that the Prime Minister gives us a record on the performance of ministries, indicating how many Bills and motions have been brought here by them, so that we can have time to tell our people how much we have done for the country.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for standing with the girl child. I remembered that one time when I was the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) in Budaka, I was invited to a wedding. When I reached as the guest of honour, I found that the girl to be given out was 14 years old and I stopped the wedding. That wedding had been organized in a subcounty called Kaderuna. It has the majority of the witchdoctors in the district and they even threatened to bewitch the RDC. I do not know whether hon. Mbogo or hon. Pamela Nasiyo are here. (Laughter) 

Anyhow, I went on and did my job but there was a loophole in the law. I, therefore, support this motion strongly. I can refer to Busia, where I come from, where in the bars in Sofia and Marachi, children work with their mothers up to morning –(Member timed out.)

6.29
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Madam Speaker, a report on the state of Uganda’s population released in 2012 indicated that 78 per cent of the population of Uganda is below the age of 30; 52 per cent was found to be below the age of 15; and above all, 62 per cent of the young girls under the age 15 had already had sex while 48 per cent of the boys had also already had sex. This is a very serious problem and this has been worsened by poverty. 

You will attest to the fact that Bugisu sub-region is one of the areas where we record the highest population in Uganda. Where is the problem? It is poverty. In fact, what some of the parents do is that immediately the girls reach the ages between 12 and 15 years old, they begin to market them. Like one of the colleagues was saying, I call upon all Members of Parliament, local councils –(Member timed out.)

6.31
MS HELLEN ADOA (NRM, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the mover of this motion. 

As everyone has said, this is a timely motion. Parents seem to be very comfortable when children produce children before they get married. In some families, children have produced and the grandchildren have also produced while at home. When you look at the number of children in some families, it is going out of hand.

Madam Speaker, I have seen defilers being arrested but the parents who give out their children are not arrested. As Parliament and Government, we need to make sure the laws are strengthened so that as much as defilers are arrested, the parents must be told to take care of their children. They do not take their children to school. Their children are producing while at home and the parents go out drinking. They do not care about who is feeding the family. 

The other thing is what my colleague from Soroti said. There is this okadibong in Teso. When young men come to your home, when you have a function and you do not allow them to dance trans-night or even when fuel gets over, they will command you to add and if you do not they will burn your home. Every day there is a function and when most of us - (Member timed out)

6.33
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representatives): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as we are looking at the policies we must also address the underlying factors. One of them is poverty, the infrastructure; those schools where we send our daughters to go and study under the trees or sit in the dust.

It is very difficult for a girl who has already matured to accept to sit in the dust; the only way she can do is to move out of the school and roam around in the villages. That is how they end up in problems.

The movers forgot to put the issue of HIV/AIDS; of recent there are reports that it is on the rise. Those numbers of pregnancies are also trying to indicate its presence so as they address all other issues they should capture HIV/AIDS.

Another area is that we must engage people from the lowest level that is the LC I. Talking of policies at school level will not help at all. 

As members have already talked here we must engage all the sectors from Ministry of Local Government, Health and Education so that we are able to solve this matter. We should also continue to provide sexual and reproductive health education at all levels to capture all the –(Member timed out)

6.36
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion. There is an African proverb which states that, “When a mother cow is chewing cud the young one will watch and it will also chew.” 

When parents put on their clothes they train their kids and dress mostly the girls with the slits behind. They start preparing them for that one.

Like in my place Mbale when time comes for circumcision they sing songs concerning that forbidden fruit. They tell everybody about it and the young ones grow knowing that there is something which goes on like this.

I have moved in some other places; electricians speak obscenities when the kids are hearing that “put the pole like this and let it erect like, let it go here.” They contribute too much to what we are talking about. 

This one goes to the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity; we parents must make sure that- at night in most places the houses are too small. When the games are being played the kids are listening and tomorrow they practice the same.

You are talking about the LCIs LCIIs; those are the ones who do the game when the kids are hearing. Tomorrow they will practice and things become worse.


Perhaps we should borrow from the Chinese and say young people should not give birth. There must be a strict law and when you do it you get imprisoned. Whether young or old the same punishment for the boy or girl so that will scares our kids not to start sexual activities when they are still young.
	
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think our traditional institutions are also not working. When I was growing up, when boys reached the age of 16 they would be moved out of their fathers’ houses but now you find one under the bed the other is also there.

6.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate Dr Bukenya for this motion and I do support it. We have been with you in this campaign to end child marriages and teenage pregnancies in this country. Let us not only look at teenage pregnancies but also child marriages.

I would like to appreciate the districts that have come up with bylaws on child marriages because that has helped a lot and the focus is to make it an offence for any LC leader to tolerate a child marriage. 

That is the way to go because it has made the LCs a little responsible and we hope that we shall be able -(Interjections) -

Madam Speaker, help me with hon. Elijah and hon. Waluswaka.

THE SPEAKER: Are you are assaulting the minister? Do not heckle. Why have you moved from your seat hon. Okupa? (Laughter) Please allow the minister to speak.

It is true that the challenge of teenage pregnancy, child marriages is a problem. We have laws in place. Teenage pregnancy is defilement.

When you look for the men who have made these girls pregnant they are older men. We have laws against defilement but the challenge that we have is the poverty that we have talked about; negotiations by parents and the law enforcement agencies that sometimes carryout investigations that are shoddy and cannot stand the test in the courts of law.

We have the national strategy to end child marriages and teenage pregnancies. It was launched on the day of the African Child and housed under the ministry of gender but we have been working in a muilt-sectoral manner.

Allow me also inform the House that draft of the national policy on sexual reproductive health has been with us for some time. 

We started this right from 2000; we have been moving back and forth but we have the draft and they are working on the regulatory impact assessment. We hope that very soon it should be presented before Cabinet and we will inform the House accordingly.

Otherwise, ending teenage pregnancies and child marriages cannot be handled by a single sector alone; we need the religious leaders, cultural leaders on board.

Madam Speaker, I was with you in Apac and you remember very well. Look at a girl at 13 years getting pregnant. She needs to be put on some family planning method otherwise she will get pregnant again.

However, people are opposing the use of contraceptives and yet we already have sexually active girls and one way of ending teenage pregnancies for those who cannot abstain is to encourage the use of contraceptives, which are available and free of charge.

That is a controversial subject but there is no way you are going to end teenage pregnancies without promoting the use of these contraceptives. These children are already sexually active and that is a fact that we must accept. We need to be champions ourselves and not give contradictory messages as leaders. Therefore, I would like to support the motion and state that we shall update the House, once we have the Sexual Reproductive Health Policy passed by Cabinet. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the motion be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

6.44
MR MICHEAL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, I rise to move a motion seeking leave of the House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill titled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019.” This motion is moved under rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda.

The motion reads:
“WHEREAS Parliament is mandated, under Article 259 and 262 of the Constitution, to amend the provisions of the Constitution by way of addition, variation or repeal; 

AND WHEREAS Article 94 (4) (b) of the Constitution and rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament permit a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill; 

AWARE that Parliament on the 28th day of February 2019, in accordance with Article 163 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, considered the report of the Public Accounts Committee (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) on the special audit report of the Auditor-General on the closure of commercial banks in Uganda and resolved, among others, that Article 161 (4) of the Constitution be reviewed to separate the offices of the leadership of the Board of Directors of Bank of Uganda and top management of Bank of Uganda;
RECALLING that Parliament resolved that the amendment to Article l6l of the Constitution be introduced in the House within 90 days of the adoption of the report, failure of which a private Member will proceed with the initiation of the requisite amendments; 

NOTING WITH CONCERN that the 90 days given to Government to bring the relevant Constitution amendments lapsed on 11 July 2019 and to date, no amendments have been presented to this august House; 

FIRMLY CONVINCED that there is need to review the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to implement Parliament’s resolution passed on the 28th day of February 2019, as well as address other related matters; 

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that: 

    1. This Parliament accepts the introduction of a Bill for an Act entitled “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill,” a draft of which is attached hereto and do order the publication of the said Bill, in preparation for its first reading.”

This has been moved by hon. Mawanda Michael Maranga and seconded by hon. Paul Mwiru. He is not in the House but he has requested hon. Odur Jonathan to second and speak to this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? It is seconded. State your justification.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. As earlier said, COSASE handled the special audit carried out by the Auditor-General and a lot of issues arose. It was recommended that amendments in respect to the management and running of Bank of Uganda be brought to this House, so that there can be separation of powers of the Board and management.

We have a situation in Bank of Uganda where the Governor, who is the Chief Executive of the Central Bank, is at the same time the Chairman, Board of Directors of Bank of Uganda. We have had problems of accountability, where a budget is made by top management, headed by the Governor and it is approved by the Board, which is also headed by the Governor.

So, if there is a mistake that is made by management and carried to the Board, which is, again, headed by the same person, we cannot rectify such a problem. All these are problems we have heard. It is because there is no second eye in the management of Bank of Uganda. 

This is why we are coming up with this Bill so that the separation of powers takes place in Bank of Uganda, where the Governor becomes the head and Chief Executive of the Central Bank and an independent person be appointed to head the Board, which can oversee the operations of the Central Bank.

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Odur, seconder?

6.49
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to second this motion that leave be granted to hon. Mawanda to bring a Private Member’s Bill.

The facts speak for themselves. First of all, Parliament pronounced itself that within 90 days, we should have a Bill brought here and Government has failed. Secondly, this very same House has been asking Government to review the Constitution. I am one person who initially thought that the Constitution is a very sacred document and that we do not need this piecemeal legislation. 

However, with a Government that is very slow, moving at a snail’s speed and actually a sleepy Government like this –(Laughter)– we need Members to wake them up so that they can deal with this issue –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I have listened to my colleague. He was proceeding well but I think when he got to a certain point, he alluded to the fact that this Government is sleeping. Is he in order to say that the Government is sleeping, when it has provoked him to actually respond to this kind of motion on the Floor of the House?

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, can you substantiate how the Government is sleeping? (Laughter)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The recommendation was clear that within 90 days, bring an amendment. If you were not sleeping and were awake, I expected, within two or three weeks, that this amendment would have come here. I can cite many, including even when we were here; I saw you sleeping as the Prime Minister. (Laughter) 

I would like to add that we need to handle the issue of Bank of Uganda very cautiously. Of course, the new trend is now that you must have separation and segregation of duties because we have all seen the problems that erupted in Bank of Uganda. 

When the Financial Intelligence Authority and another law that I have forgotten were being made, one of the issues that was cited was that the Governor of Bank of Uganda, also acting as the Board chairperson, means that certain decisions are being taken by one person and that that affects the governance structure of Bank of Uganda.

So, to save the situation, I kindly call upon the House to support this motion. Let us grant hon. Mawanda the opportunity to bring the Private Member’s Bill, so that we have the issues of Bank of Uganda sorted. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The main debate will come if we agree but let us have three comments; two minutes each.

6.52
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mawanda for bringing this motion. I had the privilege to serve on the COSASE committee when we were handling this matter. The more detailed thing was when we served in the tripartite committee that was appointed by the President to handle the issues of the Central Bank where three Members of Parliament, the IGG, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Bank of Uganda -

When we did a benchmark study, we realized that this arrangement we have here is not only limited to Uganda’s case. In the whole world, it is only Kenya and South Africa where the Governor is separated from being the chairperson of the board. In the other countries we went to like Indonesia and Malaysia, the administration of the Governor’s structure is in the way they appoint the directors or board members.

So, we found that the countries where there is separation are doing well. I need us, when we are handling this matter, to also put a lot of efforts to do the study such that we do not do haphazard work because our problem here is in the way we appoint the directors that work with the Governor.

Therefore, I support the motion. We need to do a thorough work for us to come up with a very good law. We could start by studying Kenya; the way they appointed and handling – I support hon. Mawanda’s motion because it has come at the right time.

6.54
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mawanda. At the beginning, I did not understand his motion but later on, when I read it again, I understood it 100 per cent.

First, I support the motion. Secondly, when we talk about corporate governance, whether you are interested or not, there must be separation of powers. In this case, you cannot fuse the two issues: administration and policy making together. That is why in this Parliament, it is you, Madam Speaker, heading the Commission. Assuming the Clerk was also heading the Commission, there would have been a jam. Because of that separation, work moves smoothly.

Thirdly, I would like to say – like my colleague, hon. Okupa has said – we should not only think about having somebody to manage matters from here and also the other side. It causes a problem. You know the trouble we saw in Bank of Uganda. The only medicine to that is this law, which will address all that sickness. 

I am sure there will be order in that bank tomorrow. In fact, as we talk, it starts here by amending that law for the common good of the central bank of this country. Thank you.

6.56
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Until the Committee on COSASE’s investigation was instituted, we thought Bank of Uganda was a sacred place where everything went right. However, since then and the recommendations that were given to us, we found it necessary that the principle of corporate governance should prevail over Bank of Uganda and many other institutions in this country which may be facing the same problem.

Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion and I caution that we should take the motion very seriously and move together as a House. 

I would like to just bring a word of caution to the seconder who was trying to say that Government was very slow. Government has three Arms: Parliament, Judiciary and the Executive. So, we are part of Government and it is one equation with three parts. Therefore, if you condemn Government, you are condemning us as well.

In this motion, let us not bring politics. Let us look at the development of our nation and move together and ensure that we solve the problem that is in Bank of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you and pray that we discuss this motion soberly, get enough research and ensure that what comes out can apply to all other Government institutions in future where we have problems of corporate governance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the decision which we are discussing now was taken by this House when we adopted the COSASE report. What hon. Mawanda is doing is actually taking forward our proposal. So, I would like to put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

I put the question that permission is granted to hon. Mawanda to prepare the Bill and bring it for first reading. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO SUPPORT THE OPERATIONS OF THE SPECIALISED FISTULA HOSPITAL IN SOROTI

THE SPEAKER: Who is the mover? This is a small motion. 

6.58
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging the Government to support the operations of the Specialised Fistula Hospital in Soroti:
 
“WHEREAS Uganda has registered approximately 100,000 women living with fistula and only 2,000 repairs are carried out every year leaving nearly 98,000 women who are affected not receiving the required treatment;

AND WHEREAS most fistula patients in Uganda are young and poor people with low literacy rate and limited access to emergency care;

AWARE THAT a local non-governmental organisation, the Association for the Rehabilitation and Re-orientation of Women for Development mobilised funds for the establishment of the Specialised Fistula Hospital located at Awasi Village, Arapai Sub-county, Soroti District and it is the first of its kind in East African Region;

FURTHER AWARE THAT the construction of the Shs 4.72 billion facility was financed by the International Fistula Alliance and funds generated through fundraising drives conducted across the country and in the diaspora and the services are provided free of charge;

APPRECIATING THAT the establishment of this private facility will supplement Government’s effort in the provisions of treatment and healthcare for fistula hospitals in Uganda and will elevate the sufferings of over 98,000 women who suffer from fistula in Uganda and also provide research on fistula training for medical students and health workers in the region;

NOTING THAT the objective of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined in the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda enjoins the state to ensure that all Ugandans enjoy rights and opportunities and access to health services;

CONVINCED THAT for the sustainability of this specialised hospital, there is need for Government to devise funding mechanism in terms of paying utility bills of water and power for this hospital;

AWARE THAT during the commissioning of the specialised hospital by the Speaker of Parliament, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, concerns and request were raised regarding Government’s support for sustainability of the operations of the hospital;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this august House as follows:

    1. It conveys its gratitude to the Association for the Rehabilitation and Re-orientation of Women for Development (TERREWODE) for the milestone achievement in the treatment and rehabilitation of fistula victims in Uganda.

    2. Urges Government to provide a funding mechanism for payment of utility bills; water and power, for the operations of this specialised hospital, which treat people free of charge.”

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by a number of members. Say your justification, please.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Fistula is a disease that mainly affects young women from poor communities. From just the previous motion, we heard about the teenage pregnancies; the issues and reasons of fistula came up.

Madam Speaker, I would like to personally thank you, for your personal interest and support for this motion. You and the team of Members of Parliament went in the diaspora where people misquoted you to have taken a fleet of Members of Parliament to do nothing. 

However, now when it came out that you went there to request for money from these donors and they are bringing this, it means that you are working together with the House. I would like to applaud you for this. 

In the Bill, the Minister of Water and Environment thanked you for planting trees, not only that, you are now in health, roads and sugarcane matters and so on. I thank you. (Applause)

Through the good leadership of Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and NRM –(Interjection)- yeah Government, the peace and stability has enabled partners like TERREWODE to supplement Government efforts in service delivery.

Madam Speaker, the specialised hospital treats patients purely for free. Meals and accommodation are given to the patients and the caretakers free of charge. They help to accommodate them and after treatment, they rehabilitate and give them income generating activities under schemes.

Madam Speaker, TERREWODE organisation said that they have a challenge of water and power. Government supports non-government hospitals through a partnership. However, when our people go to some of these hospitals, they are charged a fee yet they are given money on a quarterly release.

Therefore, why can’t we pay for only water and power to this hospital, which is the first of its kind in East Africa? Our people go there and get free treatment, meals and accommodation and later given income generating skills.

I would like to request Members that in the due course and for the good of this House, which went abroad to look for money to have this hospital is here, this hospital be helped because it is located in a poor place of Awasi village and it will help. I would like to request that members support this motion so that Government caters for water and power since our people are getting free services. I beg to submit.

7.06 
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Waluswaka, for having passion in issue of women - (Interjections) - yes, he is passionate because he is the one who has moved this motion.

Madam Speaker, I stand here to second the motion by hon. Waluswaka urging Government to support the operation of the specialised fistula hospital in Soroti. We all know what fistula is. If some of us, the women, can feel uncomfortable during the three to four days every month, what about these women who are victims of fistula?

Madam Speaker, many women are suffering; some have been abandoned by their spouses. Some women have lost their jobs because of this problem and some of the relatives and friends have also abandoned these women that they do not associate with them because of the situation they are in. This has caused a lot of trauma and stigma amongst these women.

Therefore, this hospital will restore hope in these women and after surgery the women will be able to live a normal life like any other woman. 

As the chairperson of Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) and woman representative of Budaka, I would like to humbly urge my honourable colleagues to support this motion so that we can help the people in Soroti and other victims across the globe to access medication. I thank you and I second the motion. 

7.08
MS VERONICA ISALA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. The message is very loud and clear. However, I would like to emphasise one or two issues.

Madam Speaker, this is the only hospital in the eastern part of Africa. Secondly, this hospital has been built with Shs 4.7 billion. Within a period of one year, if it was not built by donors, all of us in this room would know the story.

Thirdly, it is very rare that an organisation supplements Government efforts; it should be an organisation complimenting Government’s efforts. However, this is a reverse story. 

I would also like to say that I am a founder member of this TERREWODE NGO. I served on its board for eight years. It was a dream of a young girl who had to teach some of us, 19 years ago what fistula is. And three of us were the front runners - Ms Alice Emasu whom I must mention here and commend for her concern and engaging the entire country and world to bring this hospital to Soroti. 

The other lady I would like to mention is Ms Winfred Agago also from Kaberamaido.

Now, on sustainability, I need not to emphasise because people have said and talked. Government needs to supplement now and continue to make sure this hospital does not close down. We still have a big majority of the women to be repaired. Therefore, let us continue and make sure a hospital is a reality. I thank you.

7.11
MS DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Now, treating a fistula case of one individual costs $1,000 and the backlog of these cases is 200,000. This implies that we require about $200 million and the Government of Uganda will not be able to meet these costs. That is why you find that the Americans decided to come in and support.

For example, TERREWODE together with the donors have done a wonderful job to put up a very powerful and magnificent hospital. If you have never been there, you need to visit that place and appreciate what we are talking about.

Unfortunately, they have a challenge of paying for water and electricity bills. All these need a lot of money. The mover made it clear that other costs have been met but these two have remained untouched. 

That is why we are urging Government to come out and support it because these people are Ugandans. They are not Americans, Chinese or Koreans. They come from central, some from northern Uganda and others from eastern Uganda. That is why I am appealing to Government to support this hospital such that it can address some of these things.

I have only two prayers before I sit:

First, I urge Government to train fistula surgeons to deal with the backlog – (Member timed out.)

 THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR ABALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that Government must train fistula surgeons because we currently have only 23 of them in the entire country.

Secondly, Government should motivate the Ministry of Health workers such that they are always available in the hospital. Some of this is caused by delayed support for the pregnant women.  Thank you.

7.14
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this motion. Some years ago, nobody knew about fistula. I experienced a nasty incident – I may not call it a ‘nasty incident’ but it was a nasty experience.

I had a sister – it does not only affect young girls – this one had produced five children but there was a problem that she had prolonged labour; so she got affected when she got a rapture condition. 

We kept on bringing her to Mulago. I can assure you that even the doctors there did not have the experience. We brought her from Mbale to Mulago in Kampala for about a year. She was getting worse and worse. 

Like the chairperson for Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) stated, she had separated bedrooms with the husband because it was very bad. It was only the visiting doctors in Mulago in 2004 that rescued this sister of mine. Otherwise the doctors did not know.

When I heard about this fistula hospital, I was very excited and I knew that many women would be saved.  Thank you.

7.16
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise in support of this motion. I would like to start by thanking the Speaker and some Members of this House who contributed to the achievement of this vision. I heard my sister from Kaberamaido who gave a brief history of this hospital. I also know that the Speaker of this House has done quite a lot to the realisation of what was commissioned a few days ago.

Today has been a great day for, I would say, our mothers or the women. We have deliberated a lot; you have heard the statistics, which are extremely alarming. The fertility rate at 6.4 per cent is definitely alarming to the country. 

Madam Speaker, when you commissioned the hospital, I remember the Minister of Health, who is seated in front of us here, tried to caution the public. She raised an issue with the traditional leader of Teso, trying to pass a message that we should try to control the number of children our mothers deliver. That is for the mature women. We have also talked about girl-child pregnancies. All those lead to fistula.

You will be surprised that two days later, when I tried to follow up on what the minister stated, I was surprised to meet two or three families where a mother had 19 children –

THE SPEAKER: Nineteen?

MR OROT: Nineteen children. I said to myself, “This is exactly what we were talking about.”

THE SPEAKER: Were those single births or twins?

MR OROT: Nineteen children from one –

THE SPEAKER: Were they single births or twins?

MR OROT: They were 19 and in another case, I met a family with 17 and the other 11 children. The issues we have discussed this evening are extremely alarming and it complements the motion that we have just adopted. I think that as Parliament, we should put our foot down and get a solution to this problem. 

As I said earlier, I support this motion strongly but I would like to expound on it a little bit. We are talking of utility bills but I think we could urge Government to take on this hospital and allot a small budget to take care of the additional operational requirements.  Thank you.

7.19
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to support this very important motion. In the spirit of Private Public Partnership (PPP), we need to support this hospital because as Members have already intimated, this is going to bring peace, joy and happiness in the family. Very many families have broken up because of fistula.

For emphasis, fistula is where a woman leaks urine and faeces. This is terrible for the family, the community and the people around here. 

Therefore, any effort towards repairing such women – who have been looked at as outcasts in society - is a blessing to us as Ugandans. It will bring back dignity to women and their families. 

Therefore, I implore all of us to support this hospital. I wish Government could provide the utilities that have been mentioned in the motion.

I have heard Members saying that fistula is something that happened yesterday or the other year but it has been with us, except that most people thought that it was witchcraft. Women were therefore abandoned – (Member timed out.)

7.21
MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my brother, hon. Waluswaka for being passionate about women affairs.

I would like to thank Members of Parliament; I think there has been a consensus that fistula is a dangerous issue. Already, the facility is in place. What is only lacking is sustainability in two areas; that is water and electricity.

We are happy that the minister concerned with the docket is before us. It would be better that since Members of Parliament have supported the idea and we see the value of the facility, considering the challenges women are going through in Uganda, areas of fistula – fistula, as you hear about it, has diverse effects on women. It tortures them psychologically. If there is a donor or somebody that has come to our rescue, as a country, we need to come in and support their efforts.

As a country, what we have been doing is that when we get such donors, who identify the problem in an area, Government tends to abandon everything to them. Now that we have identified the problem, the two areas of water and electricity, which we are very clear to what may cause this facility not to render clear services, honourable minister, it is important that we come up and support these people and this country – (Member timed out.) 

7.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of this motion and to state that indeed, fistula has been with us. 

I do not want to blow my own trumpet but let me say it because nobody may say it well; I gave fistula the political face, when I joined the Ministry of Health. Fistula was there but nobody had moved with the technical teams that were actually talking about it. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to state that some colleagues may not still know that fistula arises when a mother has a difficult child birth; sometimes the pregnancy is obstructed and requires immediate attention. However, due to a prolonged labour lasting beyond 24 hours, then, the mother ends up with a tear that result into urine and faeces leaking.

We need to thank the US Government because they have been the ones supporting our surgeons. At the time I joined the Ministry of Health in the year 2012, we just had about five fistula surgeons. They trained these surgeons and now we have 23 fistula surgeons in the country though they are continuing to train more. 

It is not true that we do not have hospitals providing services in Eastern Uganda. We actually have Kumi Mission Hospital and Kamuli Mission Hospital; those are the private-not-for-profit. Then, we also have the regional referral hospitals; all the 14 do provide fistula surgeries free of charge to the mothers in this country. They do this in a camp-like mode. That is why it is not something that a mother simply walks into. They collect four/five mothers and the fistula surgeons, probably three or four in the region gather, and then work on them. So, these services are there. 

Unfortunately, up to now, there are mothers living with this condition in the villages and they do not know that this service is available. 

I would really like to appeal to members of Parliament to continue sensitising the women. If you have a person with such a condition, please let them visit any of our regional referral hospitals. 

Madam Speaker, we had an issue of the specialised women’s hospital at Mulago, charging Shs 2.5 million. I would just like to inform this House that that matter has been rectified because we had fistula surgeons. When we were in Rubirizi, they brought it to my attention; that they actually were idle because they did not have space, where to provide the services yet the services are already paid for. It is free and they are supposed to provide it free. I actually wrote to the executive director; the service is now free. The fistula surgeons are available at the Mulago Specialised Hospital. 

The Government of Uganda does provide PHC funds to the private-not-for-profit health facilities. Since this is a hospital providing specialised service, complementing our efforts in this area – I know we have Soroti Regional Referral Hospital but this is a special hospital. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to state that we are going to take this up. We will also see how we can include TERREWODE Hospital amongst those receiving PHC funds to cater for their operations, as moved by hon. Waluswaka. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, but that will be factored in – let us see if we can handle it under a supplementary. If we cannot, then, we shall factor it in the next financial year. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.27
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Waluswaka for moving the motion. I would like to support it because I remember when I was in senior three, I lost a cousin sister called Stella to fistula, which was such a painful thing to me. We did not see her fall sick; she just decided to take her life because of the kind of stigma she was going through. She decided to hang herself and die because she thought she would not find a solution to her problem. 

I do not want this to happen to another woman in Uganda, when we have an opportunity to provide services that could help Ugandan women, who are at risk of suffering from this kind of scourge. We would rather sort the situation out.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to support this. Thank you very much. 

7.28
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion and thank my colleague, hon. Waluswaka, for moving it. 

The issue of fistula is very absurd for a woman. Among the many domestic violence cases that we register, Madam Speaker, some of them are related to fistula. Men cannot bear a woman that is leaking with either urine, faeces or both. 

We used to see them before Kitovu Hospital started giving this service. When it started giving this service, it was the only hospital in Uganda that was doing it. This liberated very many women. When you listen to them share their life before and after the repair, you cannot imagine the happiness. 

TERREWODE Women’s Community Hospital needs to be supported to scale out the services of treating fistula for almost 19,000 women, who are reported annually. You cannot imagine having 19,000 women leaking of either urine or faeces and you look at them; it is very absurd. 

Therefore, I support this motion and I think this should have been done as soon as yesterday. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.30
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues to thank hon. Waluswaka for coming up with this motion.

Fistula comes as a result of a woman bringing out life and this is a very important cause that the women of this country are doing. It is only important that we, as members of Parliament, support this motion. 

Sometime back, I was reading that this country was number three with the highest rate of fistula cases. If we are blessed with this opportunity of having yet another private facility, I think it is only prudent that we support this and welcome it. 

In this country, we have given tax holidays to very many investors. Here is a situation we are faced with where the facility is asking for power and water. I feel that to really support the women of this country and make sure that their health is something that we put as a priority, as they do a very important role of bringing life into this world; we should all stand up together and support this motion. 

Lastly, I think the issue of sensitisation is very paramount. I remember in my district, there were about two women suffering from this problem. However, the level at which they were shunned by the community and their relatives was such a big shame that they could not even come out to go and do their normal chores. I think we need to do a lot of sensitisation and the health workers too, have to talk to these women and let them know that there is still another chance and they can live life in a dignified manner.

Madam Speaker, as I support the motion, I would like to thank you and the mover of the motion.

7.32
 MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to thank you for championing the cause of women in this country. If we had leaders like you across the board, I think this country would have gone very far. However, we would like to thank you consistently standing with women of this country and world.

I would also like to thank my senior colleague, hon. Okupa. Hon. Okupa is one of the people, who spearheaded this issue of fistula and that lady who got in touch with you. We are now here celebrating and happy. 

We had issues with Uganda North American Association (UNAA) Convention when you took us there.  Like you said, this was parliamentary diplomacy. As a result of your consistency, we have a multibillion hospital in Soroti; serving East Africa and women of this country across the board. If it was Government alone to stand with this, it would have taken another 20 years. We would like to thank you for being able leader and we emulate you for this. 

I would also like to encourage fellow men. As men, we need to support our partners because these women go through these problems as a result of being with a man. When they get this problem –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude.

MR EITUNGANANE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As men, let us have a mind-set change. Let us clean our minds and support these women because we cannot do without them. I implore the House to create a special vote for this hospital so that in every financial year, we appropriate them money and they are able to support our women so that they live better and productive life. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.35
MR AGABA ABBAS (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This motion is one of the few motions where there is neither opposition nor ruling side. We are all on the same side because it is a great cause for humanity.

I would like to thank the NGO that started this hospital and it has been able to support itself to the far it has gone. I think asking for water and power bills, is an understatement. The statement by the minister that they will allocate PHC funds for this hospital is welcome and it is in line with this. With PHC funds, they will be able to pay for water and power bills.

We need to take this a step higher. The Ministry of Health has the Public Private Partnership, which I thought would encourage the Government and the NGO to get in. Under this partnership for many hospitals that have been engaged, which are purely private and this is an NGO hospital that is helping our people, they made contributions on the construction of the hospital and many times, waiving taxes on the materials for construction.

The Government does the secondment of the consultancy at the level of masters and experienced ones; paying doctors to work in the same hospital.

The Government has contributed towards the training of the specialisation of those doctors. In return, the hospital provides a ward to the public, which is for free access. The other wards may be private but there is at least, a ward, which is available to the public and for free. The Government continues to provide medicines in the hospital and people are treated for free.

My opinion is that we encourage the Government and the NGO to get into a partnership that – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Can you conclude?

MR AGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We should encourage the Government and the NGO, to get into a partnership so that the NGO and the hospital can enjoy these benefits because they are private hospitals in this country, which are enjoying this. If already, there is a community hospital that is providing free service to the people, the right way to do it would be to engage in this PPP; that have bigger benefits than what they are asking for. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.38
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We shall not get tired of thanking you and appreciating your work. Thank you very much. We would like to thank Madam Alice Emasu, the Executive Director of TERREWODE who has spearheaded this matter. I think she deserves recognition.

Madam Speaker, as you will be going to attend UNAA, you have something to report and we are proud of that. Shame upon those who were saying, “Parliament was wasting money by going to UNAA” because it was one of the avenues where we were raising money from the Ugandans in the diaspora.

This hospital is supposed to have three phases. What has been done is the first phase. We are going to move to the second phase and it involves building the dormitories for the rehabilitation of the fistula patients. We also need some apartments for the doctors because the hospital is between three and four kilometres from Soroti town.

At the moment, they rent in the main town and go to work there. There is still a challenge. Good enough, Dr Bukenya is here. We had invited him to be there but due to some engagements, he could not make it but sent his apologies. We would like to ask this Parliament that when it is looking at the budget, it should look into these areas and support it. The other area, which needs support, is the laboratory to enable them run the tests.

Currently, there are 4,000 registered fistula cases from Busoga, Bukedi, Karamoja, Teso, Lira and Acholi. They have also formed a SACCO and this is one way where Government should come in to support them. After the rehabilitation and counselling, they train them in craft to enable them earn a living. This SACCO, which has over 4,000 women when they get rehabilitated, they need support. We urge Government to provide resources to enable them recover.

This hospital does not only handle Ugandans. We have patients from Rwanda. We have always kept praising Rwanda that it is doing well but they do not have this facility. They come to Soroti to get treatment. It is a plus to the Government of Uganda and to the people of Uganda. We must support it. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I think that we need to bring this to a close. I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question first, on the tribute in gratitude to TERREWODE.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, please extract the tribute and send it to Alice Emasu. They should hang it in the hospital so that they know that Parliament appreciated their work. I put the question to the second part of the motion, urging Government to provide a funding mechanism for the payment of utility bills for the operation of the hospital.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, you will extract that and send it to the Office of the Prime Minister. Honourable members, after I had returned from Soroti, I discussed this matter with the President. 

First, He owes a visit to the people of Teso. He said that he did not complete his visit and he is going back. We agreed that when he comes back for that visit, he should also go to TERREWODE. 

Please, make sure that they are ready to inform him about it. He agreed to the funding but I think we need to formalise it. I am also going to write and this resolution is very helpful and I will add it to my letter. 

The minister will also work through her channels so that the necessary can be done and the Ugandans have a better life. Thank you very much. 

Honourable members, we finished all the items on the Order Paper. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00pm. Thank you very much, for your staying power. 

(House rose at 7.42 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 August 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

