

Tuesday, 1 August 2017

Parliament met at 2.07 P.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Just to give you a head start that there is very high possibility that on Thursday this House will rise to give Members an opportunity to go and do their work in their respective constituencies. There is a high possibility that that might happen. If it happens, then on Thursday you will be off to go on recess but I will communicate that properly on the day. (Applause) So, with that energy, let us try to finish what is before us because if by that day we still have business that we should have done and we have not done, I could easily say we go on till next week. (Laughter) Therefore, that means that we have to use the time very well so that we can be able to do that on Thursday.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils from Kyesowa Daystar and Nyalit Parents primary schools, represented by hon. Chemtai Everlyn, hon Chelimo Reuben, Bukwo District. They are here to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome. Can we proceed?

2.10
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, regarding a fight that turned bloody among the boda-boda groups in Kampala. Two weeks back, Natete-Wakaliga Road in Kampala was engulfed in blood shedding battles by a number of boda-boda groups, resulting into serious injuries and near-to-death conditions. As we speak, two of the victims are still nursing some injuries in various medical facilities. Others are now threatening revenge against to what happened to their colleagues.

Mr Speaker, this is not a simple matter. As leaders in Kampala we are getting information that this fighting is being fuelled by high-ranking Government figures. 

(Expunged.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you stating that for a fact? Honourable member, when you state names of people and associate them with the gang leaders, it is not right. They will have no right to defend themselves here. Please state the issue you want to raise. Leave people out of this, please.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. Our suspicion is that there are some figures, high-ranking in Government who could be fuelling this kind of fighting among boda-boda groups. What I would like Government to do is to explain the following: one, how the management of boda-boda in Kampala is being addressed? Two, if it is true that some high-ranking Government officials are involved in this, Government should explain the interests of, for example, soldiers and political figure in the boda-boda industry in Kampala. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Please expunge from the record, the names of individuals who are mentioned in this particular statement.

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we will request the Minister of Kampala Affairs to come and make a statement, but it is important to note that indeed Government is not involved in fuelling fights amongst citizens. We do not have that record at all. Nevertheless, we will look into the matter and the honourable minister for Kampala will be able to come and make a statement.

2.13
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda South County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance, regarding the security of Members of Parliament attending national functions generally but specifically the security of Members of Parliament who have expressed their opinion on the on-going debate, regarding the lifting of the age-limit for presidential candidates –(Interruption)

MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a point of procedure –(Interjections)– yes, that is why I am on microphone speaking.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, point of procedure.

MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA: Mr Speaker, I rise on the point of procedure. Last week, the Speaker warned all Members of Parliament not to go public about the same matter raised by the hon. Semeo Nsubuga. It is now very clear that he is raising the same matter on the Floor of Parliament, well knowing that after you ordering us not to talk about it because it is not yet raised on the Floor of Parliament, no Member of Parliament should be speaking about that issue in that regard.
 
In the circumstances, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for hon. Simeo Nsubuga to rise on the same point well knowing that you already ruled on the same matter? I ask for that guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are rising on another matter. Please stick to the issue you want to raise.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that wise guidance. Specifically, I was talking about on the security of Members of Parliament. Honourable members, you are all aware of what happened yesterday to me while I was in Mubende, attending the 24th Coronation Anniversary of His Majesty, the Kabaka of Buganda. 

As a practice, honourable members from the Buganda Kingdom were invited to attend this function – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not making a statement; you are raising a matter of urgent public importance. Please raise it that way.

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, the matter I am raising is that yesterday I was attacked, manhandled and assaulted by a well-known journalist in Kampala called Ntege William Kyuma Kya Yesu –(Interjection)– I need you protection, Mr Speaker.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we listen to this urgent matter being raised?

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, when we were called to go and pay our respect before the Kabaka, from nowhere, this journalist came and confronted me. He said, “Please stop. You are the one supporting age-limit debate; you are supporting Museveni. You will also go like Kaweesi.” Those were his words that he said while pushing me behind and insulting me. I was only rescued by hon. Kato Lubwama and hon. Wakayima Musoke.

Mr Speaker, we should not take this matter lightly. Yesterday, it was Simeo Nsubuga tomorrow it might be somebody else. We are all potential victims of this.

From my observations, Mr Speaker, the suspect who is now in police detention, was originally a journalist in Kampala working with WBS and NTV but he was sacked and has been unemployed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that still an urgent matter?

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the Minister of Internal Affairs should come up with a statement before this House, specifically to state the status of security for Members of Parliament. This is so because this has not only happened to me; it has happened to other Members. The other time, hon. James Kakooza was almost assaulted by a fellow Member while in a radio station studio. So – (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Member rose on a matter of national importance but what we are getting at the latest is him telling this House what happens in a radio station studios, and how a voter went to ask him about his age-limit campaign. That cannot be a matter of national importance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you ruled on the matter now?

MR KASIBANTE: It cannot be a matter of urgency - when our voters want us to sensitize them on what happens in Parliament, they always confront us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you ruling now?

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, is he in order to mislead you and the whole House that what he is submitting is a matter of national importance when he is talking about himself and his voters?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes what affects an individual can affect anybody else. The Member is simply stating that he was attacked and that another Member was also attacked; that is the urgent matter he is raising. Please let us not lose sight of what he has stated because it is true, at least from the press, the Member was under some kind of situation yesterday. Can we hear from the minister on this?

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Parliament needs to come our strongly to condemn these acts of hooliganism, which are coming up. Parliament needs to issue a strong statement. There is a deliberate and calculated move by our members of Opposition to attack us. This can be witnessed –(Interjection)– Mr Speaker, there was a rally on Friday in Makindye where Members –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have some order? Please resume your seats.

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, last Friday, two members from the Opposition organised political rallies in Makindye and Nankulabye where they deliberately issued threats against us. This is on record and I can request you to bring the video here to see –(Interruption)

MR SEWANYANA: Point of order, Mr Speaker. When you talk about Makindye, I have to put you to order. 

MR NSUBUGA: You are the one who organized the rally and please wait for the ruling of the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please sit down. Honourable members, the mere fact that a Member has violated order does not mean that another Member also starts violating order. You see, you do not even have to shout to raise a point of order. If you are raising a point of order, please do it without making so much drama. 

Honourable members, the rules of this House are clear; you must debate with courtesy to other Members of the House. (Applause) This place is set aside from other places in the country. There are places where you can do what you are doing here and you would be applauded but not here. For example, across the road there is a national theatre and such acts can be great entertainment. (Laughter) Please, let us leave things for the National Theatre to be there and things for the House, let us have them here.

As the presiding officer, I am not going to tolerate any conduct that will degenerate into chaos because we have to respect each other. The honourable member for Kassanda South, please when you are raising your issues raise them properly; do not incite other Members. (Applause) Can I hear from the Government on this issue?

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mario Kania Obiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the Ministry of Internal Affairs, we sympathize with hon. Simeo Nsubuga about the unfortunate incident that befell him. The security within that function was not provided as it has become the tradition, by the Police. 

However, the Police in its general duties provided the security in the premises of that function. I am glad that after the incident, the honourable member acted appropriately, and as he has stated, the Police took the culprit under custody. They will do the necessary investigations and come out as to what exactly happened.

Regarding the general security of Members of Parliament, we do recognize our role in providing security for Members of Parliament because they are VIPs. However, in the current circumstances, we as a ministry in charge of law and order are able to provide security generally, for Members of Parliament like all our citizens in the country. 

However, where a Member anticipates a particular element of insecurity, we will always be more than willing to discuss that particular element and see what additional security measures can be taken to protect such a Member. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we are Members of this House and we know the matters that are before this House. As far as the amendment of the Constitution is concerned, we have one Bill that relates to Article 26 of the Constitution. That is what we know is in the House. 

Anything else that is not yet before the House, please let us respect what we have because that is the only way we stand above everybody else to take decisions when time for us to take decisions comes. We cannot take decisions on anything that has not come before us. The rules are strictly prohibitive of beginning to engage in discussions in anticipation of what is likely to come. (Applause) 

So as long as a matter is not in the House, please keep it out of the House. If it is in the House, we will deal with it; we have every right to deal with any matter that is before this House. And please extend this courtesy also to the population because you represent them. Please, do not go and start spreading things that are not yet even with you. How can you consult on something that is not there? (Applause) 

Please, let us respect what we have because that is the only protection we have as Members of Parliament. If we stick to what we have, we will have protection. Let us respect this; it will help us in the way we process our business here. 

Let us have the Member for Kilak North – on this matter? No, we have concluded this matter. Yes, Member for Kilak North.

2.28
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance touching northern Uganda, especially Gulu District where the East African Secondary Schools Games are supposed to take place from the 17th - 28th  of this month. I was in Gulu last weekend and I was approached by the Chairman LC V where upon he said that since March this year, when the planning for this activity started, they worked out a budget and approached the Ministry of Education and Sports to make sure that the funding go in time. 

However, as I talk no funding has been provided by the Government and the district resorted to working with the old boys of St Joseph College, Layibi; they have done a lot of work almost 80 per cent on the swimming pool at St Joseph College, Layibi, to which you are an old boy. 
The local community in Gulu has raised money to work on Pece Stadium that is going to host these games, which will involve over 100 schools. 

As a region, people are happy because a district that was known for war could now be known somewhere else for some good things. I am raising this matter because the district is now under pressure. The games are supposed to start on the 17th but no money has been released by the Government. As we talk, the work is almost 80 per cent complete but the 20 per cent cannot be completed in this period. I, therefore, would like to find out why Government has failed to support this very important event for this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the Member for Gulu Municipality also wanted to raise this matter last week. However, I asked him to put in writing what they discussed with the Prime Minister in Gulu. He wrote to the Prime Minister and copied it to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. He wanted to get a response as to how the Government is going to deal with this situation in Gulu. Honourable minister in charge of finance, do you have any information on this?

2.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we will update the Shadow Minister of Finance – (Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The national games were organised in Lira District and I happened to host them in Dr Obote College, Boroboro. What the honourable member has just said was a challenge. There were netball, athletics and the rest of these other games. However, the swimming component of it could not be done in Northern Uganda because there was no swimming pool. This means that the talented students had to travel up to Kampala for the swimming games. 

Therefore, it is a challenge that the whole of Northern Uganda does not have a swimming pool whereas the games have to be hosted there. Whatever they are doing in Layibi is private, not even owned by the Government; Government has got to put much effort in it. 

On that day, Mr Speaker, Uganda was preparing students to represent them at the East African level but some of them were running barefooted and the funding was not enough. I call upon the Government that the next time we want our representation, please let us put enough in them for us to get better results. That is what I wanted to add. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, after here I will check whether this activity was budgeted for. If it was, we will have to release the money as fast as possible so that the activities can go on. If it was not, we will have to sit and agree on how best we can support that activity and report back tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Member for Lwemiyaga, on what matter do you rise?

MR SSEKIKUBO: It is a matter of public importance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. You know the rules. Let us go by the rules.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I would like to raise is that shortly before I came in I watched on television my colleague, the hon. Simeo Nsubuga alleging that I had a fight with hon. James Kakooza. 

Mr Speaker, I do not have the will neither do I have the capacity to fight hon. Kakooza –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, was her name mentioned here? 

MEMBERS: No.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us protect our records. The Member did not mention your name. No name was mentioned. He said he was attacked in the radio studio and some Member rose, asking why the hon. Nsubuga was bringing up things that - the name was not mentioned. Why do you bring your name on record on something that was not mentioned? In other words, were you the one?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, now that that is your ruling, at least that puts the matter to rest because it would be very bad for people to allege falsehoods here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, your name was never mentioned; I have been here. Please!

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue relating to the rule on debate. The procedural issue I am raising is: we had the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs insulted, attacked and he actually – for those of us who watched on TV – he had to be evacuated by police almost in a similar manner our colleague elaborated here earlier. The reason I am raising this is because in his statement, which remains on record, he said these kinds of attacks are being organised by the Opposition. 

The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, hon. Otafiire, was not insulted by the Opposition. No Opposition Member I know in this country poured water on his suit and no Opposition Member chased him from the function. The idea of people getting angry and chasing people from functions is not in any way limited to the Opposition like the Member is attempting to tell this Parliament.

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is, whether our record should keep it that each time we see someone either  being stopped at a function from speaking or told to go away, we do not want you, they come here and accuse the Opposition? I am speaking about Gen. (Rtd) Severino Otafire, who had to endure that humiliation yet he is a Member of this Parliament. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, ordinarily, those who support you, cannot attack you. It can only be those opposing you. Isn’t it so? (Laughter) It does not matter whether you are politically in the opposition or not. However, even when you are in the opposition, those opposed to you can attack you.  

Next item, please. Honourable minister, there is no one holding the Floor

GEN. OTAFIRE: I would like to inform hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju that those who threw water on my back were members of the Opposition and especially, the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That matter had been settled. Let us move with business. 

LYING OF PAPERS

REPORT ON PARLIAMENTARY PENSION SCHEME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Remigio Achia, are you laying the papers? 

2.38
THE DEPUTY OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Roland Mugume):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to lay on the Table, the Report on Parliamentary Pension Scheme for year ending 30 June 2017. I beg to lay

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The report will be handled appropriately. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER RULE 47 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT TO CONSTITUTE A SELECT COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE THE BANK OF UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion was moved and I proposed a question for debate but deferred that debate to today. 

You will recall in the course of presenting that motion, the Member for Bukoto South, the hon. Mbabaali Muyanja, raised an issue that the motion was sub-judice and this House could not proceed with it. My ruling on the matter was that we had not seen anything that showed that the specific issue under investigation in the press or anywhere else mentioned that Bank of Uganda was under investigation. So, based on that information, I proceeded to allow the motion to be presented to its conclusion.

On Friday, after the presentation of the motion, I received two letters - one letter from MMAKS Advocates and the other from Bank of Uganda. The letter from MMAKS Advocates was addressed to the Deputy Speaker and in its conclusion it said, “We, therefore, pray for the exercise of your powers, under Rule 64 (5) of the Rules of Parliament…to make a ruling that the matter raised by the said motion, in relation to MMAKS Advocates should be expunged on the basis of being sub-judice and as jurisdiction in relation to that complain lies elsewhere…” The letter meant the Law Council but that is their prayer.

I also received another letter from Bank of Uganda and their prayer is the same.  The lawyers of Bank of Uganda cited two paragraphs of the motion which read: “To establish the relationship with MMAKS Advocates, who are the lawyers of Crane Bank, now acting for Bank of Uganda to sue Crane Bank, their client.” And the second reads: “Alarmed however, that there is a possible conflict of interest and impropriety in handling of the suit since the law firm, MMAKS Advocates, representing Bank of Uganda has previously represented Crane Bank Limited in various suits over the years.” 

Therefore, because of this, they pray that this matter is sub-judice and that particular extended issue of who has jurisdiction to determine that matter should be the Law Council.

The letter I received from Bank of Uganda states thus: “We advise that the question of alleged mismanagement of Crane Bank Limited and the role of Bank of Uganda and/or any of its officers therein is the subject matter of High Court Civil Suit No.362 of 2017 - Derrick Nsereko v. Bank of Uganda…” They have attached the plaint.

They continued thus: “Secondly, we also wish to point out that the question as to whether Crane Bank Limited was mismanaged, the responsibility thereof, and the culpability of its principal shareholder, Sudhir Ruparelia, is also the subject of High Court Civil Suit No. 493 of 2017 - Crane Bank Limited in receivership v. Sudhir Ruparelia and Meera Investment Limited, filed in the High Court on the 30 June 2017 and pending hearing.”

Lastly, they wrote: “The question of the alleged mismanagement of Crane Bank Limited is also subject of High Court Civil Suit No. 576 of 2017 - Amos Nzeyi and another Vs Bank of Uganda, Crane Bank Limited, Sudhir Ruparelia and another, filed in the High Court on 25 July 2017 and pending hearing. In this suit, the plaintiff among other things seeks findings and orders that Bank of Uganda’s failure to detect the frauds and irregularities in Crane Bank Limited were a regulatory lapse…” They have attached all the three plaints in this matter.

I also received another letter signed by the hon. Among Annet saying that this matter is being considered by the Committee on Commissions, State Authorities & State Enterprises (COSASE). She said she wrote this in consultation with the Chairperson of that committee, hon. Abdu Katuntu. When I called hon. Katuntu, to inquire from him whether this letter was issued with his authority as chairperson, he confirmed that it was true that he knew of the letter and authorised the content thereof.

Honourable members, arising from the matter that was raised by the Member for Bukoto South and my ruling then in the absence of this information, I now wish to state as follows:

You will recall that on Thursday, 27 July 2017, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, Member of Parliament for Budadiri West, moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament to constitute a select committee to among others investigate –

    a) the role of Bank of Uganda in the mismanagement of the former Crane Bank;
    b) to inquire into and assess the performance and liquidity  of Bank of Uganda;
    c) the conduct of the officers of Bank of Uganda, who were charged with the responsibility of carrying out routine supervision  of Crane Bank; 
    d) Bank of Uganda inspection reports on Crane Bank and the action taken on the top management of Bank of Uganda; 
    e) the role played by Bank of Uganda top management in the Crane Bank saga. Those were the prayers of the petition.

During presentation of this motion, the honourable member for Bukoto South as I stated raised the issue of sub-judice under Rule 64. At the time, I guided that I had not received any detailed information on the matter as in court that are related to hon. Mafabi’s motion. 

Subsequently, however, on the 28 July 2017 as I stated, the Office of the Deputy Speaker received a letter from the Governor Bank of Uganda, Prof Emmanuel Tumusiime in which he indicated that the proposed investigation of Parliament is sub-judice in so far as it relates to matters already before court in determination of the following cases:

    (a) High Court Civil Suit No. 362 of 2017, Derek Nsereko v. Bank of Uganda filed in the High Court on the 18 July 2017 relating to the alleged mismanagement of Crane Bank Limited and the role of, if any, Bank of Uganda and/or its officers.

    (b) High Court Civil Suit No. 493 of 2017, Crane Bank Limited in receivership v. Sudhir Ruparelia and Meera Investments Limited, filed on the 30 June 2017 dealing with whether Crane Bank Limited was mismanaged, the responsibility thereof and the culpability of its principal shareholder.

    (c) High Court Civil Suit 576 of 2017, Amos Nzeyi and another v. Bank of Uganda, Crane Bank Limited, Sudhir Ruparelia and another filed in High Court on the 25 day of July 2017 dealing with the question of mismanagement of Crane Bank.

The letter indicated that a parallel investigation by Parliament in the alleged mismanagement of Crane Bank Limited and the role, if any, of Bank of Uganda and/or its officers is sub-judice and would prejudice a fair trial and determination of the pending cases.

The issue that I now need to determine is whether it would be sub-judice for Parliament to debate and investigate the affairs, circumstances and the culpability of Bank of Uganda and all individuals involved in the management and closure of Crane Bank.

Rule 64 (1) prohibits a Member from referring to any particular matter which is sub-judice. That is what is known as the sub-judice rule.

Therefore, what is sub-judice? 

The term sub-judice literally means “under judicial consideration”. The sub-judice rule is part of the law relating to contempt of court and independence of the Judiciary. The rule governs which public statement can be made about ongoing legal proceedings before, principally, the courts. The basis of the sub-judice is that, in any legal system, it is the role of the courts to deal with the legal issues that are before it. The court’s role should not be usurped by making public statements about how this issue should be dealt with. The rule applies where court proceedings are ongoing and through all stages of appeals and until the matter is completed. The rule is not limited to parties in a case or their lawyers but applies to the public, statements by public officials and statements made in the Legislature.

Although the sub-judice rule is a rule of practice generally, it has been given constitutional relevance under Article 128 of the Constitution. The subjudice rule is a facet of the independence of the Judiciary and ensures that the Judiciary is not interfered with in the exercise of its judicial functions. Specifically, Article 128 of the Constitution states as follows:
”
    (1) In the exercise of judicial powers, the courts shall be independent and shall not be subject to the control or direction of any person or authority.
    (2) No person or authority shall interfere with the courts or judicial officers in the exercise of their judicial functions.
    (3) All organs and agencies of the state shall accord the courts such assistance as may be required to ensure the effectiveness of the courts.
    (4) A person exercising judicial power shall not be liable to any action or suit for any act or omission by that person in the exercise of judicial power.”

Sub-judice rule under our Rules of Procedure

Under Article 77(1) of the Constitution, Parliament is vested with the powers to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance. 

In the conduct of its business as provided for in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, Parliament must be mindful of the provision of Rule 64 (2) which defines a sub-judice matter to be one which refers to active criminal or civil proceedings which in the opinion of the Speaker, its discussion is likely to prejudice its fair determination.

Specifically, on the subject of this ruling, Rule 64 (3) (c) is relevant and provides that, “Civil proceedings are deemed to be active when arrangements for hearing, such as setting down matters for hearing have been made, until the proceedings are ended by judgement or settlement or withdrawal. It should be noted that Rule 64 (4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament requires that, “A Member alleging that a matter is sub-judice shall provide justification to show that sub-rules (2) and (3) are applicable.” 

Therefore, in determining whether the matter is sub-judice or not, one should be alive to the requirements of Rule 64 (2) and (5) of our Rules of Procedure, specifically, Rule 64(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament envisages that: 

(a)	the matter is active;
(b)	the matter was instituted before a parliamentary committee or the House began investigation into it or opened debate on it respectively;
(c)	the proceedings of the House or the committee will affect or have a bearing on the decisions of the presiding officer in the matter during trial;
(d)	the Speaker exercises the discretion granted under rule 64(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament judiciously.

Rule 64 which captures the sub-judice rule is a constraint imposed by Parliament upon itself to ensure reasonable balance between free speech for the parliamentarians and fair trial of a matter before court. The limitation must be carefully balanced with the need for free speech and more importantly, the mandate or command given to Parliament to make laws under Article 79 of the Constitution.

It should be noted that the question as to whether a matter is sub-judice is determined by the Speaker under Rule 64(5) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. That being so, the Speaker’s exercise of his or her discretion granted under Rule 64(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament is to be exercised judiciously. In the circumstance of the case before us, I need to examine the following:

    (a) Whether the investigation by Parliament will deal with the matters that are before court for determination in the High Court Civil Suit No.362 of 2017, Derek Nsereko v. Bank of Uganda; High Court Civil Suit No.493 of 2017, Crane Bank Limited in Receivership v. Sudhir Ruparelia and Meera Investments Limited; and in High Court Civil Suit No. 576 of 2017, Amos Nzeyi and Others v. Bank of Uganda, Crane Bank Limited, Sudhir Ruparelia and Others, being:

    1. whether the alleged mismanagement of Crane Bank Limited and the role, if any, of Bank of Uganda or its officers will be affected by this investigation;

    2. whether Crane Bank Limited was mismanaged, the responsibility thereof and the culpability of its principal shareholder;

    3. whether investigation of this matter by Parliament would affect the determination by the court of this particular issue;

    4. whether Crane Bank was mismanaged and whether our investigation as Parliament would affect court determination of this matter; 

    5. whether parliamentary investigation of the matter is likely to prejudice the fair determination of those matters before Court. 

In reaching this decision, I am fortified by the decision of:

1. 	The Supreme Court of Appeal of South Africa in the case of Midi Television Limited v. Director of Public Prosecution;

2. 	All South African Reports page 380, wherein; the five judges stated that “The rule applies only if the prejudice it might cause to the administration of justice is demonstrable and substantial and there is a risk that the prejudice will occur.” That is what we used to determine this.

Therefore, in my opinion, considering all these issues, the matters remain within the determination of the court and if Parliament is to determine the same matters, they will be doing the same thing which is prohibited by our rules.

Way forward: from the foregoing, and being mindful of the import of this sub-judice rule, the raising of an objection based on the sub-judice rule should not of itself tantamount to an automatic moratorium on the Business of Parliament. Where such an objection is raised, the Speaker of Parliament is vested under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament with powers to make a determination on the same.

The evocation of the sub-judice rule calls for a careful balancing of the roles played by the various organs of Government so that no organ is seen to be interfering with the other, but all organs should work harmoniously to ensure that the country functions on the basis of the Constitution. 

The sub-judice rule is one imposed voluntarily by Parliament on itself and its exercise subject to discretions of the Speaker with the object of forestalled prejudice of proceedings in courts of law. Allegations that a given debate or proceeding of the committee will be prejudicial to the final determination of the matter must be scrutinized carefully. 

Having regard to the above, I find merit in the concern of sub-judice raised and rule that the proposed parliamentary investigation in the affairs, circumstances and accountability of Bank of Uganda and all individuals involved in the management and closure of Crane Bank would be sub-judice. However, let us keep monitoring the progress of those matters before court and where necessary, we can review the matter.

Therefore, this motion will remain on the order of Business of the House. As soon as we see that there are still gaps to be investigated by this Parliament, when court has determined it functions, we will then proceed. That is my ruling on this matter. It is so determined. 

That affects even COSASE; COSASE should not proceed with this particular matter and also the motion is stayed. Therefore, the committee on COSASE can deal with all the other issues related to Bank of Uganda except all issues related to matters that are in these three cases in the High Court of Uganda. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I raise on a point of procedure particularly rule 25 that regards the procedure of business of this House. Before we came to this House this morning, there were screaming headlines about 18 of our gallant soldiers that were killed in Somalia. For that matter, when I saw the defence minister in the House, I was anxious to hear a statement from Government with regard to the lives of our gallant soldiers.

Secondly, under Article 210 of our Constitution, it is Parliament that mandates the deployment of our troops outside the country and therefore we ought to be informed as issues unfold and wherever our sons and daughters are being deployed. However, the death of over 18 of our gallant soldiers without a statement or even a moment of silence for those who are dying on our behalf is an understatement that needed clarification from Government, and to request Government to come up and inform the country about the current position. Have we indeed suffered such big causalities in Somalia, a foreign country and what happens to the relatives and the bereaved families of those gallant soldiers? Therefore, I beg and seek your indulgence that since we have Government fully represented in this House, it only deserves that as a country and Parliament sitting here to deliberate on behalf of our people, we should know the position through a statement as to what exactly took place and the way forward out of this tragedy.

With your permission, Mr Speaker, we observe a moment of silence in honour and memory of the deceased in service of their country.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and my colleague hon. Ssekikubo for raising this issue because as he correctly said, it is this Parliament acting within its powers under the Constitution, which authorised the Government to deploy our troops in Somalia, with a view of restoring peace in that country. I would like to inform this House that UPDF and other troop-contributing-countries have done a commendable job in restoring the relative peace that is in Somalia today.

Relating to the incidents that happened on the 30 July 2017, I would like to briefly report that a joint Somali national army and AMISOM patrol composed of UPDF under the seventh battalion of battle group 20 was ambushed by Al-Shabaab terrorists –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister is reading a very important statement to the House touching the lives of our gallant sons in Somalia and maybe the way forward after death. The very important statement is not uploaded on the iPads and we do not have any hard copies for our record and easy consumption. Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, could you show me that item on the Order Paper? Is it on the Order Paper? He is not reading a statement. That request has been moved through a procedural issue raised by hon. Ssekikubo. The minister is making an impromptu response to it. You cannot expect it to be on the iPad.

MR MWESIGE: Much obliged for your ruling, Mr Speaker. As I was saying, the Somali national army and AMISOM patrol comprised of about 84 soldiers were conducting regular patrol to secure the Mogadishu-Barawe main supply route, which still harbours pockets of Al-Shabaab insurgents. They were ambushed by Al-Shabaab terrorists and the UPDF troops fought back the ambush, they inflicted casualties on the enemy, but at the same time, we had fatalities on the side of UPDF. A total of 12 soldiers were killed in action and seven were injured.

Mr Speaker, all the dead and injured were evacuated to Mogadishu Level II hospital for management and treatment. The 12 bodies of our gallant soldiers will be flown to Uganda and received tomorrow at 1.30 p.m. The seven injured soldiers are continuing to receive treatment at Mogadishu Level II hospital.

The UPDF leadership has contacted the next of kin of the deceases and those injured to inform them about the developments, and arrangements being made to transport the remains of the soldiers from Somalia to their places of origin for decent burial with military ceremonies and honours. Mr Speaker, a board of inquiry under Brig. Jack Bakasumba, the commander of Peace, Support and Operations Training Centre has been constituted by the Chief of Defence Forces to establish the circumstances leading to this fateful incident. The African Union at the same time acting within the standard operation procedure will also set up a board of inquiry whose findings shall form the basis for compensation of the deceased and injured soldiers.

I wish to take this opportunity, Mr Speaker, to extend our condolences to the families of the 12 soldiers who died defending the integrity of Somalia and Africa and also to pray for the seven who are injured so that they can recover and resume their duties. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to report. 

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for the brief report he has made. The total of 12 soldiers who died in AMISOM is not a small number and the seven who are injured really is a concern of this House because we represent the people of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, it was yesterday that I received a call from one of the police officers whose relative died in Somalia and he is not aware of the procedures: until hon. Tonny Ayoo told him of the procedures of how the army would conduct the burials. This is very important. Would it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for the minister to give us a comprehensive report stating the names of the 12 soldiers who died and where they come from so that we know - including the injured ones, and let us know about their status? Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have this information?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, it was so perturbing when pictures of the dead were put on the website and they were being dragged along – they were already dead, but they were torturing and disturbing the peace of the dead. Therefore, when the minister said that the 12 soldiers are already flown back- - the reports talk of 18 soldiers who died; we need to verify that.

What about those bodies that were dragged along the road as they were being tortured. What message does this send? Where is our preparedness as a country? Remember that even the financiers had cut off funding, this means that Uganda is sacrificing on behalf of the entire world. Can we get clarification from the minister? How are our troops being prepared? 

Mr Speaker, a convoy of 24 vehicles was destroyed; we cannot say that it was a small matter. There is more than meets the eyes and that is why we would like to have Government really - today it is in the lower Shebelle, in 2015 we lost 19 soldiers again in Janale. Mr Speaker, every year such deaths occur to our soldiers of such magnitude. They are our sons and brothers, our relatives and we sent them out there. Can they be treated with fairness and understanding. They cannot be here to speak for themselves, but we who are seated in this House must put Government to account as to what exactly is going on there.

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, now that the minister is trying to brief the House on what pertains in Somalia, I would like the minister to give this House a detailed report –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you rose to give information.          

MR OCHEN: That is the information I am giving to the previous speaker –(Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Through you, Mr Speaker, this is to demand that this matter concerns all Ugandans because the soldiers are our daughters, sons and children out there and it is high time we got to know the way forward on this. We cannot be sacrificing in the Central African Republic, South Sudan and Congo and now the apparent uncharitable territory of Somalia. 

Therefore, we demand that Government comes up with a comprehensive statement and engage Parliament on the way forward on this. What are the options that we have as a country and to that extent, how can we ameliorate the lives of those who put their lives on the line in order to defend and protect this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, from 2004 when the initial decisions were made that Somalia needed to be supported, Uganda’s commitment to regional peace and security has never wavered and that is also the commitment of our President. Regional peace and security, a brother in pain makes you also feel pain that is the reason we approve the deployment of our troops in Somalia and that is also what has guided deployment elsewhere. 

We have lost people even if it was one person; it is still the citizen, son and daughter of this country or a father of some child somewhere. It is further our responsibility to account for and handle them in the best way possible. They have died; the issues being raised are critical, but for now, can we rise for a moment to respect them.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please prepare for us some meaningful brief on what happened and you come back to the House because this is not a prepared statement - then we can engage properly on this matter tomorrow or on Thursday.

3.16
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I would to thank hon. Ssekikubo for rising this matter, to which the minister has given a statement. Hon. Ssekikubo has also requested you to ask Government to give us a comprehensive statement not only on our soldiers who were killed during this incident, but also on our 10 year engagement with the conflict in Somalia. 

Mr Speaker, the mandate of this nation was to provide a conducive environment for provision of humanitarian services, create conditions for dialogue and reconciliation, to help the federal institutions to stabilise Somalia and finally for the long-term reconstruction and development of Somalia. 

As the minister reports about our loss, with your permission, Mr Speaker, can he prepare a comprehensive statement of how far we have reached in executing this mandate of four points arising from the 69th resolution of the UN Security Council? Can he elaborate on the agreement the AU signed with the traditional Government of Somalia in Addis Ababa in 2007? 

Mr Speaker, we are making a sacrifice but people who have made similar sacrifices have had a cut off time. The Americans were in Iraq and Afghanistan but they left those countries worse than they found them. However, the time reached for them to go and bury their dead and mourn them. 

I personally do not think we should continue subjecting the lives of our people to this conflict. Let the Somalis settle their own conflicts, like we did here. I do not think we have reached a point where-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating the statement? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I will stop here but I am just putting a request to Government that they bring a comprehensive statement on our 10 year involvement in Somalia because this Parliament mandated this deployment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, I think to request the minister to come with this comprehensive statement tomorrow or on Thursday might not be possible. Also, not to lose sight of the matter raised by Lira District, we need the names of those who have died and also the ones who are injured so that the families can be alerted. 

We probably need to get that immediately; either tomorrow or the next day. Nevertheless, the comprehensive statement can then follow up later with all the complex issues that the minister can deal with. Then we leave this there for now and wait for the details from the minister and we proceed from there. Let us have the next item. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, where were we? Before the chairperson proceeds, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers from St Peters Primary School, Nsambya represented by hon. Allan Ssewanyana and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They have come to observe the proceedings so please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils from Soroti Parents Nursery and Primary School represented by hon. Herbert Ariko and hon. Angelina Osegge. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

In the public gallery this afternoon, we also have students and teachers from St John Bosco Secondary School represented here by Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga and hon. Rehema Watongola Tiwuwe. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

3.20	
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Kenneth Ongalo-Obote): Mr Speaker, at the last sitting, the House considered and stood over Rule 138 because of inconsistencies in the budget timeline. The House ordered the committee to realign the timeline to the Public Finance Management Act –(Interruption)

MR OTIENO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek procedural guidance on the matter before us here. I am aware that when Parliament is doing its work, mostly at the committee stage, Members interface with the ministries and other stakeholders. 

Mr Speaker, the rules you are making are meant to govern the way we do our work, as Members of Parliament. The reason I am rising is that the last time we considered Rule 135, there was an amendment that brought some issues that bind this Parliament to the ministries. 

The committee was very careful when they listed issues that should be included because that particular one was related to how the ministry should prepare the policy statements and what should be there. The committee had only listed things that are listed in the Public Finance Management Act. However, we added in the loan and it was widely covered in the press, which will require the ministries to include in their policy statements. Those issues are only in our Rules of Procedure but they are not in the Act.

I am seeking this guidance because I am foreseeing a situation where we go to the committee room and ask the ministry that according to our Rules of Procedure, they are supposed to provide some kind of information and the ministry official will tell us that they are not bound by our Rules of Procedure but by the Act. According to them, in the Act, they are not supposed to grant that kind of information. We shall then say that Parliament is guided by the Rules of Procedure.

Therefore, the procedural issue I am seeking is: how are we going to navigate out of such a situation? In this situation, we shall include a requirement that is in our Rules of Procedure but is not applicable outside the ambits of the law, like the Public Finance Management Act. We included the loan issue in our Rules of Procedure but in the Act, it is not there. 

Supposing we go to the committee room and ask the ministry to provide some kind of information because it is in our Rules of Procedure, and yet it is not there in the law; how do we go about this? That is the procedural matter I am seeking, Mr Speaker. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You really took a long time to do it but Article 94 (1) of the Constitution reads, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make rules to regulate its procedure, including the procedure of its committees.” That is what we are doing. 

Therefore, if we say a minister should bring this and the minister says it is not in the Act, that minister is truly looking for trouble because we are acting under the authority of the Constitution to enact rules for our operations. These rules are handmade deserving anything you want to talk about. Whether you are talking about bills or the budget, Parliament is empowered by the Constitution to determine how it will handle the business that comes before it. Please, let us do what we must do to make sure that what we receive are the things that can enable us take proper decisions, as a Parliament. 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Consequently, the committee revised Rule 137 and came up with a revised timeline that takes into account all the concerns that were raised on the Floor. Also, as a result, led to amendments to rules that were not initially amended in our proposals: rule 140 and the creation of a new rule, which I will report on, as I propose the amendments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can we proceed with rule 137 then? Honourable members, you remember where we were on this matter? 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Rule 138 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it rule 138 now? 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Yes. Consideration of reports on budget estimates by Parliament: 

“(1) Each sectoral committee shall consider, discuss and review policy statements and the budget estimates committed to it under rule 137, including the budgets of public corporations and state enterprises that fall within their respective jurisdictions and present its report to the House not later than the 20th day of April each financial year. 
(2) 	The House shall consider the sectoral committee reports and refer the approved recommendations to the Budget Committee for reconciliation, harmonisation and consolidation, not later than the 30th day of April each financial year.
(3) 	The Budget Committee shall present its report to the House not later than the 15th day of May each financial year;
(4) 	The Committee of Supply shall consider the estimates and expenditure not later than the 20th day of May each financial year.” 

The justification is to align rules to the Public Finance Management Act, section 13.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chair, on the last one: “The Committee of Supply shall consider the estimates and expenditure not later than …” What does “consider” mean? What do we want it to do? To just consider “not later than” because consideration – 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: We had proposed that from the 20th day of May, we will then have 10 days. If the committee considered the estimates not later than the 20th day of May, we would have 10 days for the House to supply.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this process for consideration only or decision as well? Considering is not taking a decision. However, if there is another process for adoption of the recommendations then - Can I pick the brain of the Chairperson, Budget Committee on (4): “The Committee of Supply shall consider the estimates and expenditure not later than the 20th day of May each financial year”? What does consideration mean? Does it mean deciding as well?

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, I think we could add, “The Committee of Supply shall consider and approve” to capture your concern.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was just interrogating it. Is it also the date when to take the decision or are we just bringing it to the House? 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Ordinarily, that is the day when we take a decision on what we consider appropriate to be supplied for appropriation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair, would that addition be proper?

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, is there anything more?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the Chair. (Laughter)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: I thought the Chairperson of the Budget Committee was clear about what happens –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he is not the one processing the rules. (Laughter) We need you to agree to it and then we move. He is proposing that we now say: “The Committee of Supply shall consider and approve the estimates and expenditure not later than the 20th day of May each financial year.” Would that be proper, honourable members? Is that what we want to do?

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What we need to put here are the words “taking a decision”. It is the time frame given within which the Committee of Supply shall consider and approve the estimates and expenditure presented under rule 138.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I put the question? Chairperson, you are rising – 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, we re-phrase sub-rule (4) to read: “The Committee of Supply shall consider and approve the estimates and expenditure not later than the 20th day of May each financial year.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay now? 

MR ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the honourable chairperson. In the report, they had proposed, under rule 138(3) that: “The Committee on Government Assurances shall forward to each sectoral committee, pending Government assurances for consideration.” However, I do not hear it now. What happened to that because it appears it is very important that the sectoral committee is able to keep track of promises by Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Government Assurance is not part of this procedure. This is estimates and policy statements. 

MR ODUR: Mr Speaker, it is in their report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have seen what we are dealing with. It has nothing to do with Government assurances; government assurances are made elsewhere. What we are dealing with here is what is in the policy and in the proposed estimates. We cannot start handling assurances here. 

Can I put the question to this amendment? Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Rule 140, Committee of Supply. Amend rule 140 as follows: Under (1), delete the words: “… and any Vote-on- Account.” 

The justification is, Vote-on-Account is no longer envisaged under the Public Finance Management Act. 

Under (4), delete the words: “… and the resultant debate shall be limited to seven sittings, exclusive of the proposals to reply.” 

The justification is, the timings have been clearly spelt out in the revisions done to rule 137 and – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can he first finish what he is raising? We have not even got what he is saying yet. Wait, let us have order. Let him finish proposing and then you raise the procedure.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: The justification is that the timings have been clearly spelt out in the revisions done to rules 137 and 138. This brings it to alignment with the Public Finance Management Act. 

Replace (6) to read: “The House shall consider the annual estimates, either on motions moved under paragraph (b) of sub-rule (2) or in the Committee of Supply, not later than the 20th day of May each financial year.” 

MR ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising this procedural matter because the report that the committee submitted, which we have, does not actually have that provision. From rule 138, they went to rule 146. Therefore, I cannot follow and I think many Members here cannot follow as well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chairman stated that as a result of reviewing rule 138, they made changes in other rules including that they are going to propose a new rule to bring out that spirit. That is what he said as his opening statement. Therefore, there is no way it could have got itself into the report because these are things that happened after that report was already done. Are we clear on what has been proposed by the chairperson? Can I put a question to it? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Insert a new rule, immediately after rule 140, as follows: 

“Consideration of the Appropriation Bill

(1) The Budget Committee shall scrutinize the Appropriation Bill to ensure that the schedule thereto contains the allocations as appropriated by the Committee of Supply.

(2) 	The committee shall present its report not later than the 30th day of May each financial year.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it to avoid the deadline of 31st? Okay, can I put the question to this amendment? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, we have a proposal resulting from the amendment of rule 138, to delete rules 141 and 142, which deal with Vote-on-Account. These rules are no longer relevant to the budgeting process and the proposal is that they should be consequently deleted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which rules?

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Rules 141 and 142.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal is that rules 141 and 142 be deleted because we no longer have the situation of Vote-on-Account. Are we okay on that? I put the question to the deletion of rules 141 and 142.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Rule 146: Standing committees

Under subrule (1) of rule 146, replace paragraph (a) with the following: 

“ (a) The Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government).”

Replace paragraph (i) with the following: “(i)The Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises).”

Replace paragraph (j) with the following: “(j)The Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments).”

The justification is that the use of Public Accounts Committee generally refers to all accountability committees handling public accounts. This nomenclature is mandate specific and easily guides a person outside Parliament on how to communicate with any of the committees.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have another proposal on (l).

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Excuse me. Delete paragraph (l). 

The justification is that the Committee on Science and Technology has a sector ministry; that is Ministry of Science and Technology. It should therefore be a sectoral committee and not a standing committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I put the question to this? I put the question to this amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Rule 147: General functions of committees. Insert a new paragraph as follows: “(f) To carry out any other function as the House may assign from time to time.” 

The justification is to allow Parliament to assign its committees any work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Rule 148: Representation on standing committees. This rule is amended by: 

    (a) By deleting sub-rule (1). 

The justification is, members of all committees are selected from among Members of Parliament, making this rule redundant.

    (b) In sub-rule (4), by substituting for “Clerk”, the “Speaker”.

The justification is, Independents should apply to the Speaker and not the Clerk.

    (c) By inserting a new sub-rule, immediately after sub-rule (7), as follows: “(8)Notwithstanding sub-rule (6), the Committee on Human Rights shall be chaired and deputised by Independent Members of Parliament designated by the Speaker.”

The justification is, human rights are inherent and due consideration should not be tagged to the politics of the day. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you rise as the Leader of the Opposition or Kira Municipality?

MR SSEMUJJU: I am rising as a Member of this House. Mr Speaker, I have a problem with changing the rules as regards Independents to begin dealing with the Speaker. 

We just designate but the final decision is taken by Parliament. How do we deal with a designation that has been made by the Speaker? We seat here and the Speaker has designated people, we debate and overturn that?

Also from my experience, and the Government Chief Whip can tell you, the work of designating colleagues to committees is a difficult one. I do not think you want to burden the Speaker that every day he has a Member writing that now, “I do not want to go to this committee.” This is more or less clerical work.

My view is that we leave it the way it is. Let Members who are Independent indicate to the Clerk to Parliament their preference. The Clerk usually works out the numbers and she writes to us the whips that on this committee, you have so many slots to fill.

However, to begin getting the Speaker to first take a decision and then we come to Parliament to overturn the decision of the Speaker - Also to turn the Office of the Speaker into some sort of a secretariat where 60 or 70 Members go and ask to be put on certain committees - Where do you appeal if that has not worked?

I think that those who had proposed the Clerk had in mind the issues I am raising. Let the Independent Members of Parliament write to the Clerk to indicate committees of their choice. The Clerk can have a discussion with them and work out the figures. Eventually what happens is, you call the whip to come and read the names. Who will call the Speaker to come and read the names?

MR OKIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek further clarification in terms of why they chose specifically the human rights committee other than other committees to allocate to the Independent Members of Parliament. What criteria did you use to select the human rights committee?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Government is charged with the responsibility of protecting and defending the rights of citizens. In the event that in this House we have the Government side and the Government in waiting, would it be fair for the Committee on Human Rights, which in our perspective we construe as an accountability committee, to be chaired by the alternative government? Look at a situation where Government is charged with the police, army and other organs that safeguard and protect human rights. It would not be fair, for example, for an Independent Member to chair and also have an Independent deputise yet most of the Independent Members are either leaning to the alternative government side or the Government side. 

Why don’t we have this committee taken to the locus of the alternative government instead of having it in the middle point where it cannot be clearly understood?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the information of the House, accountability committees refer to those committees that handle reports of the Auditor-General. That is where the term applies. Otherwise, all these other committees are accountability committees in different aspects of the Budget but not in the public policy cycle process because accountability committees strictly handle issues of accountability based on what has come from the Office of the Auditor-General.

MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, I would also like to seek clarification from the chairperson. That committee has been headed by a chairperson from the Government side. Have you seen any weaknesses in terms of performance or making the country accountable to issues of human rights that makes you think it should be given to an Independent Member of Parliament?

MR FUNGAROO: I was a member of the Committee on Human Rights and I am speaking from experience. Government has created institutions such as the Uganda Human Rights Commission. When any Government body breaks or abuses human rights, for example, when the police or army torture people, the Uganda Human Rights Commission says, pay them. 

There rises a problem because the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the police are under the supervision of the same Government. In Parliament here, we need to create a difference. We see the same conflict of interest - with due respect to my colleague who was our chairperson during the Ninth Parliament and is still the chairperson now. She would be constrained in helping the committee to pass a judgement on abuse of human rights and make a recommendation, which is punitive to the Government.

Mr Speaker, my conscience tells me that if finance is important, human life is more important than finance. If finance is not supposed to be abused and is given to the Opposition to chair the committees that take care of accountability, what about life, which cannot be recovered when it is lost? It is therefore proper for this committee to be under the purview of the alternative government. That is the only way we can guarantee proper scrutiny and monitoring of human rights. Otherwise, under the current arrangement, we see the chairperson lacking confidence and also suffering from conflict of interest. 

People will say, you are hindering your own party. You are from NRM, how can you make such recommendations? Why do you speak as if you are a Member of the Opposition? I see my colleague being constrained. It is not that she is incapable but it is the question of where she comes from. Loyalty and the question of adherence to the party is what is making it difficult. Therefore, the best thing to do is for the Opposition to be the one to chair the Committee on Human Rights.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are now two proposals. The first one is from the committee that, that committee should be chaired by the Independents. There is another proposal that the leadership should be provided by the Opposition. Those are the two positions.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I think the second proposal is that the committee’s deputy chairperson should be an Independent, not that the chairperson should be an Independent. However, we have a third proposal that we maintain the status quo because we have worked very well with the Independents and the Opposition. Our chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights has done a wonderful job in stating what is right and what is wrong. Therefore, there is no reason why we should tamper with the leadership of this committee. I would like to propose -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, clause stood over. Next -

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Rule 153: Meetings of the Committee on Appointments. Delete subrule (2). 

The justification is, for transparency it is proper to have committee meetings open to the public, like in other committees, to avoid speculation of what transpires in these meetings.

Insert a new subrule to read as follows: “(3) The names of persons nominated for appointment by the President shall be published in a newspaper having the widest coverage.” 

The justification is, since the proceedings are going to be open, this will be notice to the public.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I need to be helped, maybe by the chairperson. The practice here has been for the Appointments Committee to take decisions on behalf of Parliament. However, I have never read any report of the Appointments Committee, at least for the time I have been in Parliament. 

I would like to seek clarification as to why the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline still thinks that transparency is only in opening up proceedings and not in the committee reporting to Parliament. The committee makes decisions on our behalf and I have had a problem – at least at a personal level – of committees of Parliament making decisions on behalf of Parliament. You hear them making declarations that, “As a committee, we have ordered this and that”. 

If you have the Appointments Committee conducting proceedings the way it does, maybe even the other committees will begin making decisions on behalf of Parliament. I do not know whether it is in the rules we have passed that decisions of the Appointments Committee are taken as decisions of Parliament.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not supporting this proposal; I am for the status quo. Therefore, I need some justification from the chairperson of the committee as to why they want these changes because I have never seen any problem attributed to the status quo. Thank you.

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Appointments Committee and I would like to support the proposal by the chairperson that whatever happens in the Appointments Committee should be open. This is because we have had a challenge where people have petitions, for example, but they do not know how we handle them and we do not get back to them. That is not fair.

Secondly, the other day we visited the Appointments Committee in Kenya. That committee makes a report, brings it to Parliament and it is Parliament that approves the report. I would like to suggest that in addition to making it public, the Appointments Committee should make a report, which is tabled in Parliament and approved by Parliament.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a people’s Parliament. We are representatives of the people and we should account to the people. For the time I have been here, whenever there are nominations, nominees appear before the Appointments Committee and you find that some people are not comfortable when rumours are peddled. When a matter is closed, some people may peddle rumours and those rumours could be believed to be true, especially that, that committee is not going to be transparent and accountable to the people.

Mr Speaker, in the past there have been allegations of bribery. When we make it open, it will help to cushion this committee. Whether we are members or not, this will help the committee to function in a fair and transparent manner so that any form of allegation can be cleared by any Member of this House. However, as long as it remains closed to only the members of that committee, any rumour that is peddled will be treated as truth.

Therefore, I think that it is better for Parliament not to leave any gap where speculations can be made that can be detrimental to the image of Parliament. I support the committee’s proposal that this committee should be open and bring its reports here so that we can handle them as Parliament.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the status quo and disagree with the committee.

Mr Speaker, the Appointments Committee handles sensitive documents of Ugandans and all of us are prone, at one time, to go to the Appointments Committee. It would be very unfair for information concerning a member to be laid on the Table, in the media and done in the open. I support the status quo that the proceedings of the Appointments Committee be closed. We trust the people who sit on the Appointments Committee, which is chaired by the Speaker. I do not think that anything wrong can go on in the Appointments Committee. However, putting members information - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the approval of the Vice President and Prime Minister is done by this House. When the President dies or should anything happen to him, the Vice President takes over the office of the President. I do not know of any more sensitive appointment than the one who would take over the presidency when the President dies. 

Therefore, is the honourable member in order to suggest that the appointment and the approval process of the Vice President, which is done by this Parliament, is not sensitive or in a way impute that when this whole Parliament is seated, it cannot handle sensitive issues?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, sensitivity is very personal. There is no way you can put a general criteria that this is sensitive and this is not sensitive; it depends on the individual. To that particular Member of Bukooli Central, that matter is extremely sensitive but to the Member for Kira Municipality, it is not sensitive at all. Therefore, I cannot rule him out of order on that. Please, wind up.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I have institutional memory as to why this committee was made private. If you can borrow a leaf from Public Service, they conduct interviews in private because you are going to serve the public. Look at a situation where someone comes here, we talk about him or her and she or he gets the position. You then go to seek his or her service after you have talked ill about that person. Do you think you will get fair treatment? You will not. That is why they leave the right of privacy in Article 27 of the Constitution, which says, any person must be given a right to privacy. If you subject him or her to the public and he or she goes through for the position, what will happen?

A public office is a public good but because you talked ill about that person, when you go to his or her office – That is why public interviews are held in private.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rule 153, stood over. 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the Leader of the Opposition - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed to the next, that rule is stood over.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Rule 161; Composition and functions of the Committee on Budget. Replace subrule (3) as follows:

“(3)	The functions of the Budget Committee shall be - 
    a)  to examine and recommend to Parliament for approval of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility;
    b)  to consider and recommend on any requests by the minister for deviations from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility;
    c)  to consider the Appropriation Bill based on the decisions of the Committee of Supply;
    d)  to examine the Budget Framework Paper and report to the House;
    e)  to scrutinise the proposed annual Budget, ministerial policy statements, supplementary expenditure requests, sectoral committee reports and report to the House;
    f)  to scrutinise and advise Parliament on the certificate of  compliance of the annual Budget to the National Development Plan and the Certificate on Gender and Equity Responsiveness under section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act;
    g)  to review proposals, monitor operations and report on the Contingency Fund; 
    h)  to review and advise Parliament on the reports submitted  by the minister to Parliament on fiscal performance and the economy provided under section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act; 
(i) 	to scrutinise the annual performance of the multiyear commitments report;
(j) 	to scrutinise and advise Parliament on the budgets of the public corporations and state enterprises submitted under section 13 (11)(f) of the Public Finance Management Act;
(k) 	to ensure compliance with the budget calendar provided in appendix H;
(l) 	to consider the national budget, compile amendments and report to the House; and
(m) 	to carry out such other functions relating to the national budget as may be assigned to it by the House.

The justification is: to align the rules to sections 5, 9, 13 and 18 of the Public Finance Management Act under the sections identified.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to make just a slight correction before I open up the debate. Honourable chairperson, in (e) you mentioned proposed annual budgets, ministerial policy statements; is the Budget Committee supposed to do that? In (g), the fund is called the “Contingencies Fund” not “Contingency Fund” under Article 157 of the Constitution. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, when we were dealing with the Public Finance Management Act, we did not repeal the Budget Act. Why don’t we lift section 21 and put it under that rule as the functions of the Budget Committee and say, “The Budget Committee will – 

(a) 	provide budget-related information to all committees in relation to their jurisdiction;
(b) 	submit reports on, but not limited to, economic forecasts, budget projections and options for reducing the budget deficit; 
(c) 	identify and recommend on Bills that provide an increase or decrease in revenue and the budget;
(d) 	prepare analytic studies of specific subjects such as financial risks posed by Government sponsored enterprises and financial policy; and
(e) 	generally give advice to Parliament and its committees on the budget and national economy.”

If you look at the spirit of the Budget Act, 2001 which was passed in 2003, it was the basis on which the Budget Committee was included in the Rules of Procedure. I think it is better that we lift section 21 of the Budget Act, since it was not repealed, and we insert it here instead of going into policies and other sectors.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Budget Act never had the Budget Framework Paper, for example. By lifting this, you would be missing out on the new situation that has been elaborated by the Public Finance Management Act.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act mentions the Budget Framework Paper but rule 161 says, “Functions of the Budget Committee”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but here they are proposing that it should also scrutinise the Budget Framework Paper, which was not in the Budget Act because that term was not there. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: We can maybe add it, since the law is still in place.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have an issue with the conflicting functions of the Committee on Budget.

“(a) 	To examine and recommend to Parliament approval of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility;
(b) 	To consider and recommend on any request by the minister;
(c) 	To consider the appropriation Bill;
(d) 	To examine the Budget Framework Paper.”

However, when you come to (h), they again say the same committee will review and advise Parliament on the reports submitted by the minister to Parliament on fiscal performance and the economy provided under section 18. I feel that since they have the preserve of functions (a), (b), (c), (d) and others, it would be better for the review to be done by another committee, not necessarily the Budget Committee. It is because in principle, you cannot consider something and review it yourself. I feel it would better if this function went to the Committee on National Economy, so that the committee reviews what the Budget Committee has actually considered and presented to Parliament.

MR ILUKOR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am very uncomfortable with (b), which requests the Budget Committee to approve requests for the minister to deviate from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. 

First of all, when the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility is approved, it forms a guide for which the minister now operates. For the committee again to come and allow the minister to break the law is appalling. 

Mr Speaker, I would prefer that once the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility is approved and provides guidance to the minister, let the minister go do his thing and then he is held accountable for why he deviated from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you think there will be no necessity to deviate? 

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am of the same view that the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility is a framework that guides the budgeting. Therefore, it is not proper that the committee allows the minister to deviate from the principle he has set from the beginning, which is a guideline for the nation.

Secondly, (e) says, “To scrutinise the proposed annual budget, ministerial policy statements, supplementary expenditures requests, sectoral committee reports…” Mr Speaker, is the Budget Committee going to look at the ministerial policy statements of every sector? What about the sectoral committees? Thank you.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, it would have been good if the Members had acquainted themselves with the sections I have quoted. Section 7 of the Public Finance Management Act, for example, specifically states, “Deviations from objectives of the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility”. Therefore, these are not recommendations based on what the committee feels is proper but an alignment of our rules with what the Public Finance Management Act actually allows the minister to do. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I could not have put it better than what the chairperson has said. Section 7 of the Public Finance Management Act says, “The minister may, with the approval of Parliament, deviate from the objectives in the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility”. That power is already granted to the minister. However, we are saying if you would like to deviate, we may not constitute ourselves as the whole Parliament; the Budget Committee should take over. I see nothing wrong with that. 

That should also be read with section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act on the annual budget, budget preparation, approval and management. Subsection (6) says, “The annual budget shall be consistent with the National Development Plan, the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility and the Budget Framework Paper.” 

In a nutshell, the committee in their proposal has done due diligence by going through the Public Finance Management Act and trying to see where they can, as much as possible, expand on the duties of the Budget Committee so that we are not only looking at the former provision. The former provision was only giving about three responsibilities to the Budget Committee. However, with the change in the law, just like you rightly said, even the Budget Act that hon. James Kakooza talked about did not include the Budget Framework Paper. 

Therefore, I am very okay with all the amendments proposed. My only problem is with section 15 of the Public Finance Management Act on how to commit the budget, which I see is very difficult to bring under the rules. I would, therefore, like to propose that the Budget Committee be mandated to commit the national budget. However, I am tied because under the Public Finance Management Act, section 15, that mandate is given to the Secretary to the Treasury. 

There is a danger in leaving it to the Secretary to the Treasury, and one day I will bring a proposal to amend this in the Act. The danger is that sometimes when we pass the budget, the Secretary to the Treasury tends to take long to write a commitment or a note to commit the national budget based on the cash flow. 

The budget is purely our property and in the near future, we should propose that even our Clerk to Parliament must be the Secretary to the Treasury for the purposes of the monies meant for Parliament, and the same goes for the Judiciary, just like it is done in Kenya. This should be done so that when we commit, we do not dilly-dally and delay Parliament and the three arms of Government in their operations. That is a little bit farfetched but is to put the House on notice that one day we will have to bring that amendment. Thank you.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I support the status quo because the spirit of the Budget Committee and its functions cannot be mixed up with the Government. Your work is to check what has been brought by Government and whether it is within the law. That is why section 20 of the Budget Act is in tandem with the rules because it is supposed to verify whether the policies being brought are in tandem with the law. That is why the old Budget Act is still in tandem with the rules, which are correct.

We are supposed to check what Government brings and whether it is in tandem with the law. Therefore, you cannot say that you will play the role of the Executive. I have to do my work to check whether what they have brought is within the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility and whether they are not flouting the law, and that is the function of the Budget Committee.

In the rule you are amending, you are telling us the functions of the Budget Committee. That is why I support the status quo as it is in the rules.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to move a slight amendment under rule 161(h). The committee proposes as follows: “To review and advise Parliament on the reports submitted by the minister to Parliament on fiscal performance and the economy provided under section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act.”

Mr Speaker, we also know that under rule 166(2), the role of the Committee on National Economy is to assess the national performance of the economy. I would like to request that the import of the word “the economy” under section 161(h) be deleted so that we do not render the Committee on National Economy non-functional. Thank you.

MR LUGOOLOBI: Mr Speaker, the term “fiscal performance” is largely on matters relating to revenue and expenditure. In fact, before we come up with any recommendations, we would like to examine how the Government performed in terms of revenue and expenditure that was approved by this Parliament. It is on that basis that it is now a requirement that we have periodic reports on the performance of the budget. This is largely on the performance of the budget in the context of the overall economy. That is why you cannot dismiss the term “economy”.

When we go to rule 166, we then talk about the Committee on National Economy, which will focus on the broader economy and not necessarily the budget performance alone. It will cover the private sector, public sector and all other institutions. Therefore, there is no conflict whatsoever. 

Section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act is very clear on what is envisaged under fiscal performance –(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTESA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is something important I would like to raise. I do not know whether it is procedurally right, when discussing something, for a Member of Parliament to go out and address a press conference refuting everything being discussed here.

An honourable member from Nakaseke is just outside telling the press that the soldiers dying in Somalia are dying on behalf of Mr Museveni and that Mr Museveni is the one benefiting from the deaths. We are here discussing and at the same time he is addressing a press conference. Is there any law here - This is a man who says that even the number we are talking about is incorrect, that many people are dying and Museveni is benefitting. 

I would like to know, is it in order for this thing to be carried out like this –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I feel very uncomfortable raising a point of order against my brother. At this point, we are discussing the amendment of the Rules of Procedure of this House and that is the subject matter of debate. I do not see how a matter or a business being conducted outside this House can become relevant to the discussion on the amendment of the Rules of Procedure. 

Mr Speaker, is the honourable member, who is also my brother, in order to divert the minds of the Members of Parliament who are focusing on the amendment of the rules to make them think of things outside Parliament? They may even start thinking of things happening in their homes and streets when they should be legislating. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have rules on interruption of debate. You either interrupt debate because of a point of order, procedure or if you want to give information. However, there is also a point of privilege; if something threatens the privilege of the House, you can raise that matter as a point of privilege. 

Therefore, I do not know which one hon. Pecos Kutesa was raising –(Laughter)- but we will deal with that matter separately. The Parliamentary Commission will deal with that issue.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rose in reply to the explanation given by the chairperson of the Budget Committee. The wisdom of Parliament to provide for two committees - one responsible for national economy and another for budget - cannot in any way be set aside.

Mr Speaker, indeed as he explained, the elements of fiscal performance point to issues of the national budget. However, I would like to say that the economy is broader than the budget because the economy includes all aspects thereto. If we leave that amendment as it is, the key element of the Committee on National Economy, which is to assess the performance of the economy, will seriously be diluted. Otherwise, how would two committees, the Budget Committee and the Committee on National Economy, all assess the performance of the national economy? It will be difficult to report on the same issue to these two different committees of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, my view is that the aspect of the economy under paragraph (h) should be deleted. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleague. The word “economy” seems to be taken in isolation of other factors of the broader performance of the activities of the Government. I am a member of the finance committee and the Budget Committee and I talk about the economy. You are a member of the Committee on National Economy and you talk about the economy. 

Are you trying to say that other committees should not talk about the economy, that it is only a preserve of the Committee on National Economy? Can you clarify whether other committees which are dealing with the performance of the Government should not talk about the economy? Thank you.

MR ARIKO: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for seeking clarification. The basic tenet is for a Member to simply understand the import of the word “economy”. Economy is a broader concept that aggregates all elements of the country that are geared towards enhancing growth. However, in the rules, the use of the terminology “economy” refers to the aggregate element and not simply a subset. 

I would like to find out from my honourable colleague, if you believe that when you talk about the budget and finance you are talking about economy, why is it difficult for you to have subsection (h) amended so that we delete the word “economy”, which is provided for under another committee of this House? After all, reports of all these committees will be debated on this Floor then it will be possible for all of us to make an input to it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What does section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act say on this matter because there is a cross reference there?

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, in the view of the committee, what is really controlling in subsection (h) is not the word “economy” but “fiscal performance”, which refers to the budget. It is not that we are handing over the monitoring of the entire economy but the fiscal performance of the economy. This is the only part of –(Interruption)     

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Chairman, I think that you are mixing up things. If you are amending rule 161, you are talking of the functions of the Budget Committee. Section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act is about reporting on fiscal performance – “The minister shall…” This is different from the functions of the Budget Committee in the law because the law highlights the functions of the Budget Committee. Therefore, section 18 is different from the functions of the Budget Committee, unless you say that as the Budget Committee, you want to perform the roles of the Executive.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, that is not what is being said in subsection (h). Subsection (h) states exactly what you have read in the Act. Read what is in the proposed subsection (h) and the Act.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: In section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act, there is no subsection (h).  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am talking about the proposal in subsection (h) in relation to section 18.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Under rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure, it says the functions of the Budget Committee shall be to –(Interjections) – He is proposing new ones? Okay, the proposed ones are picked from different sections of the law, with different objectives. He picked from section 5 and section 5 of the Public Finance Management Act –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kakooza, the cross-reference in subsection (h) is section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act. You have just read it and it is in consonance with what was proposed in subsection (h).

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: It is not there; I do not know where he got it from. I have the Public Finance Management Act. Let him read subsection (h) – (Interruption)    

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act says, “(1) The minister shall, by the end of February and October of each financial year, make a report to Parliament on- 
(a) 	the current and projected state of the economy; 
(b) 	the performance of Government against the objectives of the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility; 
(c) 	the financial and nonfinancial performance of the annual budget; 
(d)	the Contingencies Fund; and 
(e)	the virements made under section 22, if any; 
(f) 	the performance of the Petroleum Fund; and 
(g) 	donations made to a vote, if any. 

(2) The report made under subsection (1) shall indicate…”

Mr Speaker, it is difficult to speak about the budget and you do not talk about the economy. However, for the sake of progress, I do not find any problem if we left out the word “economy”. However, I think that you cannot talk about the budget without talking about the entire economy; it is very difficult.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know where these issues are coming from. Subsection (h) is simply saying “to review and advise Parliament on the reports submitted by the minister to Parliament on fiscal performance and the economy”, which is in the Act. Therefore, what is the confusion, because the Act says that that report will be submitted to Parliament? 

Please, let us not import confusion where there should be none at all. The section of the Act says that the minister will submit the report on fiscal performance and the economy. That is what it says. Now, they are giving this responsibility of reviewing the report submitted by the minister to the Budget Committee. This is because the content of the report submitted by the minister under section 18 is on fiscal performance and the economy. Therefore, they are saying it should be the Budget Committee to review this. 

If you want to remove this responsibility from the Budget Committee, that is another matter. However, you cannot just say, “remove the economy”. The entire report is not just on the economy; it is on fiscal performance and the economy. 

MR ARIKO: Mr Speaker, with due respect, I cannot challenge your guidance. In the strict listenership of what the honourable minister was reading, indeed he pointed out various facets that are within the element of the economy. However, the word “the economy” was not strictly mentioned. 

Mr Speaker, I am not a lawyer myself but when it comes to matters of people that know the law, when we leave it as it is, tomorrow the Committee on National Economy, in an attempt to exercise this function, would be rendered irrelevant in as far as this particular function is concerned. The Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and the honourable minister have graciously accepted that we can drop that element and it is in good faith. We do not want to import confusion but we only want to see that we leave all the organs of the House able to perform in their full capacity. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, the proposal is that the aspect of the current and projected state of the economy should not be for the Budget Committee; is that what you are saying? 

Please, let us understand this because that is what the Act says. It reads, “The minister shall, by the end of February and October of each financial year, make a report to Parliament on – (a) the current and projected state of the economy.” That is the economy. Are you saying that this should be removed? Are you saying that the Budget Committee should not be the one to do this and it should be another committee? 

This proposal is that these reports should be scrutinised and reviewed by the Budget Committee. That is what is being proposed. The economy is right there in (a).

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, economic performance and fiscal performance are different things. You can have a good economy while the Government does not have money to spend on the programmes of the Government - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please assist the House. Which committee should review the report on the current and projected state of the economy? Which committee of Parliament should review that report? 

MR FUNGAROO: In reference to the budgeting process, it should be the Budget Committee. As you said earlier, the budget cannot be made without any reference to the economy. 

Still, the point I was bringing at the beginning was that the economy of the country could be doing very well but the Consolidated Fund may not be doing very well. This is the fiscal and financing aspect of the Government. Therefore, when the minister brings a report here and makes reference to the economy, I think it is not a crime. Even he does not deny the Committee on National Economy the right to talk about the economy. 

I think this should be where the problem is. The Committee on National Economy can comment about the economy generally but in this aspect where the issue is about the budget, let the Budget Committee also comment about the budget in relation to the economy. There is no crime there. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I think it is clearer that the Budget Committee must take charge of the reports on the performance of the economy as enshrined under section 18. Now this clears what hon. Kakooza is trying to argue. He is trying to say that it is not the mandate of Parliament to come up with a report on the performance of the economy as enshrined under section 18. 

We are saying it is the mandate of the minister. Therefore, as soon as he brings a report for us to internalise and go into the depth of the issues and facts, we must push it to the Budget Committee. The Budget Committee, therefore, will report to Parliament and I think it is right. That function does not belong to the Committee on National Economy. Thank you very much. 

MR NZOGHU: Before my senior Member takes the Floor, I just want to make this clear, Mr Speaker. We have three committees which almost have related functions - the Committee on Finance, the Committee on National Economy and the Budget Committee. This Parliament must handle the functions of each of these committees carefully or else we risk getting conflicting reports from the different committees. 

Mr Speaker, in the circumstances that the Budget Committee considers and recommends the request by the minister, it would only be fair for a different committee to review what they presented. You cannot consider and recommend a request and be the same person to review it because it may not come out clearly. 

MS OGWAL: I think we have a problem here and probably the chairperson will have to clarify this. We are confusing the mandatory aspect of the economy and the fiscal one. In my mind, these are two separate spheres of the economy. 

When you look at the functions of the Budget Committee, they are more or less supervisory - how is the budget performing; we gave you money, how have you performed? It is very important for the minister to report to Parliament and Parliament mandates the Budget Committee to scrutinise how they performed with respect to the budget. That, to me, is appropriate in as far as fiscal supervision is concerned. 

When you go back to the role of the Committee on National Economy, they are more concerned with the monetary aspect of the economy. They have to look at the inflation and the debts, and it is a big aspect. Therefore, I do not think there are contradictions here. Probably, I am the one who does not professionally understand it but I do not see contradictions. All we need to do is to analyse the role of the Committee on National Economy and the role of the Budget Committee. 

Above all, we have to understand that at the end of the day, according to the mandate that you have given the Budget Committee by the law, the Budget Committee is allowed to scrutinise all the papers of all the sectors through these various committees, including the Committee on National Economy. Therefore, whatever the Committee on National Economy is doing, it will have to be subject to scrutiny by the Budget Committee. 

When it comes to budget allocation, you have to come to the Budget Committee. That is why we had a problem with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development not coming to the Budget Committee to clarify some details that we wanted. Therefore, Mr Speaker –(Interruption) 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: The spirit behind the Budget Committee is to deal with the figures and the money allocated to the sectors. The way you supervise and appropriate money gives the basis for the next financial year and you would know who has performed well and who has not performed well. That is why the rules say that all chairpersons of committees must belong to the Budget Committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, none of you is assisting the House. The question is: section 18 - reporting on fiscal performance - which committee should handle this report? [Hon. Members: “The Budget Committee”] So, then what are we debating?  

Here in section 18, it says, “Reporting on fiscal performance
(1) 	The Minister shall, by the end of February and October of each financial year, make a report to Parliament on- 
(a) 	the current and projected the state of the economy…
(2) 	The report made under subsection (1) shall indicate- (a) the microeconomic and fiscal focus in the annual budget…” All those things are there! 

Now, the question is, which committee should handle this report, which is going to be presented by the minister to Parliament under section 18? Let us not split it; the issue is that one report. Which committee should handle it? 

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have guided very well. As I concede, I would like to request that we import the words as provided in the Act so that –(Interjection)- Honourable colleague from Padyere, it is not exactly that. I am schooled a little bit in the English language. I have also read. 

Let us take it the way the Speaker has read it to us. I request that we take the words as you have read them from the Act, not the current drafting which is in the proposal. I beg to request.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I thought that it should be on record that this Parliament has a Budget Office, which is a fully-fledged department. Apart from the report coming from the minister, Parliament has a department, which can help the Committee on National Economy and the Budget Committee to also present the state of economy without waiting for the ministerial report.

The reason I am raising this is because from the debate, it was sounding as if one committee is superior to the other, or as if there is an issue of hegemony between these committees. I think that is misleading. These committees are mutually reinforcing each other and there is no watertight rule that one ends here and the other starts there. If we agree on that, you will also appreciate that when the Budget Committee and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development are looking for deficit financing, the Committee on National Economy comes in to scrutinise the loan funding, which is also a budget function. 

We should not debate as if one committee starts here and the other ends there. I thought it is very important that we do everything possible not to cause committees to feel as if they are mutually exclusive. They are instead mutually reinforcing. We need to also be mindful of the role of the Budget Office, which helps Parliament in executing its functions. 

Mr Speaker, I thought that information was very important.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to share some information with the honourable colleagues. Section 19 (2) of the Budget Act says, “The Budget Committee shall -

(a) 	focus on the preliminary estimates and the macroeconomic plan and programmes and submit recommendations to the Speaker. 
(b) 	consider the national budget and compile amendments and refer them to the relevant committees.
(c) 	carry on such other functions relating to the budget as may be assigned to it by Parliament under this Act or any other law in force.”

Mr Speaker, when you look at (a) in particular, it speaks of reporting on the macroeconomic plan and it is specifically referring to the Budget Committee. Looking at this law and the Public Finance Management Act that you read to us, particularly section 18, I think this matter is largely already well settled in the law. Our rules can only help in the enforcement of the law. Therefore so, I think this should - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have students from Africa Secondary School, Mutundwe, represented by hon. Emmanuel Ssempala Kigozi and hon. Rosemary Seninde. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome. Can I put the question?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I propose an amendment to paragraph (e) of the amendment that we are considering: “To scrutinise the proposed annual budget and harmonise recommendations of the House on the sectoral reports or ministerial policy statements”. Because the ministerial policy statements are considered by the sectoral committees, the Budget Committee can only harmonise the recommendations of the House on those reports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How about the one on the Contingencies Fund? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, there is a concern here. You recall that when we were discussing the road map, we said that we receive the annual budget around the 1st of April and then the ministerial policy statements earlier than that. 

You cannot divorce consideration of the annual budget estimates from the various ministerial policy statements. These ministerial policy statements contain numbers of the various votes and remember we are talking about scrutinising. Therefore, we have to scrutinise the figures in the policy statements alongside the figures in the annual budget estimates to come up with a harmonious position on the numbers. 

In fact, this is when the committees come to the Budget Committee and we inform them that the figures are not in harmony, and we have done that. What we do later is to consult with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to agree on the final numbers. Therefore, we cannot run away from the issue of scrutinising these numbers because we are looking at the overall picture of all the policy statements and harmonising them with the annual estimates. 

I do not see a problem. We have already defined the role of the sectoral committees with regard to ministerial policy statements. This one is about scrutinising the figures and the issues in there to make sure that the two are compatible. That is the issue we are talking about. (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, honourable member, for yielding the Floor. Have you found any challenges with the way you have been working as a Budget Committee, to use the ministerial policy statements as working documents? What is proposed now would mean that when ministers table the ministerial policy statements, they are sent to the Budget Committee. Don’t you think that there will be a conflict between the Budget Committee and the sectoral committees, which superintend over the sectors and scrutinise the figures?

Therefore, I would suggest that we buy what hon. Bahati is suggesting, that the responsibility of looking at the policy statements remains with the sectoral committees and then, they will report to the Budget Committee and you can use the policy statements as you do your work. Otherwise, if we say the Budget Committee scrutinises, it would mean the Speaker will have to send the ministerial policy statements to the Budget Committee, which may cause some disharmony.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, my feeling is that the proposal from the minister does not dilute the scrutiny function of the Budget Committee. This is because it clearly states here that the Budget Committee scrutinises the proposed annual budget and then, the Budget Committee practically right now harmonises the reports of the various sector committees. 

We do not scrutinise the ministerial policy statements but we do look at the reports from the various sector committees and we harmonise them. Therefore, I think the proposal brought by the minister should be looked at because that is practically what happens and I do not see much contradiction there.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Speaker, I would like to support the proposal of the minister because the Budget Committee does not even have the capacity to scrutinise the ministerial policy statements. Remember that the sectoral committees are the ones that have been following up, monitoring or carrying out field visits and these are the issues that are then reported in the ministerial policy statements, with proposals on the direction they want to take.

Therefore, I just wonder how now the Budget Committee will monitor, based on the ministerial policy statements, the outputs that have been reported by the ministry. It is not going to happen. I support the proposal that the ministerial policy statements be left out and then the sectoral committees, which have membership in the Budget Committee, can provide the linkage.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to concede to the amendment proposed by the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you now state it properly for the record and we take a vote on it? Chairperson, state it since you are in charge.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We propose to rephrase paragraph (e) of subrule (3) to read as follows: “To scrutinise the proposed annual budget, recommendations of the House on sectoral reports of ministerial policy statements, supplementary expenditure requests, sectoral committee reports and report to the House.”

In (g) we propose as follows: “To review proposals, monitor operations and report on the Contingencies Fund.”

MR MUGOYA: I thought I could help my honourable chair because he is tired. (Laughter) I must appreciate that he has done a commendable job. We are suggesting that it says, “To scrutinise and harmonise the proposed annual budget, ministerial policy statements, supplementary expenditure requests, sectoral committee reports and report to the House”. Therefore, immediately after scrutinise -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the leadership of the committee is getting tired.  (Laughter)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, just for the record, the chair is not tired. The chair is human.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I had proposed that the amendment reads as follows: “To scrutinise the proposed annual budget and harmonise recommendations of the House on the reports of the sectoral committees on ministerial policy statements.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that clear now? Can I put the question to that particular one? What happens to the other issues of the supplementary and all those other things? Are they already there? I put the question to that specific amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, I will put the question to the whole rule as presented by the chair. The question is now to adopt rule 161 as amended. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 161, as amended, agreed to.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Rule 162 - composition and functions of the Public Accounts Committee. In subrule (3), replace “Clerk” with “Speaker”. The justification is that it is the Speaker and not the Clerk who determines admissibility of papers and documents in the House.

Insert a new subrule to read as follows: “(4) The Speaker shall cause the report to be laid in the House by a member of the Commission.” The justification is: to provide for the laying of the reports of the Auditor-General in the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that clear? Can I put the question to that?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, the chair just talked about sub-rule (3) but I think sub-rule (4) of that same rule 162 is redundant. After the amendment, sub-rule (4) says, “The chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee shall, upon receipt of the Auditor-General’s report under sub-rule (3), lay the report on the Table.” If we have amended sub-rule (3) then sub-rule (4) falls through; it should not be part of our Rules of Procedure because it becomes redundant.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The amendment in (3) is talking about admissibility - whether it can be brought or not. This is because there is a process, and I am actually wondering whether it is a - Anyway, let us proceed.

MS OSEGGE: Yes, it is on admissibility but if you read sub-rule (4), it is not the chairperson that lays the Auditor-General’s report on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Isn’t that what we have been doing?

MS OSEGGE: A new sub-rule has been proposed, which is making it clear. Therefore, sub-rule (4) becomes redundant, in my opinion. The content of sub-rule (4) is now what is going to be in the new sub-rule (4). According to the new sub-rule (4), laying of the report on the Table is going to be done by the Commission. Probably, we could provide for how it goes to the committee and then the committee processes it and brings the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is correct. I had not seen that in the new amendment - “shall cause to be laid by a member of the Commission.” Therefore, it can no longer be the chair of Public Accounts Committee. That is what the Member is saying. Chair, would you like to -

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: We propose to delete the current sub-rule (4) and replace it with a new sub-rule (4): “The Speaker shall cause the report to be laid in the House by a member of the Commission.” Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: I just want clarification from the chair, especially in regard to amendments where almost everywhere we are replacing the “Clerk” with the “Speaker”. I would like to know from the chairperson, as you replace the “Clerk” with the “Speaker”, do you have any other embodiment for the Clerk? Also, as we have been saying, you are putting a lot of work on the table of the Speaker; are you not overloading the Speaker?

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Thank you. What we are actually doing is stating in fact what usually happens in practice, which is that the Clerk receives these documents on behalf of the Speaker. Therefore, it really changes nothing, except to state the facts as they are supposed to be.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No but still, where is the document going to be submitted? The person who receives the document should be the Office of the Clerk.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, it would be reversing the processes by first taking the report to the Office of the Speaker and then the Speaker sends it back to the Clerk. I would think the Clerk receives it on behalf of the Speaker and the process continues.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, considering the kind of contradiction we would have with this amendment and the fact that the Clerk works under the direction of the Speaker, we are putting the Speaker in a tricky situation. If a Member submits a document to the Speaker and the Clerk is the one who actually distributes the order of business or any document, don’t you think it would be fair for us to have at least this particular aspect become a preserve of the Clerk?

Mr Speaker, in the event that I come to you and say I have this document I am going to lay on the Table but you also refer me to the Clerk, I do not know whether the Clerk will also refer me to you. It will be like ping pong. It will be triple work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is what happens: If any document is required to be submitted to Parliament, it will be submitted through the Clerk. Even all agencies know that and they submit through the Clerk. However, sometimes there is symbolic significance in physically showing that the document has been brought to Parliament. As a result, by extension, they bring a copy to the Speaker and there is normally a small ceremony with cameras and things like that. That is different from how you should submit documents to Parliament. 

The desk that seals approval of documents of this nature is the Office of the Clerk. However, usually when the Auditor-General comes to bring his report, there is the ceremonial bit of it. He comes with a document and hands copies to the Speaker in a symbolic way so that the public knows that he has now submitted, yet the document has already been transmitted through the Clerk’s Office. Let us not mix up the two situations.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance for those of us who have legal minds. I am looking at rule 162, which we are amending now, vis-à-vis Article 163 of the Constitution, under the Auditor-General’s report. Article 163 says, “(4) The Auditor-General shall submit to Parliament annually a report of the accounts audited by him or her under clause (3) of this article for the financial year immediately preceding.

(5) Parliament shall, within six months after the submission of the report referred to in clause (4) of this article, debate and consider the report and take appropriate action.”

The reason I am raising this, Mr Speaker, is that it is a constitutional provision for the Auditor-General’s report to be brought to this House and debated so that appropriate action is taken and we can stop any disaster from happening to public finance. However, the practice has been that the report of the Public Accounts Committee, as scrutinized, is brought to this House after very many years that even if we find pitfalls or discover any porous aspects in the rules, laws or practice, we cannot cure it. 

I think our practice has been breaching the spirit of Article 163(4), (5) and (6) of the Constitution. I do not know how the committee can look at that section and see whether we can do something, now that we have opened the rules. Can we do something to ensure that the report of the Public Accounts Committee is submitted within six months of the submission by the Auditor-General, and debated and appropriate action taken to cure the problem that we have encountered in the process. 

I just request that you help me to look at this provision in the Constitution vis-à-vis what we are discussing under rule 162, which is being amended. Thank you.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, I believe that with regard to specifically who receives the Auditor-General’s report, you had provided guidance to this House that I think the committee cannot add anything substantial to it. What we are referring to here is the receipt of that Auditor-General’s report - who receives it. As the Speaker has guided, that report is received by the Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the Clerk.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: By the Clerk. Therefore, if the House so decides, we can concede on this.

MS OGWAL: I thought it was a concluded matter and that is why I brought a new matter. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter being raised by the Member for Dokolo District is a constitutional matter. The only problem has been that structurally, we have not been doing it that way. The chairperson is here and she can elaborate for you the problem. 

We are trying to say, can we rank the queries? This is because the Public Accounts Committee does not consider the entire report of the Auditor-General; it is supposed to look at the queries raised by the Auditor-General. It has been proposed that in terms of executing, they should rank them. They can say category A are those big ones, category B are those middle ones, etcetera. 

The problem has been that the Public Accounts Committee wants to look at all the queries. Therefore, by the time you finish with the query of the head teacher of Lalogi Primary School in Omoro District, you have almost forgotten about the one of the permanent secretary in a ministry. If they did the ranking like this, they would be able to finish with the major ones, because the recommendations would generally be the same. After all, the Auditor-General has already raised the query. 

That is where, operationally, they might need to – I am sure the chairperson can say something on this. However, that is what they are trying to do, to rank the queries and deal with the ones they have to immediately. Otherwise, five years later, for some of the queries you are raising, the people will have since moved on. There was a time a matter was being raised here about a chief administrative officer who was now a Member of Parliament and a member of the committee. (Laughter) I think it was in the Seventh Parliament. 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the practice is that once we have agreed to open the Constitution for amendment, we normally use that opportunity to amend other issues within that mandate. I am pleading with the committee but it looks like the committee is not interested in what I am talking about and yet it is a very important matter. 

What I am saying is that we have arrived at this particular moment, which deals with the functions of the Public Accounts Committee, and we have already agreed on how the reports are delivered to the Parliament and who delivers the reports to Parliament. Now I am pleading that we use that section to bring in this aspect, which has been open ended? Nobody has looked into it and yet it is a constitutional mandate. Now that we have agreed on the method of delivery of the report, can you guide us on how we can implement this constitutional provision? That is what I am asking for.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, hon. Ogwal has introduced a new dimension into this specific issue that we were discussing. This committee will not wind up its work with the adoption of these amendments. It is an ongoing process. Therefore, this is something which I cannot just make a proposal on right here on the Floor, on the spur of the moment, considering the implications. The committee has taken what you have proposed   - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, I think we just made a mistake. Let us go back to what we have deleted in subrule (4), which is not about the report of the Auditor-General; it is about the report of the committee, which is supposed to be in line with Article 163(5)of the Constitution. This is what is being talked about in rule 162 (4) as it is in the rules now. 

The new sub-rule that they have proposed is a different matter - “The Speaker shall cause the…” The one you talking about is what is currently in sub-rule (4) in the rules. 

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, I was about to propose something to take care of the provisions of Article 163(5)of the Constitution  which says, “Parliament shall, within six months after the submission of the report referred to in clause (4) of this article, debate and consider the report and take appropriate action.” 

I thought we would needed to rephrase this because what we have deleted was just in terms of who lays the report on the Table. However, to ensure that we abide with the constitutional provision, we would need to rephrase sub-rule (4), which probably would become sub-rule (5), to read as follows: “In accordance with Article 163 (5) of the Constitution, the Public Accounts Committee will consider the report of the Auditor-General and report to the House within six months.” I know that sub-rule (2) says something like that. However, this is just to bring in the provisions of the Constitution to make the constitutional mandate clear.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you looked at the current rule 162 (3) it says, “The Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee shall, upon receipt of the Auditor-General’s report under sub-rule (2), lay the report on the Table for purposes of debate by the House under clause (5) of Article 163 of the Constitution.” This needs to be changed to, “shall lay the report of the committee” so that it is clear.

It sounds as if it is laying the reports of the Auditor-General and that is why we ended up deleting it. However, in respect of this, it is referring to the report of the Public Accounts Committee that should be laid on the Table for debate under Article 163(5) of the Constitution. Isn’t that the situation?  Let us say “…lay the report of the Committee on Public Accounts” not “Auditor-General” because the Auditor-General’s report would have already been received under sub-rules (1) and (2)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, in light of this discussion, sub-rule (3) also needs to be amended because it says that the Clerk, upon receipt of the Auditor-General’s report, shall deliver the same to the Public Accounts Committee. When the Clerk receives it, a Parliamentary Commissioner lays it on the Table here and that is when it goes to the committee. So, we need to amend it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have adopted that procedure, so that there is a record of when actually, the report was sent to the committee. That is why even the ministerial policy statements are first laid on the Table. Previously, they used to put them in the pigeonholes and yet there are timeframes.

MR OCHEN: I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. 

There have been situations where the Public Accounts or Committee or the Local Government Accounts Committee were supposed to deliberate on these reports as required by law and execute their mandate within six months. However, this year, for example, we were not able to execute our mandate within six months because we were told resources are not available for that matter. This contradicts the constitutional mandate, which says this must be done within six months. How do we address that? How can our Rules of Procedure address that part, in a situation where it is not Parliament that has failed but the Executive for that matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It can never be the other side. That is an administrative thing within Parliament. Let us not go into too many details about – 

MS OSEGGE: I still insist on the six months because when the budget processes begin, the Speaker usually tells us to go into abeyance and yet they are counting these six months and we take like two months on the budget. Mr Speaker, we would like to request that accountability committees be allowed to sit all through to take care of this rule of six months.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: True, because even accountability is part of the budget. They have actually changed their names. There is public accounts I, which is central; public accounts II, which is local government; and then public accounts III, which used to be the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE). They have now changed the names and we have adopted that. 

It is now basically the Public Accounts Committee except that there are three different committees handling it. The point here is that when we suspend the work of standing committees, accountability committees must continue because they are part of the process.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think so far, we are moving very well. You raised a point and I do not want it to get out of our minds. If we are going to scrutinise every detail of the report and bring it here, then we will not succeed. We will not meet the mandate of the six months to deal with the key issues which will help us manage public accounts. 

Therefore, we need to come up with a method of work, which I hope can be incorporated in these rules, were the public accounts committees I, II and III would lift out the key issues of importance in the management of public accounts. That could be done within six months but if we refer to the report per se, it is going to be practically difficult. 

Maybe the chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee can help us frame it in a manner that will make it possible for us to lift out the key issues that can be dealt with. The implementation of those issues would help us in public finance management. Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, the constitutional period of six months and so on has been carefully taken care of under sub-rule (4). That is why they did not mention the six months. They only said, “The Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee shall, upon receipt of the Auditor-General’s report under sub-rule (3), lay the report on the Table for purposes of -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay the report of the committee -

MR ANYWARACH: That is what I was going to say. By adding “of the committee”, it becomes very clear that it is the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the document which was laid by the Auditor-General. 

What I was moving onto, Mr Speaker, is that under sub-rule (3), it should read, “The Clerk shall receive the Auditor-General’s report”. We can then go to the new sub-rule (4) which says that the Speaker shall cause a Commissioner to lay the report on the Table. Now, sub-rule (4) will then become sub-rule (5) and will have the words, “report of the committee”. 

I think that way, it will be settled. Let us not go into mentioning the six months under this rule. It should remain the way it is under sub-rule (4) but of course with that amendment of the report of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What has now happened is that after ventilating the existing sub-rule (4), the proposed new sub-rule (4) cannot hold because it is still about the report of the Auditor-General. However, the sub-rule (4) which you have amended is now talking about the report of committee after the committee has already considered it in sub-rule (4); it is now coming to be debated. Now, the new one, which is being proposed, is still talking about the report of the Auditor-General. Therefore, it cannot stand. 

If it is to stand, it should be at the beginning. It cannot come after you have begun debating and then you are saying - Sequencing is crucial. There are things that come first and there are those which come after, even in eating food.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with you because my understanding of the proposal by the chairperson of the committee has been that this is on the methodology of receiving the report by the Clerk and the report being laid on the Table. 

My understanding is that it should not be the same Public Accounts Committee that is going to scrutinise the report to lay it here. This amendment therefore caters for it very well, that a Commissioner lays the report of the Auditor-General here and later it is sent to the Public Accounts Committee and then their report comes back here. 

Therefore, their report should be No.5 and then No. 4 is the proposal of the Speaker causing a Commissioner to lay the report here. Lastly, No.3 will not be as it is in the rules here but it should be, “The Clerk shall receive…” -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is the sequencing: the report will be received by the Clerk and upon receipt by the Clerk, the Speaker will cause it to be laid on the Table by a Commissioner. Once it is laid on the Table, it goes to the Public Accounts Committee and then the committee will now come under the new subrule (4) and bring the report back and debate begins according to Article 163(5) of the Constitution and then we are done. It is simply receive, handle, present and debate and we are finished.

MS OGWAL: Has he followed?

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, can you protect me from the honourable member from Dokolo?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are always protected. 

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Thank you very much. The committee will now propose a new sub rule (4) of rule 162, which will read as follows: “The Speaker shall cause the report of the Auditor-General to be laid in the House by a member of the Commission.” 

Subrule (5) will then say, and this is subject to redrafting by our technical staff, “The Speaker shall forward the report to the Public Accounts Committee which shall lay a report…” - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The timeframe is 45 days and it is for all committees.

MS OSEGGE: I am proposing that probably the committee needs a little time to phrase this proposal because the chairperson is trying to phrase it by himself. I know we are both paralegals and we need to -

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: The chairperson is ably advised by members of the committee. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I think we did very well when it came to matters relating to the budget, when you referred the team back to do the redrafting and we came back with an agreed position. In the same spirit, we should retreat on this one and come back with a better position. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The sequencing which we are going articulate, if we adopt the issue of adjourning, is that a report will be presented by the Auditor-General through the Clerk’s office. Upon receipt of that report by the Clerk, the Speaker will cause it to be laid on the Floor of Parliament and transmitted to the Public Accounts Committee. After the Public Accounts Committee has handled it within the framework of the rules, it will come back and facilitate a debate but under the provisions of Article 163 (5) of the Constitution. 

After all that, there will be no more business. It will be done because we will take a decision and make recommendations. If you are going to discuss along those lines, it is okay because you can come back and we adopt the text.

MS OSEGGE: As he does that, he needs take note that the same thing appears for all the other accountability committees, which include COSASE and the Local Government Accounts Committee. Therefore, he needs to take note of that. 

MR ANYWARACH: I am seeking your procedural guidance on the former subrule (4), which we have allowed to stand. The wording is really very clear. It says, “The Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee shall, upon receipt…” That means it has been received after it was laid here by a member of the Commission. The words “under sub rule (3)” will now not be there because subrule (3) was that the Clerk would receive and pass it on. 

It will now be, “The Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee shall, upon receipt of the report of Auditor-General’s, lay the report of the committee on the Table for the purposes of debate by the House in accordance with clause (5) of Article 163 of the Constitution.” Mr Speaker, would it be procedurally right for us to stand it over and go to redraft and yet the wording here seems very clear?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, are we okay with the text? Can we adopt it? The actual text itself is what we are looking for; the principle is clear.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: I was of the opinion that we can get this rule done now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. Rule 162(1).

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Could the honourable member guide me again?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, it should read almost the same like in the former rule which says, “The Chairperson of the Public Accounts…”-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are starting with rule 162(1).

MR ANYWARACH: Oh, rule 162(1) is that the Public Accounts Committee shall comprise of 30 members. That is just a number. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one is okay. 

MR ANYAWARACH: Rule 162(2) is that the Public Accounts Committee shall be assigned examination audited accounts and so on. Now, his real amendment started from rule 162(3), which I would like to propose should remain as, “The Clerk shall receive the Auditor-General’s report”, and then we go to 162(4) as amended. 

Subrule (4) in the former rules will now become (5) and it will say, “The Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee shall, upon receipt of the Auditor-General’s report…” We then delete “under subrule (3)” because we are now not following subrule (3) as it was and we go on to say, “…lay the report of the committee on the Table for purposes of debate by the House in accordance with clause (5) of Article 163 of the Constitution”. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You might want to split that paragraph. 

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, if I could just give an option; it would say, “The Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee shall, upon receipt of the Auditor-General’s report under sub-rule (3), scrutinise and process the report and thereafter lay its committee report on the Table of the House for purposes of consideration and debate.” It is just the wording but what we need to capture there is that the committee will process the report of the Auditor-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I was suggesting that you could split the existing (4) into two. You will receive the report and process it within the framework of the rules, within 45 days. The next aspect of that will be the one where you will now lay it here for debate. You can split the two to be smart because (4) as it is, combines two procedures in one.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, I propose that since we have agreed on what to do and how to do it, let the committee redraft this and we can bring it to this House tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR OGUZU: I am seek some guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not do guidance; I do procedure or order.

MR OGUZU: I rise on a point of procedure. Earlier on, a decision was taken and that decision made the Committee on Science and Technology a sectoral committee. I am aware that some people have been designated to that committee because each Member is supposed to belong to a sectoral and standing committee. 

Now that a decision of this House has made that committee a sectoral committee, I would like to understand what happens to people who find themselves in two sectoral committees. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I earlier on communicated here that upon review of the rules, because there were going to be changes of the numbers and even memberships of the committees, the whips will handle the re-designations and then come back to the House. Therefore if you are in a committee that was a standing committee and is no longer one, then the party whips will handle the reallocation of Members appropriately. That is administrative now.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Rule 166 - functions of the Committee on National Economy. Under subrule (2), insert the following: 
“(d) 	To assess the national performance of the economy; 
(e) 	To assess the debt sustainability of the country;
(f) 	To analyse the annual borrowing plan of the Government.”

The justification is that these functions would provide Parliament with vital information required for Parliament to appreciate the actual state of the economy. 

Insert a new sub-rule to read as follows: “(3) The committee shall report to the House at least twice a year.” The justification is: to make it mandatory for the committee to report to the House on its functions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I put the question to that, honourable members? 

MR NAMBESHE: I would request that (d) be rephrased to read, “to assess annually the performance of loans and grants that are approved by Parliament.” The justification would be that this would enable us to provide adequate oversight on the performance of projects that are financed by external borrowing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why would you want to replace (d) with that? Would that not be additional because (d) is about performance of the economy?

MR NAMBESHE: It is about the economy but it leaves out -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then make another provision that is specific to that one.

MR NAMBESHE: That would be good. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what was it? Propose properly.

MR NAMBESHE: I am propose an additional subrule to read as follows: “To assess annually the performance of loans and grants that are approved by Parliament.” Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Is it taken care of somewhere?

MR LUGOLOOBI: How do we arrive at debt sustainability? It is by looking at that information. Therefore, it is already subsumed in (e), which we already have here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe, doesn’t debt sustainability take care of that - Is it sustainable or not?

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, it is (f) which is closer to it, not (e). 

MR OTHEINO: Mr Speaker, debt sustainability looks at the ability of the economy to borrow money which it can easily manage in terms of servicing it within its abilities. That is what we look at under sustainability. 

However, what the honourable member is saying is that once a loan has been approved, Parliament would like to know how that loan is performing and not necessarily the ability of the country to conveniently borrow money which it can conveniently pay back within the confines of the size of its economy and how much it has already borrowed. That is what we look at as sustainability.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, the proposal by hon. Nambeshe is separate, according to what the Member is saying. Therefore, can we adopt it and move? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, earlier on in one of the rules, we suggested that when ministers are submitting ministerial policy statements, they should be accompanied by the performance of loans in that sector. My understanding would be that indirectly, we are saying sectoral committees should assess this performance. 

I do not know whether the Member is now suggesting that all the performance of loans be submitted to the Committee on National Economy for assessment, or whether it would be smarter and more effective for them to be assessed at the level of the sectoral committees.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We adopted that position that if a loan is borrowed for education, in the course of submitting the ministerial policy statement, the report should contain the statement on the performance of that loan, which will be scrutinised by that sectoral committee. Therefore, would there be a need again to have that looked at by the Committee on National Economy? That is the issue.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to volunteer information as a former member and chairperson of the Committee on National Economy. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, prior to the budget, provides a report on loans, grants and guarantees. When that document is laid on the Table in Parliament, it should be scrutinised by the Committee on National Economy. Unfortunately, the experience I have now got, with the time limit we have the analysis of reports by the Budget Committee will remain on Order Paper until they fade out. I would like us to use this innovation from the rules committee to give space for us to make use of the already existing literature which comes from the finance ministry. 

Mr Speaker, when that rule was passed on the Floor of Parliament, I thought it was administrative, and that is what I wanted in the rules. If the education ministry, for example, brought a loan request, - the committee did not make demands but it was our own innovation as leaders - that committee does not pass the loan request without presenting the performance of all its loans. You do not pass a loan request for any sector - health, education, energy etcetera - without it volunteering information on performance of its loans.

Therefore, looking at that annual presentation by the minister on loans, grants and guarantees and the individual sector presentations when they have loans were not there. I was trying to see how the rules committee could take advantage of that.

In addition, there was the earlier submission by hon. Nambeshe on sustainability vis-à-vis performance. Yes, there is a debt strategy which demands that the finance ministry also makes its own assessment of both the debt stock and performance. However, as I said earlier, Parliament is privileged to do oversight and not necessarily to depend on the declaration from the finance ministry because it is a respondent. We should use our own Parliamentary Budget Office to make analysis and see if what we are presenting is acceptable and authentic. I thought we would make innovations with all the existing arrangements and get best out of the rules.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. A loan, and particularly its performance, is measured in different dimensions. There is the question of sustainability and repayment but also there is the question of utilisation. 

I am the chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances and we got into the problem of seeing loans being acquired, with terms and conditions which include counterpart funding, failing to take off. This is because the Government has failed to fulfil that element of counterpart funding.

Therefore, the question is, which committee scrutinises the loans? How do we place the element of counterpart funding failure vis-à-vis the role of the Committee on Government Assurances? How do we also look at the issue of sustainability from the angle of the Committee on National Economy?

My submission is that, looking at the rules at this moment, we should not exclusively say loans are under the purview of the Committee on National Economy because we as the Committee on Government Assurances are confronted with that element of counterpart funding. If the counterpart funding is not provided, the loan does not take off. Thank you. 

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson. If a loan request is presented on the Floor of Parliament, which committee will it go to for processing and refining for the eventual approval of Parliament? 

Secondly, we have loans which are nonperforming. How will Parliament know the nonperforming loans; is it through the Committee on National Economy or the sectoral committees? I think it is important for us as Parliament to be updated on the loans that we pass and how they perform on an annual basis.

I think it is proper and fair for us to know this. Who addresses that? Is it addressed within these proposals? How do we capture that to ensure that we are at par with the performance of the loans that we have passed as Parliament? Thank you.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the proposal made by my honourable colleague from Manjiya County. Indeed, sustainability is about assessing whether you can still continue to borrow. However, the reports on the performance will help us to see how the sector has utilised the loan and whether that sector can be allowed to borrow when subsequent requests are brought to Parliament. 

Earlier we made a provision, but the reasoning is that the Committee on National Economy will aggregate all the loans and report to us. This is because whenever the finance ministry brings a request, they will tell us the GDP to debt ratio is 35 and we are still below 50. However, Parliament should have its own mechanism of ascertaining whether we are at 36 or already at 48, without relying on information from the finance ministry.

Secondly, I find the proposal in paragraph (d) redundant because in paragraph (a) under the current rules we have, there is a provision to examine and in paragraph (d), you are just changing the word to “assess”, which is the same thing. I would like the chairperson to clarify on rule 166 (2) (a) in our current rules vis-à-vis what you are proposing in subsection (d); how different are the two provisions that you have proposed?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to propose a rephrasing of paragraph (d) to read as follows: “(d) To assess annually the performance of loans and guarantees approved by Parliament.” 

The justification is: 

i) 	To provide adequate oversight over the performance of all projects financed by external borrowing; 
ii) 	To provide adequate oversight of companies or institutions guaranteed by Government; and 
iii) 	To be consistent with parliamentary guidelines that require the assessment of all loans under a particular sector.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to propose that the committee should insert the following: “(g) To examine the annual state of indebtedness and management of Government debt including the Debt Management Performance Assessment Framework.” 

The justification is:

i) 	To provide adequate oversight over management of public debt.
ii) 	To be consistent with section 42 (2) and (3) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

Mr Speaker, I still propose that we insert the following: “(h) To examine loan guarantee requests and assess the performance of existing ones by Government.” 

The justification is: 

i) 	To be consistent with section 39 (2), (3) and (4) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.
ii) 	To provide adequate oversight over the performance of existing guarantees.

Finally, I also propose that we insert the following: “(i) To examine the report on grants received by Government.” 

The justification is: 

i) 	To provide adequate oversight on grants received by Government.
ii) 	To be consistent with section 44 (5) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015

Mr Speaker, in the same vein, the committee proposal is that rule 166 (3) reads as follows: “The Committee shall report to the House at least twice a year.” I would like us to be clearer because reporting twice a year could mean that they can report in September and October. That makes it twice a year, but this may not inform Parliament properly –(Interruption)–

MR MUKITALE: Thank you for giving way, honourable member. Mr Speaker, the committee has been reporting quarterly on the state of the economy because Government dispenses money on a quarterly basis. When you make it quarterly, I think it is more of routine reporting. 

MR NZOGHU: Therefore, Mr Speaker, I do not agree with the proposal of the committee and I would like to say that we maintain it as quarterly. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is a handful. Honourable members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 5.59 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 August 2017 at 2.00 p.m.)



