Monday, 14 December 2015

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is with grief that we convene this special sitting to pay tribute to our colleague, hon. Susan Namaganda, the District Woman Representative for Bukomansimbi.

Hon. Namaganda joined Parliament in May 2011 and diligently served on the following committees: the Committee on Science and Technology, where she advocated for the revival of Government laboratories and also the setting up of industrial parks across the country, where people could gain knowledge and apply their innovations.

She also served on the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, where her main focus was on financing of the agricultural sector. She advocated for farmer-friendly prices. She also lobbied for greater support for the Uganda Coffee Development Authority to promote coffee growing and processing.

The late also served on the Committee on East African Community Affairs. I visited Bukomansimbi at the invitation of hon. Namaganda and hon. Kiyingi sometime back and I was touched by the commitment she had for the need to revive the coffee industry in greater Masaka and to ensure that the prices are worthwhile for the farmers; she was really very passionate on agricultural prices.

We shall miss her, as Parliament and we send our condolences first, to the family, our friend, hon. Mbidde and children, the relatives and friends, the people of Bukomansimbi and the people of Uganda. May the Almighty God rest her soul in eternal peace.

We have received condolence messages from the Catholic Chaplaincy; they have made a contribution of Shs 300,000 towards the funeral expenses. We also received a message of condolence from hon. Margret Nantongo Zziwa, former Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly and hon. Dan Kidega, the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly. 

We have also received a condolence message from the Parliamentary Pension Scheme, signed by the Clerk to Parliament and another condolence message from the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee, hon. Alice Alaso. 

Further, we received a condolence message from the Secretary General of the NRM, hon. Kasule Lumumba. The NRM has made a contribution of Shs 3,000,000 towards funeral expenses. Another condolence message is from hon. Nusura Tiperu, a Member of the East African Legislative Assembly. 

I will be informing you of the other messages as they come in. From the Prime Minister’s office, we have a message from the hon. Christine Amongin Aporu, the Minister of State for Teso Affairs. Thank you. 

(Entrance of the late hon. Susan Namaganda)

National Anthem
East African Community Anthem

Laying of wreaths 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. SUSAN NAMAGANDA, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE – BUKOMANSIMBI DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as the mover comes, we have a message of condolence from hon. Ruth Nankabirwa Sentamu, the Government Chief Whip and another from the Parliamentary SACCO, where Susan was a member, signed by hon. Mathias Kasamba. 

In the public gallery, we have hon. Mulengani; hon. Margaret Zziwa; hon. Anthony Butele; hon. Susan Nakawuki; hon. Nusura Tiperu; hon. Mike Sebalu; hon. Norbert Mao, the former Chairman LCV Gulu District; Mr Kidandala, the Deputy Lord Mayor for Kampala; and Mr Bush Ainebyona, commonly known as Vicks Kingo. You are welcome. (Applause) We also have hon. Livingstone Okello-Okello, former Member of Parliament for Chua County, and of course we welcome all the Ugandans who have come to support us in this difficult task.

3.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Susan Namaganda under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the demise of the late hon. Susan Namaganda, which occurred on Friday, 11 December 2015 at Nakasero Hospital, after a tragic road accident along Masaka Road;

RECALLING that the late hon. Susan Namaganda was born on the 10 October 1984 to the late Mzee Simon Peter Kamara and the late Elizabeth Sserunkuma of Kikaya Village, Kisojjo Parish, in present day Bukomansimbi District;

FURTHER RECALLING that the late hon. Susan Namaganda attended her primary education at St Mary’s Kisojjo Primary School in Bukomansimbi District, Mengo Senior Secondary School and Christ the King Secondary School in Kalisizo for her O’level, Kawaala Secondary School in Kampala for her A’Level and Makerere University where she graduated with a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Information and Communications Technology;

NOTING that in 2008, the late hon. Susan Namaganda started her employment career as an information technology assistant at Egypro Trading (U) Ltd where she served diligently, honestly and with dedication;

AWARE that the late hon. Susan Namaganda was the Woman Member of Parliament for Bukomansimbi from 2011 to the time of her demise;

AND FURTHER AWARE that the late hon. Susan Namaganda was passionate about agriculture, particularly championing the cause of good prices for agricultural produce;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:

1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the people of Bukomansimbi and the country upon the demise of the late hon. Susan Namaganda; 

2. 	That Parliament takes cognizance of the services rendered and the contribution made by the late hon. Susan Namaganda to Uganda.

3. 	That Government makes all highways 40 kilometres to Kampala dual carriers.”

I move this motion with deep condolences to the bereaved family. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by members from both sides of the House. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you can now justify.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a justification of the motion for Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Susan Namaganda, Woman Member of Parliament for Bukomansimbi District.

Madam Speaker and Members, on Sunday, 6th of this month, I was at Kitaasa playground in Bukomansimbi, representing His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni at the Bishop Kaggwa Youth Tournament Cup finals. At that lively occasion, hon. Susan Namaganda together with other officials received and took me around to greet the football team before introducing me to speak to hundreds of young people who were gathered there.

While making remarks to introduce me, the late hon. Susan Namaganda spoke passionately about the subject she has championed since she joined this august House, and that was the case and cause of fair prices for agricultural produce to improve the quality of the lives of famers. As we all know, that passion earned her a well-deserved nickname of “bbeyi ye ’birime” — the price of agricultural produce. This was her passion. In fact, that is how she introduced herself to the audience on that very Sunday.

She also said that young people need opportunities to make a decent living, a point which we both shared and agreed on. We laughed, joked and shook hands. So, when I received the news that hon. Susan Namaganda had died in a road accident, I was deeply saddened and shocked by her tragic demise. My memory of our meeting was and is still very fresh.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the late hon. Susan Namaganda was born on the 10 October 1984 to the late Mzee Simon Peter Kamara and the late Elizabeth Sserunkuma Bbosa of Kikaya Village, Kisojjo Parish, in present day Bukomansimbi District. She was just 31 years old but full of energy and determination. We could feel it as she cheered the crowds of young people at that tournament. We have lost a gem in this youthful member of this august House.

Madam and honourable colleagues, in 2008 immediately after graduating from Makerere University with a degree in information technology, hon. Namaganda started working with Egypro Trading (U) Ltd as an information technology assistant where she served with dedication and passion, to the extent that even after joining Parliament in 2011, the company decided to retain her services.

As mentioned earlier, the late hon. Susan Namaganda was a passionate champion of growing both food and cash crops to boost food security and improve household income, not only for her constituents but for the whole country. It is because of this passion for agriculture that she decided to join the Sectoral Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, hon. Susan Namaganda’s death is a big loss to our country. She was a good role model to young people. She will be deeply missed.

Madam Speaker, I join you, His Excellency the President, the family and the country at large in mourning our star whose life has gone too soon when we still needed her most.

Cause of Death

Madam Speaker, the cause of the death of hon. Susan Namaganda was multiple injuries and fractures sustained during the tragic accident she was involved in, which involved a commuter taxi and the saloon car she was travelling in.

The late hon. Susan Namaganda is survived by a widower, our brother and colleague, hon. Fred Mukasa Mbidde, and three children - two boys aged three and two years, and a seven-month old baby girl.

Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to convey my sincere and heartfelt condolences to the family, particularly our dear colleague, the hon. Mukasa Mbidde, to the Democratic Party fraternity, the people of Bukomansimbi and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished gallant daughter. May her soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I now invite the Leader of the Opposition to second the motion. In the meantime, I would like to announce a contribution of Shs 2 million from the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus to hon. Mbidde and his family.

3.13
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, I stand to second this motion. While in Paris attending the climate change conference, I received with profound sadness the news of the passing on of the late hon. Susan Namaganda, a Member of the Opposition in the Parliament of Uganda.

We offer our most sincere condolences to the family, to the Democratic Party, to this Parliament and to the constituents. She will be missed for her calmness, composure and dedication in service to the Parliament of Uganda and the whole nation.

Madam Speaker, a young woman who consciously chooses to confront the challenges of political leadership – a male dominated area – must be an exceptional person. John Kenneth Galbreth, a renowned US democrat in the Frank Roosevelt’s administration once remarked, “All of the great leaders have had one characteristic in common. This was the willingness to confront unequivocally the major anxiety of their people in their time. This and not much else, is the essence of leadership.”

Indeed, the late hon. Susan Namaganda, in line with the above words of wisdom, realised that the NRM Government had neglected the agricultural sector yet it employed majority of the people in her constituency. While debating the President’s State-of-the-Nation Address on 30 July 2014, the late submitted thus: “A country that injects only three per cent of its total budget in agriculture cannot boost that sector, which most of its population survives on. Ugandans would like to know – is the President only joking or is he really serious about what he is talking about. Yes, we agree that Ugandans need to boost the agricultural sector to eradicate poverty but our talk is very different from our actions. In that regard, I want to differ from the rest of the Members who are thanking the President on this matter.

Secondly, imposing taxes on agricultural inputs cannot be the right way to boost that sector. I call upon my colleagues, the honourable members, to listen to the people that voted us into this House. They wonder whom we represent when we are imposing taxes on goods upon which they survive. Ugandans would also like to know whether the President needs the citizens to get poorer so that he can rule them for longer.” Those were the late’s words. 

Today, that voice is silent but asking President Museveni why the budget on agriculture has continued to drop this year to 2.7 per cent. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the mover of this motion, the late Susan Namaganda is expecting your answer.

Over the years and now during his current campaigns, President Museveni is emphasising that the NRM Government’s priority areas include roads, electricity, railway, defence and security. However, it is imperative to note that the President’s priority areas combined do not employ and sustain majority of the Ugandan population as agriculture does. For over 20 years now, budgetary funding to the agricultural sector has been declining from 4.9 per cent in 2011 to 4.5 per cent in 2012 to 3.4 per cent in 2013, 2.9 per cent in 2014 and now for this year to 2.7 per cent.

Instead of empowering farmers and the unemployed youth with modern technology and skills, the NRM Government only pronounced targets for agriculture – to distribute 18 million hoes to farmers so as to keep them in unsustainable agriculture and to continue giving cash in sacks to the youth. Despite the fact that Government has neglected farmers and the youth, the late hon. Susan Namaganda dedicated her efforts in ensuring farmers attract a reward of best prices for their produce, as well as equipping the youth with skills as the Prime Minister has just said while speaking to this motion.

Her contribution was in line with the Scripture in Psalms 126:5-6, which says, “Those who sow in tears shall reap with shouts of joy! He who goes out weeping bearing the seeds for sowing, shall come home with shouts of joy, bringing his sheaves with him.”

Madam Speaker and honourable members, at the time of our death, what shall we be remembered for? Reflections made of the late here resonate with her contribution as an accomplished agricultural and youth activist. As a result of her accomplishment, her constituents rewarded her with an identity, bbeyi y’ebirime, loosely translated as price for agricultural produce.

I would like to add that, “My granddaughter, well done for emulating the late Owiny Manus, who led the football team to London and played barefooted – for promoting football in your area to keep the youth active while they wait for Government to bring them development.”

Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is thus no surprise that the late at her nomination committed to revive cooperatives and construct silos. These, she highlighted as means for ensuring better process for agricultural produce in her constituency as they wait for Government interventions. Unfortunately, the late hon. Susan Namaganda is no longer in position to fulfil her pledges to the people of Bukomansimbi. 

Madam Speaker, I want to assure my granddaughter, Susan Namaganda, that the Opposition commits to advance her quest for an economically viable agricultural sector and empowering the youth with knowledge and skills not cash. When we come into power come 2016, cooperatives will be revived and an agricultural bank will be established so as to rekindle the agricultural sector in Uganda. (Applause) Moreover, the youth shall not be spoilt with cheap cash but equipped with valuable tools for wealth creation.

To the family, the Democratic Party and the constituents of late hon. Namaganda, be strong and know that the Lord has rewarded Susan with eternal peace. May her soul rest in peace. For God and my country.

3.23
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion and thank the two speakers who have ably made a case for the motion on the Floor.

I wish to extend my heartfelt condolences on my behalf and that of my family, and the people of Kibanda County, to the family of hon. Mukasa Mbidde, the greater family, the Democratic Party fraternity and the people of Bukomansimbi, and to thank them for giving us this great lady who is now lying silently in this Chamber. I also want to extend my condolences to the Opposition and to the House at large and to the country for this great loss. 

It is a very difficult time to speak here when most of us have prepared Christmas messages and best wishes to families. However, here we are having this to say to a family that has suffered a great loss in this festive season when families look forward to being together other than them who are going to be living worlds apart. What a pity.

Madam Speaker, being a first term Member of Parliament, most of us did not interact so much with hon. Namaganda. As you know, and the point has already been made, that it is not easy at all to be a woman Member of Parliament, young and in the Opposition; combining those three is not easy.

There is a tendency for some people to believe that if you are born around the time or during the NRM regime, then automatically you should be an NRM supporter. You will be confronted by many people who will always be asking you why you are in the Opposition yet you are the generation children of the NRM and a lot more provocative questions along those lines. However, hon. Namaganda toed a very calm line; she was very firm, principled and stayed much focussed as most of us will testify in this House. She was always in this corner, a little quiet but when she spoke, like the quotation that I thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for stating verbatim, she spoke for the people’s cause.

I want to thank her for that and also for exhibiting yet again calmness. You know some of our friends on this side of the Floor are always accused of being so belligerent and I am sure both sides will testify to the fact that she was very sober.

Madam Speaker, I got close to hon. Namaganda in December 2012 when I made a trip to West Budama County North, hon. Fox Odoi’s constituency, to celebrate with him the life of his late father who was one of the founder members of the Democratic Party. I arrived before the late but hon. Odoi briefed me about the Members who would be coming. He said that hon. Namaganda would be coming but she had a two-month-old baby but she still said she would be coming. She would stick to her word and she surely arrived with her two-month-old baby. 

In my mind, I wondered what a commitment that was and what a down-to-earth person she was. From then, we picked up conversation and I let my team go back to Tororo. I eventually chose that I should travel with her in the night as we were going back so that they would drop me in Tororo town. Madam Speaker, on our way back, we encountered a very unfortunate incident when a cyclist rammed into us and we got involved in an accident. From there, I advised her not to continue with this journey, that maybe we could sleep somewhere and continue with this journey the following day. However, she was committed and she travelled back to Kampala where she arrived past 1.00 a.m. 

The following day, I got in touch with my friend, hon. Mbidde, and we talked about many things which I do not want to talk about here. However, I really regret the fact that in December 2012 we got involved in that accident that almost claimed our lives and now in December 2015 it is when she departs. That is very unfortunate.

Madam Speaker, I have fond memories like what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister just said here of his interactions; we all heard. We have fond memories in a different sphere of life, again fresh in our minds with some colleagues, when we had a good time at hon. Haruna Kyeyune’s function in Masaka. I remember hon. Mukasa Mbidde was the best man and we had such a great time.

I am saying this to build my case that it is then that I got to interact with her more deeply and productively. After that, I was struck by her passion for agriculture. I am one of those who believe that we have not got our strategy in the agricultural sector right. Agriculture is a value chain approach, from the farm to the factory. That is the thing that we are going to discuss in another forum, not today. I want to believe that the strategy is wrong. For those who make the case that it is correct, I am on the other side to say that this is a value chain productive sector that is all the way from the farm to value addition in the factory.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for visiting Bukomansimbi and honouring her invitation. That went a long way. I want to say, what more can be done in terms of a legacy? A life short and richly lived but a life that ought to be remembered.

I do not want to say, what should the NRM Government do? I am not going to say that because the people of Uganda are yet to renew the mandate of the next government. Therefore, I would want to commit this question not to the NRM but to the voting population of Uganda: What can we do to advance this cause which African leaders consented to in the Maputo Declaration, that 10 per cent of our budget should be put to agriculture? President Museveni was part of this commitment. It is now over to you, Ugandans. 

As I wind up, Madam Speaker, I want to say that statistics do not lie. Over 200,000 Ugandans or people traveling on Ugandan roads perish in motor accidents. These statistics have been on the rise as the population also increases. What is the grand plan? May I request the NRM Government to table to this House some action plan in memory of the late hon. Namaganda. We need a report with a clear action plan as we celebrate Christmas.

Lastly, I would like to pray for my friend, hon. Mukasa Mbidde. I know it is extremely difficult; none of us can be in your shoes. I pray for the greater family too. To the people of Bukomansimbi, you had made up a menu, which has been messed up. I pray that the good Lord gives you the fortitude to move on just as she would have wished that the constituency obviously moves on. The only difference is that she wanted to be a part of it. Now that she is not part of it, I pray that you move on by the grace of God.

I pray that the good Lord sustains the bereaved and rests the soul of hon. Namaganda in eternal peace. I second the motion.

3.39
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to our comrade, hon. Susan Namaganda. On behalf of the people of Kiboga West in Kyankwanzi District, we extend our sincere condolences to the family of hon. Fred Mukasa Mbidde and the family of the late for the loss of such a gallant daughter.

Hon. Namaganda was still young, energetic and enthusiastic to perform and serve her people but we have lost her just like that. I saw her when she had just got the accident on Thursday night at around half past midnight. I was coming from a function in Isingiro. She had just had that fatal accident and people were struggling to save her life. They had stopped vehicles which refused to stop. I would like to thank the lorry drivers – I do not know their names – who struggled to put her on a lorry so that they could carry her to the hospital to save her life. 

When I stopped and sent my driver to find out what was happening, he told me that it was a Member of Parliament who was involved in that accident. I panicked and we went and brought her to my vehicle. We drove at a terrific speed. I had intended to take her to Nsambya but she gave me the phone contact of her husband, hon. Fred Mukasa Mbidde. She was still conscious and she could remember the phone number. I called but they had already informed him and he was on his way. He met us at Nabbingo. She was in great pain but conscious because she would call out my name. She even asked me to loosen her blouse and I tried to support her but she had had a very serious accident; we could not help. 

We brought her to Nakasero Hospital with the guidance of her husband. They checked her; she was taken for a CT scan, X-rays and other scans. I think they understood what her condition was at that time but they did not want to tell us the truth. They comforted us and said that they were going to assist her by removing pressure from the lungs and then they sent us away. It was sad to hear early in the morning that she had passed on. 

We pray that her soul rests in eternal peace. We also pray for the family, especially hon. Mukasa Mbidde, to be firm. Like it is said in Psalms 23, the Lord is our Shepherd. All of us should commit our lives to God. Let us do good things. She was trying to uplift the price of agricultural produce in serving her people. For all of us, let us do good to our friends as we would like them to do good to us.

Madam Speaker, I would like to call upon drivers - some of us drive ourselves, while others have drivers. There are also drivers in society outside this Parliament. Once someone is drunk or has taken alcohol, he should not drive. Just excuse yourself. If you feel sleepy, park somewhere and you sleep for say two hours and then drive. We do not know under what influence the other assailant was; we do not know whether he was drinking or sleeping.

At the same time, I would like to call upon all Ugandans to help when you come across such an accident on the road. I presume she might have spent an hour there. Many vehicles just passed them to the extent that these people were desperate and they tried to carry her in a lorry. Therefore, whenever we come across an accident, let us be kind enough to check what has happened and who is involved. As leaders especially, we must be kind and even call the police.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, as we are going to exploit our oil, I would like to call upon Government to make these highways one-way traffic. We are increasing in number and developing. If this road was a one-way traffic road, maybe she would have survived. She was in her right lane. Her car went to the extreme but the other man came directly and knocked their vehicle. They tried to save themselves, but there were rails. They could not go over the rails to escape. That is how this gallant daughter lost her life. 

We pray that her soul rests in eternal peace. May God comfort the bereaved family. For God and my country.

3.46
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I would also like to express my sincere condolences to the family and people of Bukomansimbi.

Madam Speaker, we appreciate that death is inevitable. However, Susan’s death makes me believe what one American doctor once said, that Africans die even when they should not have died and simply take it as God’s decision. 

It is not about how long one lives; it is about how much one achieves. It is sad Susan has died at such a very young age but she has achieved quite a lot, in my opinion and from what others have said. She played very mature politics. She was neither antagonistic nor abusive. She was very friendly. We are going to miss her. 

She was such a nice young mother. On several occasions, I met her with her little babies. She would in most cases come with her children to Parliament. We are going to miss Susan greatly. 

Dear colleagues, we are the voices of the people. We can change and improve things through budgeting, policies we pass and through the regulations we pass here in Parliament for the good of the common man. The time has come for us to really put our foot down and advocate for the improvement of the health sector. This is not about political affiliations. It is about all of us and the people we represent. We need to improve the health sector because many Ugandans have died because of challenges in the health sector. 

Madam Speaker, we also need to ask the police to improve or pull up highway patrols. In case one gets an accident and there is no one to help, probably patrols would be there to help. The issue of an ambulance system is very essential. I think it is high time we put it as one of our priorities. Hon. Namaganda was going to be carried in a truck. It can happen to any one of us; we can be put on top of bananas on a lorry.

Madam Speaker, we need to look at the issue of ambulances. Cameras and -(Member timed out.)

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion and to mourn the death of my colleague. I would also like to convey condolences from the people of Bamunanika to you, Madam Speaker, my fellow parliamentarians, and my friend hon. Mukasa Mbidde for this great loss. 

As a family friend, a parent and a teacher, I had many opportunities to interact with hon. Namaganda. Death has robbed this country of a very brilliant, young, very hardworking, caring and supportive parliamentarian with very many big plans for the development of this country. Unfortunately, hon. Namaganda has not lived to implement her good plans. As elders, we would like to see these young leaders come up under our mentorship and guidance but life continues. It is very sad that hon. Namaganda had to go at such a tender age. 

The late hon. Namaganda had a very unique approach to politics. You are all aware that she belonged to the Opposition side. However, she always had time and was able to reach each every one of the parliamentarians in this House. I do remember many times she came to our offices in the ministry looking for solutions to the many educational challenges she had in her constituency without any hesitation. I loved that approach. She was not an extremist; she would reach each and everybody whenever she felt there could be something good for her people. She loved her people. She cared for the welfare of the people of Bukomansimbi and Uganda in general. We are going to miss Susan very greatly. 

Madam Speaker, there is something wrong that is happening. Almost every morning you wake up, you hear about Ugandans that have perished in accidents. The numbers of those who are dying is on the increase. Today, it is Susan and tomorrow I do not know who is next. Isn’t it time for us to seriously consider amending the traffic laws in this country? Isn’t it time to look at the curriculum that is offered in our driving schools, including the implementation of these laws?  

Today, it is very common for a young man to come from a place, for example Kamuli, in the morning and in the afternoon you find him on the streets of Kampala riding a boda boda without any licence. Isn’t it time for us as parliamentarians to say enough is enough even if it means -(Member timed out.) 

3.51
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to send my sincere condolences to the family members and Ugandans for this great loss. 

Madam Speaker, I knew hon. Namaganda very well because she was a member of the Committee of Agriculture where I have also been. She would attend all the committee sessions even if they included field work. She would go with the committee even if it meant spending one week in the field. Susan would not leave you there alone. She would stay there until all the committee work was finished before she came back. That is how committed she was in her work. 

Madam Speaker, Susan was a young mother, wife, a worker and a Member of Parliament. However, she has performed very well in all the sectors, even as a housewife. In all the media houses, you never heard anything to the effect that she had a problem with her spouse. That shows that she was executing her duties very well. 

As young mothers, we have young children but that never stopped her from attending parliamentary sessions. That shows that she was really committed in doing all this work. The last time I met Susan in the corridors, I told her that she was becoming younger. I asked her to begin family planning. In the last Parliament, I had two children and this Parliament I decided to take a rest. She told me that she was also going to do that. We were just here in the corridors. When I heard that Susan had passed away, those are the last words that echoed in my mind. 

Madam Speaker, Susan was disciplined and respectful. That is why she did not have any problems. She would contribute from that side but she was never provocative. The last thing I recall about Susan is that if you accidently began a political debate during a committee meeting, the only thing that you could do was to tell her that you first finish the committee work and then get back to the political debate. She was the only DP person in our committee but when you began that political debate, she would not give you time. She would debate until you told her to first finish the committee work before you get into the political debate. Otherwise, she would keep you and you would not even do that committee work. She loved her party and she talked about DP everywhere.

Madam Speaker, I am told Susan died while doing work for her people. She was travelling from Bukomansimbi to Kampala just to come and get facilitation because she had another function that morning. That is the reason as to why she travelled at night, leaving her young children there. (Member timed out.)

3.53
MS AMONGI BETTY (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is where hon. Namaganda used to sit and she was our neighbour in this area. All the times that she interacted with most of us, she was always smiling. The smile was her trademark.

We have talked about accidents and if you looked at the statistics, you would realise that the majority of the accidents are caused by taxis. I had to drive from Lira this morning to come for this session but when I reached Migadde, I found that a taxi had knocked one person and the tyre was on the head of this person. Like my honourable colleague has stated, all the vehicles were just passing but I stopped. A boda boda had also been involved in that accident. I had to carry this person back to Bombo Barracks but I do not know whether he survived, especially the one that the taxi had knocked and stepped on the head. This is the scenario that we are faced with.

Hon. Namaganda’s work in this Parliament represented the true challenge of a woman politician. She could not sleep in her constituency even if she had a choice; a woman who had to go and attend to her constituency and yet had a seven-month-old baby could not risk sleeping over even if it were midnight. She would try her best to leave and come back, unless she had travelled with her baby; in that case, she could have spent the night. 

This is the challenge women politicians face. How do you balance the fact that you cannot keep running on the road with the baby and also attend to your constituency. That is what she was faced with and that is what many people are faced with. Her challenge, and what she has done for this country, will not be forgotten.

I can describe myself as somebody who can step on people’s toes but hon. Namaganda would not step on your toes, politically. She would never step on people’s toes. She was very balanced. Even when she had the big responsibility of having children, unlike some who might not even have that responsibility but do not attend parliamentary sessions, she would always be in attendance. She would attend parliamentary sessions irrespective of the fact that she had the responsibility of taking care of those young children. She was always here.

Hon. Namaganda was somebody who could not talk anyhow. She was very useful in letting you understand the politics of this country. I remember the last time I sat with her, we discussed at length and she made me understand the politics of DP - why some are in the Truth and Justice group, why - (Member timed out.)

3.57
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to my late colleague, hon. Susan Namaganda. Indeed as a district, this is a terrible loss.

I would like to take this opportunity to extend my condolences to my friend and in-law, hon. Mukasa Mbidde. We are very sorry for what has happened to you. I also would like to take this opportunity to extend my sincere condolences to the people of Bukomansimbi, to you dear colleagues and to the whole nation.

Hon. Susan Namaganda has been a Member of Parliament for Bukomansimbi District. Indeed, she was the pioneer Woman Member of Parliament for the district, which was created in 2010. Since we received hon. Susan Namaganda we never regretted as the people of Bukomansimbi and the Democratic Party. We have always had her as our strong advocate, both politically and in other sectors.

We can compare hon. Namaganda to lightening which comes, strikes and goes very fast but leaves a very big impact. She has left a big impact in this country, especially in Bukomansimbi District. She was a lover of many, a mother, a daughter and a friend to all of us. We are going to miss her.

This country has lost a number of people, mainly due to road accidents. This highway called Kampala-Masaka Road is very terrible, especially the section between Kyabadaza and Nsangi. It is very bad and faulty especially when it rains. That section is always slippery. 

I am very disappointed simply because of where the accident occurred; it is less than two kilometres away from Mpigi Central Police Station. With that terrible bang, I do not understand how the police could fail to send an ambulance in the shortest time possible. The section is about two kilometres away from Mpigi Central Police Station or even less and the traffic police are always on the road, even chasing innocent people. Here, people are dying and yet they cannot rescue them when they are nearby. We, therefore, need to defend ourselves as Members of Parliament. 

The issue of voters is becoming a problem to us. Hon. Namaganda died because she was working for her electorate. She travelled from Bukomansimbi very late in the night to go and look for money from Eco Bank, which does not have a branch in Bukomansimbi and Masaka, and yet she wanted to move fast and return to Bukomansimbi the next day. That is one of the reasons she got this accident. The demands from the voters are becoming very –(Member timed out.)

4.04
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu):  Madam Speaker, as the chief whip of the party, I also convey my condolences. However, a situation where you have hospitals and yet they block people from visiting them simply reveals the problems we are facing.

Hon. Susan Namaganda has been a very strong lady in our party and in the Catholic Church. During the years I have spent in Parliament here, I have never seen a politician being escorted by a Bishop from the church to their vehicle but hon. Namaganda has been escorted by Bishop Kaggwa. That is a challenge for me, other Catholics and other believers around here.

There is something that we should emulate from the late. We have been carrying out campaigns for by-elections and she always travelled to these campaigns with her daughter and they both shared teargas – the mother and child. I remember in Luweero, her husband was commenting about the security that a Member of Parliament of the East African Community had; you could only arrest him in Uganda by first calling the Inspector Generals of Police of Rwanda, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda. No sooner had he finished that statement than teargas exploded and yet the late hon. Namaganda was breastfeeding after her communication.

As the Democratic Party, we have a lot of problems. This lady has been consistent in the party.  Ladies, breastfeeding is not a problem. Do not think about bottle feeding; move with your children. Even though you are a Member of Parliament, come for sessions, breastfeed the baby and then go back. That is what hon. Susan Namaganda was doing as a Member of Parliament and as a lady.

The issue of Masaka Road – We have raised this matter several times, and the Vice-President even comes from Masaka. We might get another accident worse than what you have heard about.  

Madam Speaker, I send my condolences to you. You have lost many members in this august House and we do not know the next step. As an individual, I fear that coffin. I would like to inform you that there was a lorry driver who put a coffin behind in his lorry and the turn-boy who assisted the driver sat inside the coffin and covered himself to prevent from getting drenched in the rain. The people who boarded the lorry thought the driver was carrying a dead body. Incidentally, when the turn-boy was trying to find out if the rain had stopped, he opened the coffin and because of fear, everybody jumped out and ended up dying because they thought it was a dead body coming out of the coffin. (Laughter)

This coffin you see here, the manufacturer and the buyer do not wish to have it. Even if hon. Namaganda was to wake up and ask who bought this coffin for her, we would all run away. We need to fight for our lives as Members of Parliament. I am also seeking –(Member timed out.)

4.07
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion and to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for moving the motion.

Madam Speaker, today is not a normal day for all of us. As you are aware, when we had just joined Parliament, hon. Namaganda used to sit next to me for consultation. Much as we were both new in Parliament, she used to think that I had spent some time in Parliament. We became friends because we come from Masaka and we were both members of the Democratic Party. 

It is a hard moment to see the coffin of hon. Namaganda in front of us today. The circumstances under which Susan died - we got the narration when we were in the church – were perturbing. We are all disturbed by the way it happened but Susan is gone.

I am the President of the DP women’s league and hon. Namaganda has been my deputy. You look at a young woman at 31, and she started campaigns in 2010 in Bukomansimbi at the age of 26 but she managed to convince the people of Bukomansimbi and they voted for her as their Member of Parliament. It is not easy for a young woman, and in the Opposition, to be given the trust to become a Member of Parliament. 

In the Democratic Party, we are just four women and we have lost one. I do not think we are going to replace hon. Namaganda. For her, it was a sure win. We had already counted her as one of the people who were coming back in the Tenth Parliament. We are not very sure if DP will replace Susan; it is not easy. My prayer is that since the late hon. Namaganda was a nominated flag bearer of the Democratic Party, the opportunity be given to DP and fresh nominations are carried out in Bukomansimbi. I also pray that Parliament is given a day off to see off our colleague. That is my prayer. Thank you very much.

4.10
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Namaganda.

When Masaka District then was divided into four districts in 2010, Bukomasimbi was one of them and as DP we were looking forward to receiving applications from people who wished to stand in that district. I had received one application from a lady who was a teacher in Mukono. However, towards the end, I was in office here in Parliament together with hon. Mutebi Balikuddembe and we saw a young lady entering my office; unknowingly, she was entering an office of a conservative but she was dressed in skinny trousers and a shirt and she was a very young lady. I welcomed her and she told me she wanted to stand as a woman MP for Bukomansimbi.

She was young, and Bukomansimbi is a rural constituency. After interviewing her, I called my party president, hon. Norbert Mao. Hon. Norbert Mao asked me to keep her and that he was going to come. He came, we talked to her and she was very promising. We later sent her to Bukomansimbi for DP primaries and she emerged victorious and became the first flag bearer of the party. From there, she started campaigning. She was very articulate. She won the elections and came to Parliament. She was the first woman representative in the Democratic Party; we had never had a district woman representative in Parliament. We had women Members of Parliament but not district representatives; so, she made history.

She was a leader. As you heard, she was the deputy national women’s leader. She was also a member of the national executive committee of the party and a member of the national council of the party. She took over Bukomansimbi, the constituency of the late Benedicto Kiwanuka. For those who listened to her, you know that she always invoked the name or the speeches of the late Benedicto Kiwanuka. 

In 1961, when the Democratic Party led the self-internal government, the late Benedicto Kiwanuka increased the prices of agricultural products. Coffee then was 55 cents and he increased it to Shs 1.55. Even tobacco, tea and all the agricultural products were increased by the late Benedicto Kiwanuka under the democratic –(­Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Join me in welcoming Mr Elton Joseph Mabirizi, a presidential candidate. Today he has abandoned his campaign in honour of hon. Namaganda. Thank you for coming.

The Secretary General says there is something he finally wants to say.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Parliament, but more especially you for the assistance you have rendered to the family of the late honourable member. When she passed on, I called you and you accepted to call this special sitting today; thank you. I would like to thank His Excellency the Vice President, who also came to hon. Mbidde’s house when hon. Namaganda had just passed on. 

I would like to thank the Government of Uganda, which was represented today by the Government Chief Whip in the church and all Members of Parliament. I know we are in the trenches now, so I thank you wholeheartedly for turning up in big numbers.

I would like to thank the press; they have done a wonderful job since hon. Namaganda passed away up to now. I would like to thank the religious leaders from all denominations who turned up at hon. Mbidde’s house and for all they have done. I thank all the people for their contributions. Thank you very much.

4.14
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me add my voice to those who have spoken before in thanking the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the acting Leader of the Opposition for this motion.

Before I say anything, hon. Ssemugaba deserves a big thank you. (Applause) Much as you could not do much to save the life of our colleague, you did your best and I think the human in you should be replicated by all of us when you are faced with such circumstances. Hon. Ssemugaba, thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, the late hon. Namaganda used to sit right behind me throughout these four and a half years. Since I have been in this House longer than she was, all the time she would bend over and whisper to me, asking about one or two things. 

What I found out is that this young lady was a patriot. At one time we even had a conversation about it. Just imagine, at the tender age of 25 to 26, when young ladies are thinking of starting families, she had no husband, no child and yet she offered herself to shoulder society’s problems. Being a Member of Parliament is not an easy job, you know it. You take over big responsibilities of communities - water problems, educational problems, health problems, infrastructure, personal problems - and at the same time you must have time to plan for the nation. As a young girl, she could have thought of starting a family but instead she took up these societal challenges. 

As a country, we are burdening our young people with responsibilities that should not ordinarily be theirs. The older generation, my generation and those above me seem to be missing out on something, which is forcing these young people to come and take over these responsibilities. These are the patriots we have in this country. Suzan, you had a very good record. I think the whole country will stand up and say, “Look here, at some point in time there was a great young lady who took a decision to serve her own people.”

Secondly, Madam Speaker, road carnage; how many thousands of people die every day as a result of recklessness? Anybody who sits at the steering wheel of a car thinks he is a driver on the road. We do not seem to have an effective control system; when you go to the taxi park, you find juveniles driving, some of them under the –(Member timed out)

4.19
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion as brought by the Prime Minister to pay tribute to my sister.

Firstly, on behalf of the leaders from the greater Masaka region, I would like to thank all of you, dear honourable members, for coming to share this grief with us and for paying tribute to our sister, hon. Susan Namaganda.

Personally, Susan always called me her brother and she told me why she respected me. I was a leader in the greater Masaka region of which Bukomansimbi was part. Although I contested in the previous elections with hon. Mukasa Mbidde, we have since become friends and I have been a family friend, and I will always be despite the demise of my sister. Indeed, that is why I supported hon. Mbidde when he was vying for the East African parliamentary position. 

Hon. Namaganda stood for farmers and it is true that she has always been passionate about the welfare of farmers. Indeed, that other name, “bbeyi ye’birime”, is what she stood for. Bukomansimbi is an old agricultural district known in the greater Masaka for being a food basket for this country for quite a long time. I would like to say that the only problem today is that we have to support our farmers to learn how to use fertilisers and we should educate them. From the rate at which fertilisers are used, these districts that used to feed this country have gone down in terms of productivity. We need to think about educating our farmers on fertiliser use.

I would like to assure the Members here that when I joined Cabinet, I found out that everybody in Cabinet supports and loves agriculture. They have educated me and I have understood that agriculture does not stand alone. I would like to assure the Members that the NRM Government that I am serving today is going to take on and promote agriculture. We shall not let down our sister, hon. Namaganda, who has always been fighting to see that agriculture goes up.

Lastly, I would like to tell hon. Mukasa Mbidde that we share this grief with you and we know the feelings that you have today but be firm; we pray that God gives you the energy to withstand this trying moment. May the good Lord rest the soul of my sister in peace. I thank you very much.

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to extend my condolences to the family and the people of Bukomansimbi and Uganda at large.

The late hon. Namaganda has died at a very young age as has been said. She was such a quiet person. I one time met her with her baby in the field in Tororo and I was surprised. I asked how long she had been in Tororo because they were leaving that day. She told me she had been in the field for four days. I asked whether she had been with her baby and she said she had been with the baby. The other members of the committee assured me that she actually did that. I was completely surprised because not everybody can do that kind of thing. I think the baby was about three or four months old, but she was in the field with her.

Rt Hon. Speaker, although hon. Namaganda was quiet, I got to understand who she was. She was part of the campaign team of hon. Brenda Nabukenya during the by-election in Luweero. Bukedde TV showed the people who were at hon. Nabukenya’s rally and what they were saying and I saw hon. Namaganda working up the crowd. This made me realise that behind this quiet person was a brilliant and courageous lady. It is very unfortunate that she has gone at such a tender age because I strongly believe that with time, she would have opened up and spoken much more on the Floor of this House.

There is something that disturbs me; the number of road accidents in this country. Road accidents are increasing and from the statistics, you can see that Uganda comes second to Ethiopia in terms of road accidents in which so many lives and resources are lost. We use a lot of money, in the billions, to treat people because of these road accidents. 

Madam Speaker, we have spoken about the challenge of road accidents on the Floor of this House. I am glad that the Ministry of Works and Transport has taken up some recommendations and if you look at most of the new roads, there are road separators placed at the sharp bends.

When this accident happened, we were told it was a head-on collision. I asked myself, what made somebody leave his lane and come to the other person’s lane? What was it that made this gentleman driving the taxi leave his lane and move to the lane of hon. Namaganda at that time of the night? Was he over taking another vehicle? The answers that I received showed otherwise; there was no other vehicle. So, what was it? I am still asking up to now what it was that made this person leave the other lane and swerve over to hon. Namaganda’s lane. I hope the police will investigate and find out what it was. Was there a pothole; what was it?

I know that death is painful, but we are told in 1 Corinthians 15:26 that the last enemy of man that will be vanquished will be death. So, death will always occur but there are deaths that we can actually prevent and this was one of them. 

We are seeing increased use of alcohol and drugs amongst our people and the only way we can control this –  of course, there is one element of enforcement, but the other is the road designs that we are going to use in this country. I have raised – (Member timed out.)

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Rebecca Otengo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Please, allow me to send my condolences to the family of the late hon. Susan Namaganda especially the husband, hon. Fred Mukasa Mbidde, the children and the Democratic Party.

I have a very short time but I would like to mention that this is the tenth Member of Parliament in the Ninth Parliament to die. As Chairperson, Madam Speaker, we thank you for standing with us because it has not been very easy.

Secondly, I would like to speak to our brother, hon. Fred Mukasa Mbidde. Human words are not easy to explain and also comfort you but your comfort will come from the word of the Lord. I keep telling people that there are three deaths that you can never share with others: the death of your spouse, child and parents. People will tell you to be firm but in most cases, they do not know the pain until they go through it themselves. I know that is exactly what you are going through especially given those three little children.

Madam Speaker, I saw hon. Namaganda arrive in this Parliament and she was very young but she never paraded her age above her performance. She would never tell you that her contribution was because she was young. She would get up and speak on behalf of her people. I always saw her write notes to the senior Members of Parliament on the front bench and tapping others like hon. Betty Amongi before she would get up to speak. 

Hon. Namaganda never jumped up and down on any topic; she knew her area. Some of us sometimes get tempted to speak because the gallery is watching but she was not that type. I also noticed that every time she stood up, you never let her down; she always caught your eye and you allowed her to make her contribution.

There are two areas where I saw her as a very competent person. I did not know that she was connected to the hon. Fred Mukasa Mbidde but when hon. Mbidde was one of the contestants for EALA, she really played a big role. She would come to the table where all the elders were - the ministers - and she would speak to us. By the time she would leave, you would feel like you must vote for hon. Mukasa Mbidde. I also want to thank God for you because you never humiliated her. In many cases, our young people are humiliated by their spouses but you never did that and I want to thank you.

Finally, to the Democratic Party, we send our condolences to you but we want to say that next time when somebody dies, do not begin by announcing who must take over. I heard you doing that on the media. We begin by mourning. You do not begin by saying that we are going to have some kind of re-election; no! She is still out; show people that she is more important than the position she was holding. Thank you.

4.34
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to register condolences on my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Kanungu. It is so sad to lose hon. Namaganda in this Parliament because when both of us came here, she was one of the colleagues I would talk to. However, like the word of God says, God is the one who knows all things. 

This kind of death is so disappointing and so demoralising because Susan had good plans for her people. I remember the last time we were chatting in the corridors here, she was telling me how she had a nice plan to go through the minister in charge of microfinance and make sure that she gets enough money to give to all the youth in the district and the farmers so that they could improve on agriculture and their small businesses. Susan had a heart for her constituency and it is unfortunate that she has not stayed for long to carry out all the plans she had. 

I want to thank God because the little time she has spent on this earth has been useful through what she has been doing for her people and for the family. She was a great woman; though young, she was really great. It is unfortunate that we have lost hon. Namaganda. All of us shall go someday, but it was too early for this to happen. Susan was very humble among us. Even when talking, she would just say her point and that was it. 

She was really somebody you could rely on as a friend. You would be sure that what you told her would remain with her; you would never hear it anywhere. She was a lady anybody would wish to be but it is unfortunate she is gone. We shall always remember Susan. 

It is unfortunate that she grew up as an orphan and she has left children who are young and who are going to grow up the way she did. I know God in all this, though it is unfortunate. She really loved her family. She cared for the children and you would hear her talk about the children. We would share about it and advise each other - (Member timed out.)

4. 36
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to our beloved young honourable Member of Parliament, Susan Namaganda. 

Madam Speaker, we will all die but we will be mourned for differently. If a person dies after a very long illness, people say let him or her go to rest; you do not mourn so much. If a person dies at an old age, they say let us celebrate their life and we do not mourn so much. However, when a person dies young, like hon. Susan Namaganda here – she was a very young politician, young mother and young wife - it is very painful. 

It is really unbelievable that this young girl has gone. She had just come and we had seen her. She was young in politics and age and yet she did not show any youthfulness in her behaviour as a Member of Parliament. She worked very maturely for her constituency. I am sure she would have come back to the Tenth Parliament because the people of Bukomansimbi knew that she was the right person, but her life has been cut short. The people of Bukomansimbi are going to miss her contribution. 

She was a very young mother with only three young children; actually, they are all babies. Who is going to take care of these children, oh God? It is very painful, but much more painful for her husband. These children are for you to take care of and I would advise you to give them time. I know you are very busy but they now look at you as a mother and father. It is important to give them time. Do not hurry to get married quickly because you will not have time for these children. Give them time to grow. No person will take care of those children except you. Pay attention, watch over them until they are of a reasonable age and then you can live your life again. That is my advice.

Coming to this accident, I want to say that our accidents are mainly caused by human carelessness - human error. In this case, it was over drinking and another time you will find that it is overloading, then over speeding and yet we have a policy on road safety, we have laws; what happened? I see policemen testing for alcohol among the drivers within Kampala here -(Member timed out.)

4.40
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family of my brother, Fred Mukasa Mbidde, for the loss of your dear wife and our colleague. I also convey condolences to the Speaker, the Parliament, the people of Bukomansimbi and to the country at large.

I want to thank the Eighth Parliament. We were haggling to create districts and it was only Kalungu District which was supported then, but during the process Bukomansimbi was created as well. When it was created, we received a very credible, prominent young leader whom we have lost after a very short time. 

When the elections of 2010/2011 took place, Bukomansimbi was taken by DP. As a Member of Parliament, I was in charge of Bukomansimbi and on several occasions, I was a frequent visitor to Bukomansimbi and that is where I began to interface with Susan. She was such a young and energetic leader. She came with an “itch” and that is where the name bbeyi ye’birime comes from. She supported the farming community of the people she had come from.

When she joined Parliament, I mentored her as I have been doing several new Members of Parliament. I told her that if she was representing farmers, she should support the farmers’ cause. She took it up and promoted many food security programmes in her constituency; she joined the coffee platform and she has been an ardent fighter in that cause. She also came to the committee of agriculture to further that cause.

We have been giving her wise counsel on how to represent people, but she has gone too early. I want to urge Members of Parliament that as we struggle to win the votes of the people we represent, there are two cardinal things human beings on the globe strive for: food first and income second; the rest falls in line after those two. Therefore, if you are an ardent supporter of your people to secure what they eat either by farming or by getting the purchasing power parity to get it, you will be home and dry. (Member timed out.)

4.44
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. It gives me gratitude to talk about Susan as a tested politician, a family woman, woman activist and an agricultural change agent. That gives me great pleasure and satisfaction.

She came into this world, she has done her part. Colleagues, for any of us to become a Member of Parliament at such a tender age is very challenging, more so for a woman; you need extra qualities which you men may not need. You must have patience, perseverance, tolerance and must be a team player and a master planner, which qualities she had at her fingertips.

It is amazing because she did not earn the name bbeyi ye ’birime in vain; she was an advocate and she had a passion for the economic empowerment of the most rural people who thrive and earn from agriculture, knowing that 80 per cent of her people earn from agriculture. Susan advocated for an increment in prices in their produce. It is unfortunate that she has died too young before achieving what she longed and fought for. Any of us who comes from agricultural communities would be gratified if you got a good price for your people because they depend on it.

I was looking at the Order of Mass and even the names of her children depict the person and the struggle in which Susan lived. I looked at the name Ndibamega, Ndibasobola and then Ndibasirisa. They depict a set of struggles where we come from, the country we live in; she was in a struggle daily! These are daily challenges, which should not drown us; let us use these challenges as a stepping stone –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. I want to say that on behalf of the people of Mukono Municipality, Buganda Parliamentary Caucus where I am the vice-chairperson, and as the Vice-President of DP for Buganda region, I have not just lost a colleague but a relative of mine in the names of hon. Susan Namaganda. She was one of the four women from DP in Parliament, the others being hon. Nabukenya, hon. Florence Namayanja and myself. 

The most important thing about her is that she was a role model for our young women in the party. This is so because before her, people thought that it was so difficult for an Opposition young lady like her to compete for a district seat. She has been our pioneer and because of her efforts in these on-going elections, we have so many young ladies from DP contesting for district seats just because she stood and made it.

Susan was one of our newly elected leaders in the party. Her task was to re-establish DP women’s wing and in the few months that she held that office, she did a great job.

Madam Speaker, my sister died in a road accident on Masaka Road. It was the third accident she had in a period of three years on the same road; this one took her life. Susan Namaganda is just one of the many Ugandans who have perished on that road. The question I want to bring out today to the honourable Leader of Government Business is: How many more people should die on Masaka Road before that matter becomes an issue of interest to us? We risk being called selfish as Parliament because here today we are seen crying for our own but each and every day that passes, a Ugandan or Ugandans perish on that road. Questions must be answered. Is it because of the terrain or is it the drivers? Madam Speaker, this matter must be investigated.

Lastly, as we face this problem of losing hon. Namaganda, the police came out very fast and gave a statement that was full of gaps. You would sympathise with anybody who would jump to a conclusion of murder. People were saying that a drunkard travelling alone in the night knocked a car carrying an MP and she alone died in that car and the driver disappeared. Madam Speaker, at the right moment we shall demand, as DP, for a full investigation into this matter. We want a full report about the cause of this accident, the owner of the car, who the driver was.  We want to know how a driver who drove into another vehicle walked away unhurt and even had the capacity to hide himself for all these days. This hurts us and we want to request the police to satisfy our curiosity on this matter; we need a full report about this particular accident.

Madam Speaker, my sister, hon. Namaganda, in just five years accomplished what others have accomplished in 50 years. She has done her best; she has been with us here for a few years but we are very happy and proud of her.

My brother, Mbidde, we dedicate you in the hands of God. To the orphans, we know that there is always God for the orphans and the widowers. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

4.51
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Rubaga South and the Conservative Party which I lead, I would like to pay tribute to the late Susan Namaganda and extend very profound condolences to my comrade, hon. Mukasa Mbidde. 

Hon. Mukasa Mbidde and I belong to different political parties. However, much as that is so, we share a lot in common regarding interactive politics. The two of us enjoy the spectacle of interaction in debating terms. I hope you will get courage to carry on the exercise. When I saw you at your home yesterday, you were totally dismayed and heartbroken. In doing so, I would like to pay tribute to you by consoling you using the words of Socrates: “For anything that men can tell, death may be the greatest good that can happen to them: but they fear it as if they knew quite well that it was the greatest of evils.” Death is evil; you condemn it, I condemn it, but carry on while remaining great and brave.

A lot has been said about the late hon. Namaganda. I personally come from Masaka although I am a representative of the people of Rubaga South. However, between Buddo and Mpigi on Masaka Road, the Government of Uganda should scale up and learn what is happening. When it gets late, bad people or evildoers pour oil on the road surface so that they entice the sliding of vehicles so as to capture the goods carried. The Government should investigate that satanic activity.

In regard to those who have been listening to Madam Namaganda – I happened to have shared audience with her on CBS where I commonly speak – whenever she was bringing out a point on farmers, you nearly wanted her to talk for hours. This is because she captured the attention of the suffering farmers. 

Before I sit down, I would like to give a fundamental challenge. What does bbeyi ye’birime mean to the ordinary people? Government has spoken and many Members of Parliament have spoken. I still insist that nobody has reached the point of concern which was embedded in what hon. Namaganda was saying. What hon. Namaganda was saying with regard to bbeyi ye ’birime was that the majority of Ugandans are rural farmers. 

Since the demise of the Lint Marketing Board and Coffee Marketing Board, the state of survival for the farmers continues to be belittled. The time is now for Government, including our coming government, to renew concerns in the parastatals pertaining to farmers so that there is a fundamental change. Rest in peace, hon. Namaganda.

4.55
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, I stand to second this motion. 

First, I would like to add my voice to the voices of others who thanked hon. Ssemugaba for the kind attitude that he has. Kindness has become a rare commodity in this country. It is very easy for people to leave you on the roadside if you are involved in an accident. It happens for two reasons: the police may turn against you that you are the one who has caused the accident and the other is that people do not have time for others. That is why Ssemugaba is an important person that I would like to thank very much for trying to save the life of Susan Namaganda, who is lying here.

I would also like to extend my condolences to hon. Mbidde for the loss of your dear wife. If you did not know, it was only in Parliament that Susan was not speaking about Mbidde in her submissions. In all her speeches in the constituency, the name “Mbidde” would surface more than six times. She was a loving wife. I sympathise with you. I do not know how I would handle it myself, but we shall continue to pray for you.

As members of the Democratic Party, we have really lost an icon. Susan was a very powerful young woman who spoke with passion and moved crowds. She was respected by the old and young people in her constituency where she would call people by name. She was a marvellous debater both in the constituency and Parliament.

Madam Speaker, if at all God was a human being I would have led a demonstration against him for killing people in the Ninth Parliament. Very many lives have been lost in this Parliament and we have had a number of resolutions, especially concerning healthcare and the road carnage. I would have wanted to amend this motion so that Parliament resolves that the road to Masaka be dual carriage and then we can know that as Parliament we did our work to pass a resolution that Government is urged to make a dual carriage road from Kampala to Masaka. 

We will be blamed as Parliament for not taking action and our action is very easy; it is to urge Government, and it be recorded in the archives of the Ninth Parliament that we resolved that Government has been urged to make Masaka Road a dual carriage. We can then think about a success story; about passing a good resolution, which we have not done.

Madam Speaker, if you have allowed me, I would move that motion now without notice -

THE SPEAKER: You can move it.

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion without notice that Government be urged to make Masaka Road dual carriage. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Prime Minister, you can amend the motion.

4.59
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND THE DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, thank you for allowing me to make a small amendment to the motion of making Masaka Road a dual carriage. The amendment I would like to make is to add, “at the appropriate time”. I am just amending what has been proposed that Masaka Road be made dual carriage by the Government. I agree but I would like to add that they do it as soon as possible and at the appropriate time -(Interjections)- I am not sleeping. That is my amendment. Thank you. 

MS EKWAU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank all who have spoken before me - (Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, we wanted to dispose of the motion. I thought that you were going to put it to vote so that it is passed as a resolution of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you need the support of your colleagues? 

DR BAYIGGA: That is what I want. 

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you want your colleagues’ support on this matter? Therefore, let the Members say something about it.  

5.01
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I think all roads fairly 40 kilometres to the capital should be made dual carriage. If you compare the traffic on Masaka Road to that on Jinja Road, if you are a patriot, you would first call for Jinja Road.

If you compare it to Bombo Road, it is terrible. Therefore, the motion should be amended to say that all roads to the capital 40 miles to kilometre zero, which is the Post Office, should be dual carriage. I beg to move. 

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, again I would like to add, “as soon as possible.”  (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I thought that the “as soon as possible” may detract from the urgency with which we are speaking on this matter. I think it would be better to leave it as it is and we continue urging the Government but to say “as soon as possible” could mean 20 years. Let us take it with the urgency it deserves.

5.03
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I support the motion. I would like to pass on a message of condolence to hon. Mukasa Mbidde. Life will definitely never be the same. However, we pray that God gives you the ability to look after these young children.

I would like to thank the family that brought up hon. Susan Namaganda. At that age, leading this political trek and you walk out of it scandal free is not a life that you would call ordinary. I, therefore, pray that the good Lord takes your life and soul where you will live at peace. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment about the press. In yesterday’s Red Pepper, it was reported that hon. Susan Namaganda died in a car worth Shs 5,000,000. I would like the country to know that a Member of Parliament comes from the society. A Member of Parliament is just like any human being. These cars we drive are machines that break down. Therefore, you can find yourself under any circumstance and you are forced to move in any means of transport including a boda boda. 

A Member of Parliament is not an extraordinary human being. We do not fall from mars. We also want to encourage Ugandans not to hate politicians to this level. Even after someone is dead, a person writes such moreover the person who wrote this kind of article is well schooled and studied at a senior level but has no dot of sympathy because it is a Member of Parliament who died. Members of Parliament are relatives to you out there, have some dot of sympathy for us. 

The circumstances under which we work are terribly hard, above all being a mother. You leave a three-month-old baby and travel hundreds of miles away. Afterwards you rush back to that baby and make sure that life in that family continues. Therefore, it - (Member timed out.)

5.06
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to stand here to second the motion. 

Madam Speaker, it is a difficult moment to speak when we have lost a dear colleague. Today we are seated here where Susan used to be our neighbour. We are feeling empty because she is not here; she is in the coffin. It is my prayer that the Almighty God gives us courage. 

One thing I would like to say about the late regarding agriculture, which has not been said here, is that at one time when the President decided to take a drastic decision to address the problems in NAADS and picked the soldiers, hon. Susan Namaganda asked me why the President could not recruit the so many jobless agriculture graduates. He could have recruited the soldiers in the army. They are knowledgeable in that area. In my opinion, that made a lot of sense. I hope Government will take that advice. That was her proposal and she had a passion for agriculture. 

To my brother, my OB - we were in the same university hall with hon. Mbidde though he was a year behind me. Over the week we were together in Kigali and hon. Mbidde left us a day earlier on Thursday evening. He was one of the EALA members playing football with us. They even managed to beat us for the first time after four years. When he left, he said he was coming to meet his family and to help during this political time. That did not happen. He only came to meet a very tragic death. It is very unfortunate. The pain that you feel when you have lost a dear one can only be explained by those who have had the same experience, like me. 

Colleagues, remember in 2002 when I had just got to Parliament, I lost my spouse. It took me 10 years to try to compose myself. I can see and feel what hon. Mbidde is going through. Hon. Mbidde, if it needs crying, please do. If you need to have time for yourself alone, do it. It is one way of healing. We can only tell you here that we shall visit you and be with you. However, there is a time when we shall all leave and you remain alone and that is the most difficult time in that house, in that bed and in that bedroom. You need the hand of God. You need prayers. 

Colleagues, let us offer prayers for our brother to help him recover and raise his children as a single parent. It is a difficult time. You are a politician and there are so many challenges that you will face. Let us help our brother. We shall only continue praying and asking God to give you that courage to come out of this. 

May the good Lord grant our sister, Susan, a befitting place to be. Thank you. 

5.09
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion as presented by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. On behalf of the people of Kasese District, the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu, the FDC Women’s League and the women movement, I bring to you, Madam Speaker and the entire Parliament, condolences. Condolences to the Kabaka of Buganda, condolences to the people of Bukomansimbi, condolences to DP Women League and condolences to my brother, Mbidde, and the family for the loss of a national leader, a mother and above all a member of our generation.

It is quite sad that today we are here seated in Parliament to bid farewell to a young legislator, a promising national leader, a person whom you would never see getting hurt. I had never seen Susan annoyed for the time we have been here in Parliament. I had never seen Susan complaining; she always had a smile for everyone. To her, life was one of a smile. I just thank God that He enabled me to meet this pearl.

To hon. Mbidde, I will request you to let your children know that their mother was a pearl to the nation and to the entire world. May they live to let her candle continue burning; let Susan’s candle continue burning through her children.

Madam Speaker, the news of the death of Susan came to us at a time when we were in high spirits as women MPs of this Parliament. We had just secured victory in the East African Legislative Assembly Inter-Parliamentary Games. I remember last year when we went to Arusha, I met Susan there and she was pregnant. I jokingly said to her, “I am the captain of the ladies team, why have you not reported to me so that you will join us in Arusha? How did you come here?” She then laughed and said, “Winnie, I am now an international MP; I am no longer local. I come here as a Member of EALA.” We laughed it off. She then said that she must be there to see hon. Mbidde succeed. “I have to cheer him” she said. To tell you the truth, Mbidde played his best in that tournament. I realised that besides a successful man, there is a successful woman. Actually, Susan was a loving woman, wife and mother. It is unfortunate that she has just gone too soon.

There may be many other lessons that we would have learnt from Susan. I thought on arrival here – and we had planned that maybe on Tuesday, we shall be laying on the Table our trophies. I was ready to tell Susan that even in her absence, the EALA people smashed us. This was the first time since our Parliament participated in these games that EALA was taking the male trophy. I just wanted to share that with her that her husband again made it. Unfortunately, as soon as we jetted in at the airport, the messages started coming in of Susan’s death. 

When I received the message, I remember just asking, “Why now?” I still ask, “Why now?” Life should have been at where each one of us plays their part but Susan’s part had ended too early. We still enjoyed her presence in the world. Susan, so is the world; it is not a bed of roses! May the good Lord rest your soul in eternal peace.

5.12
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion. On behalf of the people of Moyo District and on my own behalf, I would like to pay condolences to hon. Mbidde and his family for the loss of our dear friend and colleague, hon. Susan Namaganda.

Madam Speaker, I got this message when I was preparing to travel in the night to Moyo District. However, when I saw the wreckage of her vehicle, it reminded me of the death of the late Balikowa who was in the Eighth Parliament; it reminded me of the death of Kyaka; it reminded me of the death of many of your children who were Members of Parliament and I got scared.

Honourable members have spoken a lot about road carnage and the challenges related to that. However, there is one big issue which I feel we must pay attention to. Our constituencies have put us under a lot of stress, under the burden of running up and down; should we continue to travel in the night? Many of our colleagues, including myself, do travel in the night just to catch up with pressure we get from the constituencies. Just recently, we almost perished together with hon. Bernard Atiku as we were travelling in the night. I really plead that the Parliament of Uganda, under your leadership, takes the lead in talking to our constituencies not to draw so many programmes for Members of Parliament. 

Just as the Prime Minister said here, hon. Susan Namaganda was in her constituency the whole day together with the Prime Minister. In the night, she had to travel to Kampala so that she could be able to catch up with another programme in the constituency. Road carnage is finishing us but we also have not given enough time to our own lives. I think with your support, we should be able to do something about it.

Otherwise, I would like to thank the late for really holding the symbol of the Democratic Party high up. She is the youngest. The symbol of DP is the hoe; the hoe means support to the farmers and that is what she really advocated for, not only for her constituency –(Member timed out.) 

5.15
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of West Moyo County and on my own behalf, I would like to extend sincere condolences to the bereaved family members and relatives, friends and in-laws to the Government of the Republic of Uganda and to all the people of Bukomansimbi for the demise of our dear beloved MP.

Madam Speaker, God gives and takes. It has happened and what we can only do is to have ourselves in prayer in order to encourage one another so that we endure and persevere this suffering and test. Hon. Namaganda is very young. Only at the age of 31 years, she was yet to fulfil what God had commissioned her to do on earth. She has left a lot of work not done. We are, therefore, going to mourn because of that.

However, we are grateful to God for all the services He enabled her to provide on earth. For instance, her dedicated work for the Parliament of Uganda, in the committees, for the people of Bukomansimbi and as a lover of agriculture, as a mother, as a God-fearing person and as an educationist. She used to call me musomesa because there was a time between 1989 and 1990 that I taught her relatives at Christ the King S.S. Kalisizo in Bulinda. That is why she always referred to me as musomesa.

She also loved sports. In 2014, when I got the second position in 100 meters, she encouraged me, praised me and said, “You are my father, hon. Aza. Thank you very much for having participated and for getting a silver medal.” It is because of her encouragement that this year, Madam Speaker, I got four medals in athletics. We are here to celebrate both her victories and her life and to remember her in all that she has been doing.

To you, the family members, take heart. God gives and He takes.

5.18
MS KYABANGI NAKATO (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Gomba, I also would like to support the motion.

As young as Susan was, she has been a role model to many. At Parliament, you would not find Susan in any clique and whenever I would meet her, she would seem busy but very jolly.

Madam Speaker, Susan was an Opposition Member of Parliament but we have been interacting with her freely. When she was organising her introduction, she invited all of us irrespective of our parties and we all got involved. Hon. Susan Namaganda has been a member of the Buganda Caucus. However, while in the caucus, though she loved her party, she would not talk about it just to give weight to Buganda issues.

We have been attending CBS radio shows with hon. Susan Namaganda but during her submissions, you would not hear her attack her colleagues. She would try to bring out her point without hurting anyone.

Accidents are very common on almost all the highways. In most cases it is the good Samaritans who rescue the victims and take them to hospitals. I would like to request the Government to provide stand-by ambulances along the highways so that the public does not look at the Government as leaving its duty to the good Samaritans. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.20
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadriri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My condolences to my brother, hon. Fred Mbidde and the orphans, and my colleague, the Secretary General of DP, hon. Mathias Nsubuga. 

Madam Speaker, in 1984, when hon. Susan Namaganda was born, I was in senior six. That means all my life after senior six is equal to her life. I have lost somebody who has been in the struggle and I feel bad that she has died at a young age. 

In the Seventh Parliament, we lost an Attorney-General, Francis Ayume. Instead of getting the report on the late hon. Ayume’s death, we just got Koboko District. It is high time we got reports on the accident of Ayume and in respect of my sister, hon. Namaganda.

In fact, in terms of agriculture, she would actually have been the one in-charge of Karamoja. These Karimojong would not be dying of hunger because she had very good ideas.

We thank our colleague who tried to save her on the way and took her to the hospital. She died in Nakasero Hospital. We are happy to talk about her because she was a Member of Parliament but under normal circumstances, other Ugandans who go to Mulago Hospital, Mbale Hospital, Arua Hospital - these hospitals themselves are sick! The medical staff there are sick and they are treating sick people. You would be lucky to come out because these hospitals do not have intensive care units. That is very dangerous for this Government of ours where we have been for 30 years.

Madam Speaker, I would like to support my brother, hon. Bayigga, on the issue of making Masaka Road and others like Jinja, Arua and Mbale dual carriage because all these are highways. We do not want to think about these issues of saying, “As soon as possible”. We should come up in affirmative that Government should install them. I have here a copy of the State-of-the-Nation Address by His Excellency President Museveni on 01 June 2010 and he said the following: “…given our increased self-sufficiency, however, we are going to tarmac the following roads using our own resources.” 

Madam Speaker, these are the roads: Mukono-Kyetume-Katosi; Kisoga-Nyenga; – and Byandala did something - Muyembe-Namalu-Nakapiripirit; Nadotiko-Moroto - we are happy that the World Bank is now helping us on this. I would like to pick those of interest: Kapchwora-Bukwo-Suam, Mbale-Bubulo-Magale, Buwumbo-Lwakhakha. Six years down the road, these roads have not been done! 

Our President, who is the NRM candidate, when he was in the Bugisu region, had to use helicopters for four-kilometre distances because the roads were impassable. He would go four kilometres and stop and jump into the helicopter again. (Laughter) That demonstrates how bad the roads are in Bugisu and I believe that is how bad the roads are everywhere.

Therefore, for these highways to have dual carriage, we need to come up with affirmative action on them. Whenever we lose a colleague, we raise a lot of things; roads, health and many others however after burial, we forget. Why? Have they bewitched us in Parliament? Why don’t we, after passing it, follow it up?

5.24
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Prime Minister, I would like to thank colleagues for their contribution and for supporting the motion, and also for giving consoling words to the bereaved family.

On my behalf, that of my family and all mourners who have heard of this tragic death, I stand here to express my sincere condolences. We do express sadness for the demise of our colleague.

I also stand here to share experience with my learned colleague, hon. Mukasa Mbidde, that he will be going through challenges for the departure of his dear one. There will be a time like this, as somebody said here, when people will always be with you at home and at burial but there will be a time when everybody will go away. That is the moment you will find it very difficult. 

There are many challenges you will face and I am also thinking one of the serious challenges is these young children left with you; they do not know what is happening. A time will come when they will ask you about their mother; you will have to be strong. 

Again I would like to sympathise with you that your wife left you at this tender age of 31 with these children, and your religion does not allow you to marry more than one woman. At least for some of us, if it happens you can easily adjust. However, I can see your problem. It will take your time to adjust but we pray to the Almighty to give you strength. 

I would also like to appreciate that our late colleague who has just left us at 31, got an opportunity to become a Member of Parliament because Bukomansimbi was made a district, a policy which many people were opposing. However, many of our colleagues here who come on that ticket representing women in the district had that opportunity. If that policy was not there probably this opportunity would not have been there. On behalf of the beneficiaries of this policy including our departed colleague, we would like to thank the Government for this policy.

Madam Speaker, from my own experience sitting in this House, there are very many of us of different calibre and different ages but she had emerged as one of the promising future leaders and one of the most tolerant. Many of us do not tolerate each other especially when some of us with ugly faces stand here to talk, there are a lot of shouts -(Laughter)

Some even said I sleep when I do not, they wanted me to sleep; those are not tolerant -[HONOURABLE MEMBER: “Order!”]- Don’t you see that one on order? (Laughter) These are the issues I am comparing. The late has been tolerant and disciplined. 

She was sworn in as a DP Member but she did not misbehave just because DP misbehaved. She was a disciplined MP; we will miss her. Some of us, old as we are, are actually consoled with such leaders who promise that the future is good for us because we do not know this future of Uganda. If it is handed to unknown hands it becomes a problem to some of us because some of them who are showing that one time, God forbid, if they come to power, things will be different.

My learned colleague, I would like to pray to the Almighty Allah to give you strength so that you stand firm and when time comes to get another Susan, take time and be firm. You cannot spend life without another person; you need somebody to come and help you bring up these children. 

May her soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the question is that the motion be amended as proposed by hon. Kivumbi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do resolve as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion, as amended, agreed to.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to reassure hon. Mbidde that we have secured a police lead vehicle to take you to Bukomansimbi so that you do not have the problems you had getting here in the morning. We have got that to assist you to take Susan home.

Honourable members, it will be difficult for us to sit when the funeral service is going on. House will be adjourned to Wednesday at 2.00 p.m. so that we are able to go and give a dignified farewell to a friend of so many. House is adjourned to Wednesday at 2.00 p.m.

The Clerk is directed to extract the text of the Hansard and the tribute and hand them to hon. Mbidde and the children. 

I had already invited you to commence work on the budget framework paper tomorrow but when this happened, we had to move it forward. We are going to be here until 23rd December.

Parliament has arranged for transport; it will leave at 9.00 a.m. Please, come early. The buses will be parked at the South Wing parking area.

East African Community Anthem

National Anthem

(Exit of the late hon. Susan Namaganda.)

(The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 December 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 
