Thursday, 24 December 2015

Parliament met at 11.21 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and thank you for making the time to be here at this particular time, because it takes more than sacrifice for us to be here at this time. I congratulate you for the effort you have made to be here today. Duty calls; so we are here.

Allow me alter the Order Paper to accommodate the report of the Committee on National Economy or rather a motion for a loan request by the Government to borrow up to SDR 10.7 million, equivalent of US$ 15 million from the International Development Association as additional financing to support the East African Public Health Laboratory Networking Project. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2015

11.24
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. I beg to lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it accompanied by the necessary documentation?

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, a certificate of financial implications for the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2015 is also with me here and I beg to lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that rule 15 that requires these Bills to be referred to the relevant committee be suspended in accordance with rule 118 and that the Bill is considered by the whole House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Motion seconded by Member for Rushenyi, Member for Kiboga, Member for Jonam – I think the secondments are enough. (Laughter) Would you like to speak to your motion?

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2015” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you haven’t justified your motion.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to further amend the definitions of “terrorism” – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, why do you want to suspend the rule? Why are you seeking leave of the House to suspend the rule?

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, we are bound by some international obligations that we have already signed and if we do not process this Bill urgently, we will be suspended from the international accreditations that we have already got. So, I would request that we move and have this Bill considered so that we are within the obligations that we have already signed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to help the House; why is this Bill urgent and why must we suspend the normal rules of referring this Bill to the committee to handle it? That is the justification you need to give the House so that the House can take a decision on it and we move.

MR JACHAN OMACH: Mr Speaker, we have the financial action taskforce, which is an international organisation that deals with issues of anti-money laundering internationally. It also deals with issues of anti-terrorism financing, and this is being outlawed all-over the world; and Uganda is to comply by 21 January 2016 without fail.

Otherwise, as a country, we shall be blacklisted and we shall not have any international transactions as far as finances are concerned. This will be detrimental to the economy. So, this is why we are requesting that we suspend rule 118 to enable us take this to the Committee of the whole House and be able to pass these amendments. And Mr Speaker, these amendments, as you see, are only three. I so submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that is before the House is for the suspension of rule 118 to enable the House sit as a Committee of the whole House and process this Bill – handle its second reading immediately without reference to the committee. I now propose a question for this motion. That is the motion before you and debate starts now.

11.30
MR EDDY KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to thank the minister and the Minister of State for Finance. However, I am not convinced as to why we should suspend the rule because this Bill is housed in the docket of planning. Therefore, we would like to know when that Bill became an emergency, who was responsible and what functions has the appointing authority put on that person who has not performed his work for us to be rushed. 

Lack of planning on your part should not make us rush. I even thought that we had come here for other business that was of urgency, Mr Speaker. Therefore, unless we are convinced as to why and when that emergency came, I will decline my support. I thank you.

11.31
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It perturbs me; has Uganda become a member of the international community overnight that you ambush us and you want to rush us to pass a Bill as if you did not know that you have got an obligation to effect payments to international organisations? You have obligations and this should have been known earlier. 

Mr Speaker, we came for different business - the budget; that is what brought us here. You are now ambushing us with a Bill of anti-terrorism that we must pass immediately. Didn’t we know? Isn’t Uganda a member of international bodies that we must pay our obligations? This is what we have been talking about. Uganda is always embarrassed when we go for international conferences at the UN and the AU carrying a draft at the last moment and we want this to stop so that we are not ambushed at the last moment that we come up with such Bills. Mr Speaker, we came for different business this morning.

11.32
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I picked a copy of this Bill as I walked into Parliament today for other business as the Member for Mbale Municipality has said. In fact, from where I picked this Bill, I asked a colleague; how many times do we have to amend the anti-terrorism law? This is because this Parliament has just processed a Bill; my chairperson of the Committee on Defence is here. It is just about two or three months ago when we amended the Anti-Terrorism Bill. The explanation then was as the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has given it now. 

In fact as a committee, we said yes our hands are tied because once there are international obligations, then we are bound to fulfil the commitment we made. Can the minister tell this Parliament what happened to the amendment that this Parliament processed? Was it not enough for you to bring an amendment within two or three months? You make this Parliament look ridiculous. 

We finished the Public finance law here and before it is applied, we are coming here for an amendment; did this Government go on holiday? I can understand politicians like us who are campaigning but what about the civil servants? You pass a law and within two months you return to Parliament saying, please can you add this one? In this century! Do you have researchers in ministries or are you running them as kiosks where you enter and get out and then along the way you discover you have not done something.

Mr Speaker, I can understand but we cannot allow this kind of stampede that we have a Cabinet of 80 people and all they do is to bring a clause every after two months saying, “Please can you also handle this, we had forgotten.” If you went on holiday together with civil servants, just tell the country that we are no longer functioning. 

This is the embarrassment you are causing to yourself. Presidential candidates visiting health facilities that are in dire need of renovation and all you do is to bring policemen. Do we have a Government that is functioning? Two months later you are bringing a second amendment and you are giving the same explanation - international obligation? Why didn’t you bring it together? What has happened to justify another amendment within two months?

11.35
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri West County, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we should be a respected Parliament. I have no objection to being stampeded when there is an emergency. However, how can you bring such a law where you want Parliament to suspend all their rules and regulations so that it is amended within 30 minutes?  We are making a mistake. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to remind – and I am not threatening you – you should never accept such because there are things on your back as a Speaker in that Chair, which have taken place. The Public Order Management Act, the Oil Bills; do not accept this also to be added on you. I am raising all this – (Interruption) 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Member’s contributions on this motion are genuine and we are all concerned. But when hon. Nandala Mafabi attacks the presiding officer to insinuate that where you are seated, you have caused grave mistakes in handling The Public Order Management Act and he was going ahead to mention that - from his submission, he was actually intimidating you as a presiding officer and yet this is nothing to do with a presiding officer.

You are presiding and the decision is for the House. Is he really in order to digress and attack the presiding officer instead of raising the genuine points that members are raising, which I also support but we will raise more justification as to why we should suspend rules? When he attacks I feel uncomfortable. Is he, therefore, in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you just go even by my size and the protection of the Chair that I have, I cannot be intimidated by any Member. (Applause) The honourable member was expressing an opinion and he seeks to rely on some history which he wants to use, it is within his discretion to do that provided he does not offend the dignity of the House. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, be sure I will never offend the dignity of the House. I only bring history to help make a case and that is where I leave it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The reason I am raising this is that our House should not be used as a boxing tool. The Executive should do their work. I will give the chronology of events; even you said that Uganda amended the anti-terrorism law in June 2015 to address the financial action taskforce. I am sure the United Nations did not raise this thing yesterday. I am sure there is something that you want to cure especially in this election period. That is what you are looking at. 

I would like to warn you people who bring such laws and I would like to repeat it for the last time and I will never do it again. There are people I want to mention in this House; by then you used to sit where hon. Mwiru is sitting. There was a man called Dan Kiwalabye and I have quoted him many times. When we were making the constitutional amendments he said, “We do not want to put independents in our constitution” and he swore over his dead body. He went for primaries in Kiboga where hon. Ruth Nankabirwa the Government Chief Whip comes from. He was the first person to become an independent - (Laughter) – and we made him suffer because I used to sit behind him.

When they were making a law here of detention without trial, there were seven ministers on that front bench who said that this law should have passed the other day. That was Balaki Kirya from our area, Magezi, to mention but a few. Three days after passing the law, it was applicable to them. 

Thirdly, I told you that over 50 per cent of you would not make it in primaries. I think the answer has come out. You went there, they beat you and you know what happened. You may be making this law for the Opposition but it might affect you - (Interjection) – Yes; yesterday, the Speaker and I were all in UPC. He left me and went to NRM and I am in FDC; UPC is no more or it is in limbo. (Laughter). Therefore, do not assume that the NRM is not going to “die”.

Fourth, you Members of Parliament assume you have reached everywhere. As we talk, many of you are in problems financially - (Interjection) - you may not be among them. Hon. Byandala was in prison recently because he wanted to make it better - (Laughter). These are the things we must know but we must be careful not to do it for the sake of owning it.

I know many of them are here. Therefore, we want to amend the law but let us follow the rules; let us follow the justification. The Bill was published on 11 December 2015 and barely two weeks, they are bringing it to be amended. However, we have so many laws; for example if you looked at the business to follow - I will show you one; The Uganda Development Corporation Bill, 2014. This is the Bill that is going to fight poverty but nobody is talking about it. 

The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2015; this affects our children. The National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012 is here. The Retirement Benefits Sector Pension Liberalisation Bill, 2011 which the current Minister for Internal Affairs was very interested in. Now she has left it because she is in Internal Affairs; she thinks she has arrived and she is bringing the one in which she is interested in now. This way of operation is very bad for our country -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to wind up? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by pleading with you and the House that please, let the Bill go to the committee so that we give our views. Nowadays, we are used; even if you called us on New Year’s Day, we shall be here. Today, we were supposed to be away but we are here. 

However, to stampede us when we are supposed to go home and have Christmas with our families and our voters, is very unfair. We came here for the budget, which we know we are going to discuss for some time and we know it will take time. We may not conclude it today because we have issues to raise but do not bring something to divert us. 

We would like to plead with the frontbench that this country belongs to all of us. Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, this country belongs to all of us [MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: “Address the Chair.”] I know why I am addressing you because you were among the parliamentary youth. By then you were sensible but now you have become insensible because you are now sitting on the front bench - (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I have not lost any of my senses. I am very sober and I was watching with respect, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who is speaking with strength and I think that is why he is wearing that tie. However, when he was addressing us, he mentioned that I am becoming insensible because I have become a Government Chief Whip which is not true.

Secondly, instead of addressing the Speaker, he is addressing individual members of Parliament and forgetting our rules. I understand that he is going through difficult times during this period - (Laughter) - I really appreciate and that is why he is attacking everybody and UPC. I really understand and pray that God presides over him until 18 February 2016. 

Is he therefore in order to lose his head - (Laughter) – because that is not the Nandala-Mafabi I know. Is he in order to have left his head at home and come and begin defiling our rules and attacking everybody including the Chair? Can he be heard -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: My point of order is very pregnant - (Laughter) – and that is what I am delivering. I am very uncomfortable with how he is addressing us in the House. I do not know whether he is in order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reference to insensibility offends our rules of courtesy to each Member and hon. Nandala-Mafabi you might need to withdraw that particular statement and proceed and conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I withdraw and apologise to my sister, Ruth Nankabirwa, for having delivered a non-pregnant rule of order. You are right I am going through hardships because you remember Ntungamo, they beat our people; in Acholi they did the same. Last night they hit our team with tear gas in Atiak; so, I am going through tough times. I would like to tell you that if you stopped those bad habits, the tough times would not be there. That is all I wanted to say.

However, having said that, Mr Speaker, I am just pleading. In fact our colleague, hon. Betty Aol, was almost killed. Those are the hard times I am going through. Even your side when they beat you during the primaries, they were hard times for me because you are my friend. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to plead that we follow our rules and take our amendments to the committee so that we follow the normal procedures. However, for now, let us do the business that brought us. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this debate should not have taken us this long. I am going to ask the minister whether she wants me to put this to vote or whether she wants to reconsider and find a way we can move forward.

11.48
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I, first of all, want to make some clarification. The factors that are making us behave like this are external and it is because we have to conform to obligations that we have assented to internationally.

This body - the FATF - which has a lot to do with anti-terrorism and anti-money laundering is a body that is so dynamic and because of this dynamism, they keep amending their rules. Once standards are amended, even the countries that have signed to conform to these standards have to amend their laws in order to conform to the standards.

Mr Speaker, when this Anti-terrorism Bill was brought here in June, Parliament made amendments that did not conform to the requirements of the FATF. It is because of those amendments that now we have to again amend this Bill in order to conform.

Secondly, the FATF -(Interruption)

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I appreciate where my colleague comes from because she is quite new in this position. She is aware that as a country, we have a problem which we are not even addressing in this Bill. 

The last time this Bill was here, we attempted to define terrorism to conform to international standards. The Government objected and instead decided to define terrorism by acts. Terrorism is very universal that the moment you attempt to define it by acts, every other day you will come back here. 

Instead, what the international community did is to have a universally adopted definition of terrorism which you have failed to conform to and make part of the law. Our attempt last time was to define terrorism so that for all these other small things, we do not need to come back here and amend the law every day. You are doing the same. You will be back here after the next three months because as per international law, terrorism keeps on changing. 

Therefore, all that we would like to ask is that do not attempt to bring this Bill now. You will not address the problem. Take it to the committee and define terrorism to conform to the international definition. Once you do that, every other aspect will be easily handled. That was the passionate debate we had last time here. The then minister objected and now we are back to square one. We cannot move in circles. 

What I would like you to clarify is that you are not addressing the problem. This taskforce will keep changing every day. Terrorism is an amorphous phenomenon in the world. It changes faces every day even in America. What you should do is to adopt an internationally accepted definition of terrorism once and for all. You are not helping our cause. Thank you.

MS AKOL: Thank you, honourable colleague. I just want to further explain that once we conform to international bodies, this is what we have to go through. The international definition that has been given by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), which all countries must put in their laws is what is in this Bill. The amendment on an act of terrorism is what we have to put in our law here which has been given by the international body.

Financial Action Task Force (FATF) also passed a new standard to fight terrorism which requires all countries to criminalise the financing of terrorism as well as training of terrorists. This also requires the amendment of the anti-terrorism laws that we have as a country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the debate is not whether the amendment is required or not. The debate is whether it is necessary not to send it to the committee. That is why I asked whether you would like me to put the issue of suspension of rule 118 to vote or you would want to say something about it. The Bill is not dead by referring it to the committee.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I know we are in a very difficult situation as we have to go for campaigns. However, at the same time if we do not amend our laws by 15th January, we will be blacklisted as a country. We will not be able to perform certain financial transactions. 

Since we will be breaking off today, my request is that these are only three amendments and are straight forward. I beg that the House proceeds to consider the Bill. If that is not possible, then I request that we get a commitment from colleagues that at the beginning of January, we shall come and reconsider this Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you now withdrawn your motion for suspension of rule 118?

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I stick with the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like me to put it to a vote, honourable minister?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I would like to plead with hon. Akol that you have even seen the commitment of Members by coming here on the 24th. Give the committee time to look at this amendment. Give the country time. If we have to come on the Christmas Eve, it shows that we are committed. Even if you said 28th or 29th, we will be able to be here. If you say it is on 8th  January, we will be here because we have shown this commitment.

When you look at this proposed amendment of section 3(2)(a) of the principal Act, there is where you say, (b) by inserting immediately after section (1) the following: “(ii) without prejudice to subsection (1), the minister may make regulations…” when you go to (c) you say, “to prescribe a penalty in respect of any contravention of the regulations including a fine not exceeding 250 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years”. This is legislative work. We cannot give a minister this power. 

Therefore, you can see there are very many things that need to be looked at. We have also just got this thing here. We need to go deeper into it. Give us time. We shall be able to get here like we have always done.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I have understood that Members are willing to come back here after Christmas - after Christmas can be before the end of the year or in January – to consider this Bill. Therefore, in the interest of harmony with Members, I submit that the Bill be referred to the committee -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Withdraw your motion for suspension.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, with due respect, I withdraw the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Motion withdrawn. The Bill stands referred to the appropriate committee to handle expeditiously and to report to the House on the process of how we will proceed with this matter.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE MINIMUM WAGE BILL, 2015

11.59
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Mr Speaker and honourable members, you recall that on 21 February 2013, Parliament granted me leave to introduce a Bill entitled, “The Minimum Wage Bill, 2013”. 

Mr Speaker, after many communications to the Ministry of Finance, on 17 March 2015, the Clerk to Parliament requested the Ministry of Finance in accordance with section 76(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 to examine the Bill and issue a certificate of financial implication. The Ministry of Finance did not respond -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for first reading of the Bill.

MR RWAKAJARA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I, therefore, move that the Bill entitled, “The Minimum Wages Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it 2015 or 2013?

MR RWAKAJARA: It is 2015, Mr Speaker. I was just granted leave in 2013. (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order on this Bill. It is because I recall when Parliament was about to consider this Bill, it was decided that the Member liaises with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs to come up with an appropriate law and the Bill was suspended. 
By the time I left that Ministry, we had gone a long way in preparing a Bill on the same subject. I am now informed by the minister holding the portfolio that Government is ready to present this very Bill-(Interjections)- Would it be in order, therefore, for the private Member to continue presenting this Bill in defiance of the agreement that we had when Government is bringing the same Bill?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, the Learned Attorney-General knows that the rules do not permit us to debate anything in anticipation. (Applause) He has not brought any Bill. There is no Bill from the Government on this issue. 

The Member was granted leave by this House; a request for a certificate of financial implication was made; it has not been responded to. However, that is now cured by section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. That is no longer an issue and it has been clarified that the certificate of financial implications should not act as a bar to a Member’s right. (Applause) The certificate is simply to say the Bill can be accommodated and the implementation can be or cannot be accommodated now. That is all that is required from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Parliament can then take a decision as to when the commencement of the Bill should kick in if money is not available to implement it.

Therefore, this Bill is properly brought and it shall be acted upon as such, even in the absence of a certificate of financial implication because under section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the Member is covered to present this Bill.

Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) The motion is seconded by hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Joshua Anywarach, hon. Jacob Oboth, hon. Eddie Kwizera, hon. Raphael Magyezi and hon. Jovah Kamateeka.

The Bill is properly before the House. The Bill stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling so that it can advise the House on how to proceed with this.
Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

12.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Jacan Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Financial Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2015”, be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_)It is seconded by the Minister of Internal Affairs, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Minister in charge of Luwero. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, the objects of this Bill are: 

To amend the Financial Institutions Act, 2004; 
To provide for Islamic banking, to provide for bank assurance;
To provide for agent banking; 
To provide for special access to credit reference bureaus by other accredited credit providers and service providers; 
To reform the deposit protection funds and for related purposes. I so submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that, “The Financial Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read the second time. When this Bill was introduced, it was referred to the committee. I now ask the committee to report on this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Today is 24 December 2015. Under normal circumstances, we would be buying meat, chicken and other items. (Laughter) We should be fair to ourselves. Some of us are traveling to the mountains of the sun, there are those going to Kasese and other places.

We had thought, we would be here for one hour and leave at around midday. Driving at night - unless you want to bring more bodies here to pray for. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the Financial (Amendment) Bill, 2015 is not something urgent. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right if the budget is not ready, we go away and come back on 15th or 20th of January 2016? 

I have just talked to somebody here who has left her family in a hotel because she had said they were going away today. She has left her husband and the children at the hotel and she is here. (Laughter) I am the Secretary General of FDC and I get information. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, would it not be procedurally right that since the budget cannot come in, you allow us go? Let us come back on 15 January 2016 to deal with this problem.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, today is Christmas Eve. When we were being whipped, some of us were told we must handle the budget and we were prepared to come and stay here for two hours and do that. 

Therefore, in the event that the Budget Committee is not ready, let us not be time wasters. Let us go and come back next week because we are not going out of the country. Mr Speaker, I appeal to you to have a feeling for the Members. I thank you.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You called upon the minister who was attentively listening and we have three Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who all seemed to have either refused to respond or ignored.

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it, therefore, be sufficient evidence before you that the budget process is delayed and you grant the motion moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, seconded by hon. Kwizera and supplemented by hon. Oboth?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not hear any motion moved.

12.10
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I cannot remember the one that suspends everything but I would like to move a motion of emergency nature that you allow us to travel upcountry early for Christmas. This is because the budget has delayed and you have the capacity as the Chair of the House to suspend this sitting. We could come either next week or next year. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to plead with you that you grant this motion -(Interjections)- the House should go home and come back next week to handle this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a motion for adjournment of the House. Is the motion seconded? Can we get a middle ground on this? The report on the Budget Framework Paper is ready. The circumstances of the electoral year are the ones that are bringing this confusion.

Ordinarily, by law, the Budget Framework Paper should have been brought by the 31st of this month. Therefore, it has been brought forward because the decisions and the discussions should be completed by 15th January. By that time, this House will be in the peak of engagement with the re-election campaigns. That is why it was brought forward so that we could handle it before that date. 

However, it is now becoming apparent that there are some difficulties. The report is ready. I have a copy here and I have been advised that it is now on the iPads and everything. 

The guidance I wanted from the minister is to advise us on what we should do as a priority. Should we receive a report of the committee and take a decision after that or should we go by the motion proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi? Let us find a middle way, if we can find it. 

12.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to inform this House on two issues: There are loan applications, which will expire if we do not approve them. These loans form part and parcel of the budget. 

Therefore, I need your guidance, Mr Speaker. We have to consider the loans. If you want me to bring the data and show you how long these loans have been in Parliament, I can do that. However, I thought that was unnecessary - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I asked you that we should find middle ground. The Budget Framework Paper was the focus of this meeting. Please, guide us on which one is a priority now. This is in order for us to see what we can do. 

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I strongly suggest that we look at the loans. (Interjections) I have said that these loans form part of the budget. As I said -(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I rise to seek clarification on whether this House handling the loan first would be better than handling the Budget Framework Paper, which one would by serious legal implications render me and you jobless? 

If it is both, at least they are not competing. The budget is the main one that carries the loan. If we do the budget, until you help me, it would also help the loan. The loan would have urgency because it is part of the budget. I thought that way and forgive my ignorance in matters of loans. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The current Budget Framework Paper we are talking about, which is with the Budget Committee, relates to the budget for the next financial year.

The loans, which are before us and actually have been before Parliament for some months, are part of the resource envelope, which we approved for the current financial year. Therefore, these loans are part of the resources that you appropriated for the current financial year. 

The Budget Framework Paper relates to the following year and the law requires us to pass it. Earlier on, we had agreed that due to the fact that we are breaking off and coming back in March, we should sort this thing out before we break off. That was the spirit with which the Speaker made the committee work long and hard so that we can be able to do that. 

Mr Speaker, there are loans, which are time-bound and they have been with Parliament. The Committee on National Economy has worked long and hard for three days to make sure that they process these loans. Now that we have come to the House and are here, the time we spent debating the procedural issues could have been used to finish one or two loans. I thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, for the time I have been in this Parliament, this has become a habit. On the last day when Parliament is going on recess, it has now become routine that there must be one, two, three or four loan requests that are usually processed at the edge. As we are about to go on recess, those loan requests are brought up. 

We receive a report here on loans every year. In the report from the Minister of Finance, we pay interest on $4 billion of loans approved but not yet used by Government. In fact, last financial year, we paid more than $5 million interest. They are loans processed by this Parliament and approved by the lenders but they are not utilised. 

It is your report. I read this report every year, whenever it is brought here. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is now telling Parliament that if we do not pass this one, the world is coming to an end. 

Mind you, Mr Speaker, the motion hon. Nandala-Mafabi had moved is the motion that he read neither to the Budget Framework Paper nor to the loan, but to the current threshold. People must go for Christmas. 

How will the country judge us when we are here and the biggest part of our mind is in the constituency and our homes? Then the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes up and says this matter is very important. As we are in that frame of mind, we must pass it. The minister says two or three hours. 

The procedural issue I am raising is that you summoned us on Christmas Eve to come and deal with the Budget Framework Paper. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is saying we leave it and their priority is the loans. 

Mr Speaker, are we proceeding –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: In mathematics, there is what we call commutative law; order does not matter as long as things are moving. 

The information I would like to give you is; one, we have not paid $5 billion for interest because this would mean Shs 15 trillion. That correction must be made in the Hansard.

Secondly, we have said that our priority would be – because that was the question from the Speaker - out of these items on the agenda tell us your priorities and we have said that the Budget Framework Paper and loans, which are before us, would be our priority as we speak.

You have gone ahead to say how will a country judge you to come here before – we are already here. How will it be judged that we are really here and we are going to take two hours on procedural issues and then leave, when we could actually do some business?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was still a procedural point which –

MR SSEMUJJU: The procedural issue I am raising is whether it is procedurally right to summon us on the eve of Christmas to deal with the Budget Framework Paper and then finance ambushes us with what they think is their top priority; that is passing loans, the same style that we have been dealing with loans. On days we are going for recess, various requests are turned in, sometimes up to ten requests. 

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, a motion was moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and it was seconded. Earlier on, we had business of the Committee on National Economy; another business emerged for the Budget Framework Paper.

When you asked the minister to guide the House, he introduced another business of loans. That shows you that there is constitutional conflict or stress in Cabinet and Members of Parliament.

Would it not be procedurally right for us to dispose of the motion moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and we go. When Government is organised, we come next week and deliberate. I thank you.  (Applause)  

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do appreciate the Members’ arguments. Today is the 24th December and we are supposed to be travelling to our constituencies. However, you asked the minister to guide as to what is important. We have already been told that we can have this budget passed not later than 15 January, 2016.

The implication is that we can find time and come back in early January to deal with this budget. However, Mr Speaker, the minister indicated that the loans are urgent. (Interjections)  Yes, I just would like to give information.

The East African Public Health Laboratory loan, which we are asking Parliament to pass - we are already running out of time. This loan was brought to this House, if I recall, in August 2015. It is a loan that actually supports the Public Health Laboratory within the East African region.

Four countries are implementing projects under this loan and it is not the first time. We received a batch of this loan in 2011 and this would be the second batch, which we are supposed to receive to complete our work of strengthening the Public Health Laboratory in our country.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I just would like to indicate that –(Interjections)- can I be allowed to make my case? This loan is supposed to have commenced or we should have had the project starting by 31st December of this year. We are, therefore, requesting that if colleagues can accept, this is part of the initial loan that was long passed -(Interruption)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, Parliament has been on all this time. Today is the 24th December. What we knew was that we are coming for the Budget Framework Paper, not loans. If this has been pending from August, where were you? Why didn’t you bring this early? 

Is it in order for you to bring it today, when we were set for something else not for loans? Is that not stampeding Parliament? Are you in order? Is the minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a situation here that we need to deal with. The Order Paper that was brought clearly has not been prioritised. It is Government business, it is certainly overloaded, but we had hoped that in the spirit of facilitating the budget process, we would make some progress with some items.

We have spent all this time with suspension of rules on something that was not urgent and other matters that were not necessary, motions and all kinds of things. It has affected us and the time we have lost will certainly affect our output today.

I had asked a very simple question that, now that we are already here, if there is one thing that we must do, we must be guided on that particular thing that we must do. 

However, you seem to be running around, not even knowing which one is most urgent and it is not very clear. The pressure is on all the Members, can we make a compromise, please? If you are going to guide the House, you would have already done that by now. Can we make a compromise and I seek the indulgence of the Leader of the Opposition, to say something about it. Can we seek to do possibly one thing at least, just one? We can leave the rest after we have something done.

12.29
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are supposed to be campaigning. The time you gave us expired yesterday. Some of us have been here since Monday; some of the Members are not here and are campaigning quietly.

Mr Speaker, you also know this, you have been up there doing something for yourself. (Laughter) I would like Government to respect this House. We agreed in the Business Committee what we are going to discuss. We prioritised with the Deputy Prime Minister in attendance. The Government seems to have forgotten that and they are bringing in all sorts of things. 

Other parliaments are prorogued; we never do that to ours. We also have a problem of the change in the process of doing the budget. So, we agreed to do what the Government wants us to do. But we were called here to come and discuss the Budget Framework Paper and we were supposed to do that only because of the law we made ourselves. Now the minister is telling us about the loans and among them is the one for stabilising the shilling - $200 million. Is that part of the budget? I think let the Government decide now on the agenda and what the priority is today.

However, before that, I beg that we dispose of hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s motion and if hon. Nandala-Mafabi carries the day, we go home. We can agree on which date again; we can come back but most likely after elections -(Interjections)– yes, but you see honourable members, what type of Parliament goes into election - ideally we are not supposed to even be here as Members of Parliament. Anyway, we can agree on when we shall come back but the way I see the frame of mind of everybody, I don’t think we can do any sensible debate and discussion of any matter in this House this afternoon. Thank you.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Bills that were proposed today are all related to the FATF (Financial Action Task Force), which is intending to blacklist Uganda. That is why we had brought this as our priority number one - the anti-terrorism, the Financial Institutions Bill and all those.

The second issue is about the loans most of which are part and parcel of the financial year that is pertaining, as part of the resource envelop. And we had thought that this would be handled fast enough to give us time to finalise with the Budget Framework Paper. That is how Government had arranged all these. Now we request your indulgence that -(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, honourable minister. At least you are a senior at the Ministry of Finance. The two ministers know that this country has got $5 billion of loans that were approved and have not been used at all yet we are paying fines for that.

Secondly, you know that there is a Bill that you brought up since August, according to the Minister of State for Health –we have officers from the Ministry of Finance seated there.  Couldn’t those officers advise you that you were running out of time so you could bring this to the Floor of Parliament to dispose of it? We would have no problem with that at all. 

However, you call us for a different business and you know the mood of Members of Parliament today - we are getting calls from our constituents, they are waiting for us but we are seated here with the banks closing. There is a motion that was moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I request that we dispose of that motion. 

But also, Mr Speaker, when you look around the House, we do not even have quorum. We are discussing these issues on the Floor of Parliament fait accompli. I would request all these friends of mine to put it off –(Interruption)- they are my friends, including hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere; he was one time my minister. Everybody in this House is my friend. Otherwise, we are not going to get anything because there is no quorum in the House. If we go against the rules of Parliament and we pass a Bill without the quorum, it can be taken to court.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, finally.

MR OMACH: For the Bills, we said yes, we can come back maybe in January, but for the loans, there are those that we are requesting and most of them are straight forward - we would like to thank the Committee on the National Economy that sat over this weekend to finalise this for us to be able to look through them today. So, we would at least pick some of these and finalise with the Budget Framework Paper. That is the request from Government.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Omach Fred, my former colleague in the finance committee. In the Budget Framework Paper, we are looking for Shs 200 billion to capitalise Bank of Uganda again. But the loans you are looking for are the following: one is to borrow $ 200 million to stabilise the exchange rate but why don’t you get the $ 200 billion to be used to capitalise Bank of Uganda and you stabilise the exchange rate - (Interruption) - please relax because we deal in Uganda shillings.

The other information is that you want money for the inland port at Bukasa. Three is you want to support the project of clustering agriculture. But we can continue supporting up to next year. However, there is the fourth that you want money to finance the sanitation programme phase II. But we can also do that next year. There is the request for the money to conserve the forests, but who told you to destroy them in the first place? That can also wait till next year.

You also said that we want money to do with fish management resource - fish is there and we have now even allowed fishermen to fish without the law because the police have been stopped from enforcing the laws. Now, what do you want to do? That can wait until the election end then we deal with it.

You further said that we want to borrow money to do industrial parks power transmission stations. Which park? Mbale Industrial Park has not taken off; even Namanve which is near has never taken off. What is your worry? That can be done next year. 

Seven, you said we want money for Musizi Hydro Power Station. But that can also wait because even Karuma has not taken off. So, what is the priority here? 

Mr Speaker, why I am reading is to show that there is nothing urgent here. I would plead with you that you consider my motion because it was overwhelmingly supported. 

Mr Speaker, I am sure, if I checked your mind, I would get to know that you are a beneficiary of this motion. (Laughter) Okay, I withdraw that. 

But Members, Parliament is not coming to an end. We can come on the 15 January 2016 on special arrangement - honourable members, you know what you benefit. Let it be a special arrangement so that you can also benefit from this cause. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, consider my motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me propose this and we see how it goes. The Budget Framework Paper is not late; it can be handled at an appropriate time. They have actually brought it forward because it should have been brought on 31 December this month, and our Parliament should have considered and handled it by 15 January 2016. But because of the election period, they brought it forward. So, we are not late.

However, honourable members, there is a loan. I am not talking about the stabilisation and those other things. There is this one on additional financing to support the East African Public Health Laboratory Networking Project. We might need to consider that because it is the one that is strengthening our Ebola monitoring systems, and all the other public health issues to set up these things to link up with the rest of East Africa so that there is a comprehensive response strategy for this thing. 

It also has a timeline - I am just explaining all these and it was not even on the Order Paper because it was – So, if Members would at least agree to handle just this one then we can adjourn. That is my plea so that we at least finish one loan, which is very urgent and then we move from there.

If you could allow the loan on public health and then we see; I seek the indulgence of the Members. I had to amend the Order Paper to – yes.  So, if we could do that one at least then we see how to move. 

Members, I really seek your indulgence on this please because it was with the committee and it was introduced in the House on 20 August 2015. Members, if you could at least help with this - and it also expires. It was not on the Order Paper; I had to amend to allow this.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, we are in a dilemma, not created by you or us, but created by the Executive. We have been here since you called us and the Budget Committee has been meeting morning, afternoon and evening. We have done our work and we had thought that we would sandwich plenary with the committee activities, but that was not done. As if that was not enough I saw the Minister of State for Health whispering to you  - and he does not know I am an old woman who can understand things beyond what is spoken.

Mr Speaker, I would have expected that if this matter is as urgent as it has been stated - and you know if you want a mother to kneel, talk about the health of children, she will respond. But if it was that urgent why did it wait to be brought on Christmas Eve? And it is not even on the Order Paper because I -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is on the Order Paper; I amended it.

MS OGWAL: It was amended, but I have been following the Order Paper, Mr Speaker, and thank you for doing the work of both Speaker and whips. But when I called my people I told them the important and urgent matters on the Order Paper; this was not there and I would have mobilised more people. 

The procedure I am trying to bring before you is that I would have appreciated if the issue of health was brought earlier and properly managed and brought even to the Business Committee, which unfortunately was not done. Now that the ministry did not follow the procedure, it is up to you to have us look at this, but we should be mindful of the fact that when we pass such a loan, we must have a quorum because it is money and we are authorising the spending of public money. All these people are very conscious about the new law, which they proposed, brought to Parliament before we approved it. But now they are the first people to abuse that law. 

Anyway for me, Mr Speaker, if we are going to approve anything today which has anything to do with money, my answer is no. We will put on record that whatever loan we have approved is without quorum. And yesterday I warned the Minister of State for Finance that we are needed to lobby the speakers so that we do not call Parliament on Christmas Eve. It is inhuman; unchristian; and anti-Uganda. In the past, Ugandans would eat meat only on Christmas Day. It is also ungodly. We would wait for a whole year to eat meat on Christmas Day. But now on Christmas Eve when we should be preparing meat for our children and grandchildren, you want us to be in Parliament.

Mr Speaker, the procedure which I am proposing, as a Whip of the Opposition, and of course if I whip the Opposition the Government must listen because that is why I am here, is just give us whatever Christmas card you would like to give us and bless us and maybe we say the prayer for the closing of the year and you disperse us. We can reconvene mid-January 2016. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a motion before the House for an adjournment. We have tried all ways to see if we can move and this House can only move in harmony the way it is constituted. We do not want all these issues raised after the event. I am sure all of you understand what I am talking about. So, it might be in our own interest to do something -

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, the way hon. Nandala-Mafabi had already started debating the loans and we were almost finishing three - my appeal is that at least we would do some two or so because some of these –(Interjections)- the Speaker requested that we handle some of the loans and I am also appealing that we agree with him and do a few of these and some of these loans are time-bound - once we don’t pass them by the end of this month, they are likely to be recalled by the board. So, I am agreeing with you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House can only proceed if we are together. We cannot proceed if we are not together and that is what I was saying. I had made an appeal for the health loan to be considered because it is urgent and expiring. But the way we are constituted, we will not be able to take any major decisions on these things unless by consensus.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. We came here on Tuesday, unfortunately there was no sitting. I particularly came because I was interested in the children’s amendment law and I thought it would probably be a Christmas gift. Then the next day we came, dressed to ‘kill’ and ready for business, but we were told there was no business until today.
 
Mr Speaker, I have listened to both sides. Seemingly there is evidence that Members are so interested in the Budget Framework Paper to be passed. But in our language there is a saying that when an elder insists, a young one may have to reconsider their thinking - I have been sitting here quietly and seeing how senior members of this government – leave alone the current minister of finance – but a person like Minister Omach, when he insists, actually in Alur land, we listen to him.

So, I am appealing to Members that if we go back without considering even just one item, I would feel offended. My understanding here would be whatever the minister is going to present has gone through a committee of Parliament, which has done scrutiny of the loans.

Now, in the order of priority –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to raise a point of order to my young brother here. The issue which you have raised, Mr Speaker, that we need harmony - the moment there is no harmony, issues will arise and you know them. We are not going to do things because we want to please hon. Fred Omach or because of tribal issues. No, because we are here to do work for the people of Uganda – national issues. In fact, I have high respect for hon. Matia Kasaija because he worked with my daddy in co-operatives – they are the ones who made it work. And when you only talk about hon. Fred Omach and leave out hon. Matia Kasaija, I feel offended. (Laughter) 

So, is the Member in order to say that we should not leave without doing something when we have been working since morning? We started with the Anti-terrorism (Amendment) Bill; we went to the Wage Bill; to the Bill on financial institutions, and now on a motion to go home. Is he in order to say that we have done nothing and that we should do things in a legal way?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me say it for the third time and I do not think I am going to repeat it. In the House, if we are to take any decision, we will need harmony. If there is no harmony, we will not be able to take any decision. And we draw this spirit of harmony from the national interests of this country; people who are not here but they need some of these things. Circumstances of delay should not cause us to leave out some urgent matters that need to be handled. We should not throw away the baby with the bathwater. So, that was my appeal and the specific appeal I made was on the issue of public health. That is all I asked.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have had the benefit of listening to my colleagues but I think when you look at the health loan – of course, it is a very important loan, given the subject matter. Nevertheless, we must also take cognizance of the fact that there is a lot of laissez-faire within Government as far as the Ministry of Health is concerned. This is because, this loan, however important it is, the way it has come to the House, is quite challenging. 

I think, on a second thought, I am just arising to appeal to colleagues - maybe they needed to get the substance of the loan – the substance of the loan is so important to this country that despite the other technicalities involved and the laissez-faire attitude with which the Government is operating – and maybe my direct appeal goes to the Leader of the Opposition - you know this government is about to end in a few months and this may cause the lives of the people within that time –(Interruption) 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and Hon. Paul Mwiru. This shows how shabbily Government does its work. We have had the Business Committee but this loan was not mentioned. The Order Paper was prepared yesterday for today but this loan was not mentioned. But as an afterthought about this very crucial and urgent matter, the minister raises it.

Mr Speaker, we can make a deal that we pass only this one loan on health and we adjourn; nothing else.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can we proceed with this item? Can we agree to proceed with this item, Members?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I have no problem with us proceeding, especially after very strong pleading from hon. Paul Mwiru. But the minister who was pleading for this loan should also, from today onwards, learn that this country belongs to all of us. When you begin issuing draconian rules that presidential candidates cannot access health facilities and you position there policemen – and I heard you, yourself announcing - then you should know that there will be a day when you need everybody.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, please, can you call this item?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SDR 10.7 MILLION (EQUIVALENT US $ 15.0 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) AS ADDITIONAL FINANCING TO SUPPORT THE EAST AFRICAN PUBLIC HEALTH LABORATORY NETWORKING PROJECT

12.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move a motion of Government effort to borrow up to $15 million from the International Development Association (IDA) as additional financing to support the East African Public Health Laboratory Networking Project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the Member for Jonam, Members for West Budama South, West Budama North, Koboko, Kyankwanzi and the Minister in charge of Luweero and also the member for Budaka. The motion is properly constituted before the House. Would you like to speak to it?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the interest of time, this loan was moved here and you forwarded it to the Committee on National Economy. The committee has studied its content and objective and they are ready to report. I would beg that in the interest of time, the chairperson can move and we handle the loan. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question which I propose now for your debate is for a Resolution of Parliament on the Government request to borrow up to SDR 10.7 million (equivalent of $ 15 million) from the International Development Association (IDA) as additional financing to support the East African Public Health Laboratory Networking Project. That is the motion before you and debate starts now – Oh! It is the report – yes, report of the committee. Please summarise.

1.00
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Evelyn Kaabule):  This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow up to SDR 10.7, which is equivalent to $15 million, from the International Development Association (IDA) as additional financing to support the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project. 

Before I report, I beg to lay on the Table documents relating to the report. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the committee; a brief to Parliament; minutes of negotiations; and the financing agreement and project appraisal documents. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Please, go to the recommendations.

MS KAABULE: This project will be implemented by the Ministry of Health. The Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health will have the overall responsibility for the project. The Ministry of Health’s technical working group on communicable diseases control represented by the clinical disease control and planning departments will provide overall direction for strengthening health laboratory services and will review and approve the consolidated annual work plan for the project.

Observations and Recommendations

1. The committee noted that laboratories are critical for supporting disease surveillance and sharing information with our neighbouring countries. They are also key to complying with international health regulations, which aim to improve early identification of public health emergencies, and are important for accurate diagnosis, guiding treatment and managing the growing problem of drug resistance.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should put emphasis on coordination with neighbouring countries to aid disease surveillance especially in cross border areas, which will benefit from timely responses to outbreaks. Early responses will reduce stigma and improve the quality of life.

2. Laboratory Staff 

The committee noted that availability of qualified laboratory staff remained a critical bottleneck to service provision in this country. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health should scale up the training of laboratory technicians to ensure that the national capacity to implement this project is strengthened for the realisation of better project outcomes for the nation and the region as a whole.

3. Transmission of Communicable Diseases

The committee observed that there was an increased risk of communicable disease transmission and pandemics due to global and regional trade, international travel and refugee movement, which requires a harmonised approach to mitigate the negative spill-over effects and maximise positive externalities.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health should strengthen its capacity to track communicable diseases using harmonised polices, strategies and protocols and allow for sharing of high quality and reliable information. 

4. Sustainability of the Project 

The committee noted the concerns over sustainability of the project. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health should ensure the timely integration of the recurrent costs due to this project when completed in order to guarantee the achievement of the intended objectives of this project both in the short and medium to long terms. 

Conclusion

The committee recommends that the request by the Government to borrow up to SDR 10.7 million, equivalent to $15 million, as additional support to the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project be approved subject to the recommendations above. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. Members, debate starts now. Each Member will take -

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, following the spirit with which we have worked, the fact that we all agreed to pass this law and in order to save time, unless there is someone with a very serious concern, I beg that you put the issue to vote. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if that is the consensus, I now put the question to the motion on the request by the Government to borrow up to SDR 10.7 million, equivalent to $15 million, from IDA as additional financing to finance the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I know you are about to adjourn Parliament but as the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs, I would like to say that before we go for Christmas, it would not be prudent if we did not commit this country to a peaceful and violence-free election. 

We have observed with deep concern that in the last two to three weeks, the mood which had been built at the beginning seems to be fading. Actually, when the Pope left, actors in this country seem to have gone back to their roots and we are back to conducting our elections in a violent manner. Simple things are not being observed; for instance, people are not sticking to the campaign programme. If candidate X is supposed to be at a certain venue, why on earth would supporters of another candidate either line up to provoke or cause commotion? This has led to violence and arrests in this country. I am so worried now that we going to campaigns for parliamentary seats where matters will go local and the communities will be more incited. 

My humble appeal to political actors in this country is that Uganda will not end after February 18th 2016. There will be a country called Uganda and we will need to live in harmony. May we appeal to the Government, to the forces, especially the police, political actors and those who are running presidential campaigns, especially people in the political bureaus of various presidential candidates, to ensure that Uganda will have a peaceful election. The mood seems to have gone bad and there is national anxiety that we are about to go into a violent election. 

Our humble view is that this can be avoided. I do not want to be petty and mention names but these acts have been perpetuated by honourable distinguished members of this country who also belong to this House. These acts could be avoided. This is my humble appeal to my counterpart; as we go towards this year, can you renew the commitment to a peaceful and free election. Thank you.

1.09
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleague for the concerns raised. I also want to say that when the campaigns started, especially the presidential campaigns, they were peaceful. It was not until the Ntungamo incident occurred that we started seeing issues. 

I want to make an appeal to us, Members of Parliament, now that we are going into serious campaigns, let us restrain our supporters. It is not about the candidates; it is normally the supporters that engage each other and you find that there is a problem. So, let us restrain our supporters. For the presidential candidates, it is still the supporters who are causing all this anxiety resulting in what we are beginning to see. 

So far, however, I think the police have exercised restraint. I want to say that they have tried their level best. We are also going to try and see that we move in harmony. All of us want peace; I do not think there is anybody who is interested in what we saw in Ntungamo. Therefore, we are going to try our best. The police are alert about what is going on in the country. Let us work with the police to ensure that we have a peaceful election. 

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to clarify something in regard to what she has just said about having a peaceful election.

I would like to know the role of the crime preventers in electoral matters. As we speak, crime preventers are going around carrying registers in villages, and these were the registers that where recently given to the political parties. When the Chairman of the Electoral Commission was giving out these registers, he clearly said that this was the final register that we are going to use for the elections in 2016. 

However, in some villages in Kasese, Kabarole and Kyenjojo, even in Kireka where I stay, I have seen crime preventers carrying registers which include names of people who have died and are living. I do not know whether this exercise is being carried out on behalf of -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The crime preventers have not only stopped at registering people, but in Kitgum District two days ago they were compiling a list which is supposed to be submitted to the Electoral Commission. I contacted the Electoral Commission boss about that list being compiled by the crime preventers. They are actually registering people and submitting as if they are polling assistants. They are not only stopping at indicating those who are dead but they are doing multiple activities in the electoral process.

MS KIIZA: I thank you for that information, honourable colleague. I just want the honourable minster to clarify whether these crime preventers have been hired by the Electoral Commission to do this work. I know there is a tribunal that is supposed to deal with such matters and recommend to the Electoral Commission the people who are either alive or dead and those who are supposed to participate in the election processes. Since when did this become a job for the crime preventers?

MS AKOL: Thank you, honourable colleagues, for the issues you have raised. What I can say is that I have taken note of the issues that you are raising and we are going to find out which people are carrying registers and carrying out the activities which you have just mentioned. 

However, all of us are entitled to that register. We can all, at a cost, pick a copy of the register from the Electoral Commission. As for the activities that you have mentioned, we are going to investigate and we will duly report to the House. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have a problem with that register as a secretary-general of a political party. I have just got a report that in Arua and other areas, the crime preventers are marking names of people from the Opposition with the letter “O”. If you are not available, they put “T” meaning transferred; if your whereabouts are unknown, they put “N”; if the person is dead, they put “D”; and then they mark the NRM members. They are now telling our people that they are going to use that register and they will delete those marked “O” who are known - for example, me, Nandala, who is known to be from the Opposition – and leave the supporters of the NRM. 

We want it to come out clearly -(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, I beg for your protection. I have heard hon. Nyanzi asking why I am fearing. When he went for primaries without fear, he was floored. (Laughter) You know what happened and you can see how he is even laughing. Therefore, Mr Speaker, we want a ruling on this. At least there must be a public document or statement on this; if we do not get one, this election might be a disaster.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Mr Speaker, this question of crime preventers was an issue that caused me to initiate dialogue between Government and my side. We have had two meetings. The honourable minister had not yet joined Cabinet but her deputy, hon. Baba, was there, the IGP and hon. Kiyonga.

We held meetings and discussed the issue of crime preventers. First, we said that crime preventers are outlaws; they do not exist in the laws of Uganda and they are not paid. We agreed that they should be confined to their communities in their villages. 

The IGP gave the example of a pilot community policing initiative in Kansanga or Muyenga as the best. About two hours ago, I was at Standard Charted Bank in Garden City and I met a man called Omar who has been handling community policing. He was asking me to do something about the crime preventers. He said that what the crime preventers are doing is totally different from what they were doing. On Monday, we were interviewing one of the commissioners for human rights and he appealed to us to do something about crime preventers because they have become a problem. Last night, I listened to Justice Ogola talking about crime preventers as a problem. 

Now, these crime preventers -(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the crime preventers are the ones being used to deface posters. I am in charge of FDC campaigns in Busoga and when they went to Namayingo and Bugiri, they defaced our posters. I called the Chairman of the Electoral Commission.  I think that is the purpose they are now serving.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, hon. Mwiru, for that good information. They have also removed mine in my constituency.

Mr Speaker, this Parliament should pronounce itself on this issue of crime preventers. These people are transported across districts to go and cause trouble. I heard that one of the groups that fought in Ntungamo was the crime preventers. I have no proof but I have got such information. We should pronounce ourselves on this issue of crime preventers. As we get closer to these elections, if we do not sort this issue out, I see that it will be a source of trouble and violence during and after these elections. These people do not exist in the law. 

We had asked Government to cease the recruitment of crime preventers until after we have finished elections. Government had convinced us that they were stopping it and those who were there were going to be deployed in their communities. Now, I just read before I came here that one of them was being lynched in Buwama for doctoring a register. 

What is the role of the crime preventers? Are they detecting crime? This man, Omar, told me that in Muyenga and Kasanga, community policing is done in such a way that if you notice a crime being committed, you go and report to the police; you do not arrest them or carry AK-47s in the night. Today, crime preventers waylay people at railway lines in Kampala and arrest them and they share whatever they have stolen. There is a court in Matugga and Nsangi where they take people – (Interruption)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, we suspended business in a rush to go for Christmas. The Leader of the Opposition is on the Floor alleging very many things, including things that happen in Matugga. I stay in Matugga; do not malign people because of this political process without evidence. I am the area MP and I would be the first person to know if there was a crime preventer harassing people in Matugga. Is the Member in order to tell us stories maligning very many villages? Is he a god? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member was expressing things within his knowledge.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Kyadondo North, you are out of order. (Applause)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, the things I was saying were told to me –(Interruption)

MR KWIZERA: Thank you for giving way. Honourable members, extremism can be very dangerous. Crime preventers are connected to what took place in Rwanda. In Rwanda, there were people who supported political parties and the Government in power. However, because they were drank with authority, they caused genocide. 

I would like to appeal to Members; are crime preventers a state or non-state entity? If they are non-state, who is responsible for them? If they are state, under what law do they exist? If they are state, then pay them. If you are using people who you are not paying – 3,000 of them per village – tomorrow they will turn on you. We must regulate them. Who is responsible for them?

The information I would like to give you is that in the Great Lakes Region, we have rogues. We have not been having them before. There were the Interahamwe in Rwanda, you can see what is happening in Burundi and it can happen here anytime if after elections you do not pay them. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, hon. Kwizera, for the information –(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for the opportunity to give you this information. This issue of the crime preventers is not a small matter. It is a real issue which we must deal with as we go for elections. 

Just two days ago, we were looking at the MTEFs presented by sessional committees in the Budget Committee and the vice-chairperson, hon. Wamakuyu, was chairing that committee meeting. When the matter of crime preventers came up, hon. Wamakuyu stated that in his own constituency crime preventers have become a very big problem so much so that even if he is holding consultations, these crime preventers would gather around, and they are about 30 crime preventers per village. He said when he was holding a rally at parish level, all the 30 crime preventers per village would gather aside, set themselves apart from the other members of the community attending the rally and claim sitting allowance from him. They would take themselves as special people and say that the Government had trained them but they had not been paid and they are not entitled to any payment. 

Therefore, they are themselves becoming a problem not only to the honourable Leader of the Opposition or members of the Opposition but to all Members of Parliament and even to the Government itself. I think it is a matter that must be dealt with.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I am winding up, Mr Speaker. Archbishop Ntagali has called crime preventers “crime promoters”. These people I have mentioned are senior citizens – a commissioner for human rights, a retired high court judge and an archbishop. 

I would like to appeal to Government to please stop involving crime preventers in electoral matters. If you do not, we are all going to have crime preventers and you are going to see clashes throughout. This time round, none of us is going to allow anybody to steal our votes; it will be settled through violence. We do not want violence. Thank you very much.

1.28
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank my brother, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, for his appeal for non-violence as well as calmness. I would like to also associate myself with the comments made by the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

The Leader of the Opposition has stated, and I would like to agree with him, that there is an initiative between himself and the Prime Minister which has caused a forum that brings us together as the Opposition and the Government sides on the question of security. What I would like to appeal for is that we continue using this forum. 

Hon. Oguttu and I have just exchanged notes. I think he had not yet read mine before he came up to speak. My view is that although tomorrow is Christmas, I would appeal to brother Oguttu that after here we should go to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and seek to meet in our forum on this question of violence as well as crime preventers. However, for that meeting to be useful, I would appeal to those colleagues who have taken the Floor and recounted incidences about crime preventers to write those incidences on paper and pass them on to the Leader of the Opposition so that this will make part of our input as we discuss this subject. 

I, therefore, conclude that let us all commit to non-violence during this election. Let all of us remain vigilant. If you see an incident, take record of it and pass it on to the authorities so that we all work together – (Ms Ogwal rose_)- Just hold on, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. We should work towards non-violent elections.

My brother, Oguttu, is generally a very calm person. I have known him for a very long time. However, this afternoon, for the second time in my hearing, he has made this very strong statement - “if this happens, we are going to have violence”. I would like to continue to appeal to him and others that let our collective commitment be for non-violence. Anybody who has a tendency to create militias and illegal structures will be brought to book; that, I can assure you. That is why I am appealing to my brother, hon. Oguttu, that soon after here we go and see the Prime Minister so that we hold a meeting before we go for Christmas.

Let me take the clarification, Mr Speaker, from hon. Cecilia Ogwal before I can conclude.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. 

Mr Speaker, what is happening now is a reality. The crime preventers are on the ground working. I think the Leader of the Opposition wants to know from the Government who is responsible for the crime preventers. Are they part of the state machinery, so that we know that if they commit any crime anywhere we hold the state accountable, or are they a private entity? 

Right now, it is also difficult for us to differentiate between the crime preventers authorised by the state and Amama’s guards. We do not know whether they are also crime preventers since we do not have a clear identity. All we know is that they are militaristic in their style of doing politics. Even Amama’s guards, since he is also part of you we do not know whether they are part of the Government’s crime preventers who have moved with him. Who are they? Can you clarify the matter? 

Mr Speaker, if the Minister of Internal Affairs really cared for the lives of the people of Uganda, I would want her – First of all, I would like to congratulate you, honourable minister. You have come to this office at the right time and may God bless you. The only way you can give us Christmas is for you to come up with a strong statement saying for anybody who is known to be a crime preventer and is involving themselves in anything to do with electoral matters, it is illegal. We would then be aware that the crime preventers have no legal authority to handle any electoral matters. 

Come out loud and clear. That will make us strong and enable us to police the ground and control them. Right now, we do not know who they are or whether the police are responsible for them. When we ask the police, they say they are not responsible for the crime preventers.

Mr Speaker, we are in a desperate situation and we need the intervention of this Parliament to direct the Ministry of Internal Affairs to give us at least a Christmas message so that we can have a peaceful Christmas.

DR KIYONGA: First, hon. Wafula Oguttu has put the issue of crime preventers in the right context and I just want to restate what he said. We discussed this issue in that committee, the chair was the Prime Minister and there are positions we agreed to. We said the crime preventers in many places are helpful, but they should be based in their villages and they should not move to other areas. We also agreed that further recruitment be postponed and the Government initiates a law that will incorporate the crime preventers.

Government has not denied the fact that crime preventers come under the control of the national police. That is also very clear. However, I must also say, Mr Speaker, that I am speaking with great restraint. That is why I am appealing to brother Oguttu that we should have a meeting. You know very well that the tendency for people to create militias was coming to surface. Let me give you examples. Kakooza Mutale, as you saw, about two or three months ago appeared to be creating a militia. The Chief of Defence Forces, Gen. Katumba Wamala, took action, warned him publically and wrote to him and he has complied. We also know that our brother, the former mayor of the city, threatened to create a militia group. He too was strongly advised against that. I also know that there are some signs somewhere showing that some elements are trying to do the same. 

The central issue is that we commit ourselves to a non-violent election. We should commit ourselves to vigilance but not just talk. When we notice anybody moving in that direction, we should make sure this information is brought to the surface. Evidence should be brought to particularly our leaders- the Leader of the Opposition, the Prime Minister and us who are in the security - so that timely action can be taken and deterrence evolves.

I would appeal to you, Mr Speaker and colleagues, that for now, leave this matter to the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and us who are working in security. Statements will be issued as and when action is being taken. I thank you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we close on this note? 

1.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I seek your indulgence and your permission. Yesterday, during the Committee of Budget meeting, with the permission of the Speaker and members of the committee we presented an addendum to the Budget Framework Paper and agreed that when the House sits, we shall lay it on the Table formally. I seek your permission to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can proceed and do that.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table an addendum to the Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2016/2017.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Since we have not been able to debate the report on the Budget Framework Paper, let it also be captured and handled as such.

Honourable members, we have come to the end of this sitting. Let me just say this before I adjourn: Tomorrow is Christmas and thereafter, will be New Year and there are going to be many activities. I would like to wish you and the whole country great celebrations. May the memory and the commemoration of the birth of Jesus Christ remind us of our commitment to love our neighbours as we love ourselves and to restrain from any kind of acts that can result into violence. 

Under the spirit of ecumenism and also the inter-religious council, we now all recognise these days; Eid is recognised and respected by Christians and Christmas or Easter are also respected by people of other faiths. That should be the spirit to bring this country together. We need to work as a people who grew up together not by accident but by history. 

We must always remember that we have divisions; we come from different tribes, we have different political parties and we speak different languages. However, none of those divisions is deeper than the blood that connects us not only as a people but also as a people of God. Therefore, this spirit should guide us through these festivities and elections. 

I pray that whatever we do during the elections should stand above all selfish interests and violence tendencies especially from members of this House. We should desist from acts of provocation. In case you find people sitting somewhere, respect them. It would help if these things are observed.

Our politics should not be a matter of life and death because it is not, it should not be and it has never been. It should never be a matter of life and death. People have lost elections and have come back after losing them. Some people have won elections and have lost them and they have not died as a result of losing an election. 

We should just do our best to respect each other, restrain ourselves and act within the spirit of our country’s motto - act for God and our country. That should be the spirit that should guide us through this festive season and as we begin the election campaigns generally in the next year. Let us observe these principles; they will help us when we respect each other.

With these few statements, I wish you all a merry Christmas. May the New Year bring more blessings than this year has brought. That is my prayer for you. This House, therefore, in the circumstances, stands adjourned sine die. Thank you.

(The House rose at 1.42 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 