Wednesday, 3 December 2003

Parliament met at 2.22 p.m. in the Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to alter the Order Paper to enable the Minister of Defence respond to an issue, which was raised yesterday, namely, the changes in the Army. I would like him to make the presentation now.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.24
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to respond to an issue that was raised on the Floor of this House yesterday, and to which the Rt honourable Prime Minister responded by saying we would be responding to it. I wish to respond now.  

The issue was about the action that has been taken in the UPDF regarding deployment of officers. Apparently, the demand by members who spoke on this issue was that an explanation should be given by Government about this so-called reshuffle. 

I would like to make a categorical statement, Madam Speaker; His Excellency the President, who is the Commander-In-Chief of the armed forces, exercising his constitutional powers has carried out some action in the Army. This is not the first time he is doing this. In fact, on a daily basis this is what is done. It was administrative action. 

I did not know that Members of Parliament require the Executive and this Parliament now to set a precedent, that each time the President carries out administrative action in discharge of his command function, we should come to Parliament and explain. That is not my understanding of how the command function is exercised.

Madam Speaker, as you know, there have been a lot of changes in command. The Army Command only recently changed hands in June, but I did not hear this demand. On a daily basis something like this happens. So, I just want to say that what has happened -(Mrs Zziwa rose_)- Can I finish? I will come back to you.  

What happened was something that is not extraordinary in terms of the exercise of the command function by the Commander-In-Chief. I, therefore, just want to inform Parliament that he was carrying out his function and that is all.

There have been a lot of speculations in the media.  I have read about treason - the Monitor has been leading in this one as usual - about planned military coups, and things like that. I would like to assure this Parliament that there was nothing like that. 

It is true there have been some changes, but these have been changes, which have been carried out routinely by the President in exercise of his command function and, of course, in response to the situation there. It is not unusual for the UPDF to undergo this kind of purification process, and I would want to invite Parliament simply to acknowledge that the President has performed his functions. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, first of all, this information, in my view, is just for you to note. This is because some of the matters, which have been aired out, may touch on matters that may go before other tribunals. So, we shall not allow debate on this matter. (Mr Sekikubo rose­_) No, because he may touch on matters, which are going to other tribunals. 

Do not go into the merits and demerits of who is going to be tried, when he will be tried and so on.

MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine really was to compliment Government for this effort to clean up the Army. But, particularly, for this to come from the honourable Minister of Defence, who is reported to have headed the committee that investigated the ghost soldiers in the UPDF. 

I should commend him in the first place for coming up in such a short time to see to it that his recommendations, if they were his, were carried out. I wanted to thank and compliment him for that.

Also, Madam Speaker, I think it would not be bad to prepare the country, especially Parliament, to witness positive developments in the UPDF. It has been our institution and we have long been yearning to see a day when UPDF would come up as a strong institution devoid of all these scandals, these taints that have accompanied it for quite some time. 

However, I also noted that just in the –(Interruption).

MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable Minister of Defence briefly explained that there was no need to give further clarification on the constitutional mandate of the President for whatever he did. And you rightly ruled that having got that explanation, there is no need to debate the issue. 

I just want to move a point of order. Is the honourable member who stood, almost begging you that he was seeking a point of clarification, in order to continue debating on a subject matter that is not even tabled?  Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think he has already done that. Thank you.

MS MARGARET ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think in the same breath I should also compliment and salute the Minister of Defence. 

My humble concern, as he was bringing in this issue or response, was the attitude in which he carried the statement. Definitely, unlike many other reshuffles where His Excellency the President is also performing his administrative responsibilities, maybe you would apportion the blame to the press. But this time, this one was carried along with verdicts printed below names. So, I think that is why the House came in to ask. 

But I think we should take it in good faith. When it has come to the Floor of the House like any other national issue of interest, Minister of Defence you would have come in to say, “This was administrative”. That would have been good enough and we would have taken it in good faith. Thank you.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: I want to thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues to thank the honourable Minister and government. 

Honourable members, you will realise that the biggest problem we have had with the previous regimes are the problems that have been occurring in the institution of the Army. Matters would be handled as if members of the Army are untouchable.  

For this to happen - as the press has reported that the Army was reshuffled, some members are going to face disciplinary measures, others are going to be court-martialled, others have been promoted - this is something that is commendable. We should also commend Government for it.

Secondly, I strongly support the Minister of Defence that in exercise of his powers, the President of Uganda has the mandate to organise and reorganise his structures, either of the Army or of Government, the way he thinks fit. The problem comes when there is a lot of speculation, for example, here about court-martials. 

You people know the consequences of court-martials, because people have been court-martialled and others have faced firing squad after the exercise of court-martialling. So, to us as Parliament, we raise these matters in good faith. It is not intended to ridicule the process, the Government, or the Minister. It is because of the sentiments that the public and the people or officers themselves who may be concerned may raise. 

The other problem officers face is that the President did say that the UPDF officers in the House are listening posts. So, they may not be in position to air out these issues that directly relate to the officers of the Army. 

But, honourable Minister, I do support you; the President in discharge of his duties owes no immediate explanation. But as things go on, it would be good for us to know, instead of speculating through the press. We want to thank you for the good job.

MR AWORI: I would like to give information, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information to who? I know you want to contribute, but do not touch on matters which are subjudice. 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have no intention of doing so. Without prejudice to your ruling on the matter, I beg that you permit me to express concern about the procedure in which this matter was handled, nothing to do with the substance except the format. 

I would have liked to thank the honourable Minister of Defence and his senior colleague, the Commander-in- Chief, for having carried out a reshuffle. But I must say it lacked finesse, administratively. A matter of such national importance should be handled with equal degree of importance in delivering to the general public. 

The honourable Minister of Defence is a member of this august House. He should have the courtesy to come here and inform us thus: “this morning, His Excellency the President, Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces, carried out a reshuffle”. It is a matter of courtesy. We are the people who authorise the money for the operations of UPDF; they owe us some information.  

Two, Madam Speaker, again I beg your indulgence to ask the honourable Minister whether the report from the Sebutinde Commission of Inquiry, which he tabled here with a White Paper, has any relevance to the current or recently announced reshuffle? 

If the answer is affirmative, that the two are related, then what has he to say about the people who are named in the Commission of Inquiry report and those who have been promoted in this new reshuffle? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think this reshuffle and demotion of certain officers is a matter of extreme importance to this country. 

When this kind of thing has happened in history, usually an explanation, just a mention or a hint, is given as to why such a thing has happened. When the war in Korea was going on, Harry Truman sacked one of the Generals and an explanation was given. During the Second World War, one of the Generals who was very instrumental in invading Germany was demoted and an explanation was given. 

I agree that the President has a right as Commander-in-Chief to do what he has done, but it has left a lot of speculation and worry in the country as to why it has happened. If we had a stock market in this country, which was viable, it would have plummeted almost to zero because of what has happened. 

So, I think the honourable Minister owes the nation an explanation. I usually see even in civil life when a robber is arrested, they say he has been arrested for robbery and that does not prevent him from having a good day at court. So, I do not see why we cannot receive specific explanations as to what happened to these officers. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable members for expressing their maximum confidence in the ability of His Excellency, Yoweri Museveni, and the leadership of Defence to perform the command function that they were entrusted to do. I am really grateful that this Parliament is in full appreciation of that, and has expressed its confidence. 

As I have said, what has been happening now and, of course, what has been happening in the past is what will happen even in the future. What has differentiated the Movement Government and other governments before it has been the ability by the leadership of the Movement to instil maximum discipline in its armed forces.  

The armed forces have been the tool through which governments have committed crimes against society, against this country. Armed forces have been used to subvert democracy. We all know that, and we had to go through an armed struggle in order to bring about correction. 

This Government will not fail you; I would like to assure the country and this Parliament. In maintaining that character, we will have an iron hand on the discipline of the armed forces so that the armed forces serve the people in accordance with the law.  

I said that in order to achieve this objective, action is actually taken on a daily basis. Action is taken in units out there and at the headquarters. We have an administration of justice system in the military, which this Parliament passed. You know we have taken action against those who have acted in breach of the law. 

What is happening now is simply consistent with what has been happening in the past. And I am glad this Parliament has been able to see it and fully throws its weight behind that continued firm control over the discipline of the armed forces.

I can say that I have seen a lot of speculation in the newspapers and most of it is not true. The question of treason, the question of intended military plots and things like that; there was nothing like that. This action is as a result of a process that was put up in Defence and has resulted in this action. 

There has been investigation in some matters, including the existence of ghost soldiers in the Army, indiscipline of senior officers in command structure, and the investigations have resulted into this action. This is going to lead to further action, which I really do not feel free to talk about now because it may prejudice the action that will follow. I thank you very much.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, you accorded us a rare opportunity to seek further elucidation from the honourable Minister on a matter of the transfer of senior Army officers. You also accorded him an equal opportunity to answer us. But when he comes and gives us 10 percent of what we require, do we not have a right to question him? 

I asked him a very pertinent question on the matter of the Sebutinde Report and how it relates to these transfers. He has deliberately ignored it. Madam Speaker, procedurally, really, can you accord him the opportunity to come back and answer my question?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  He is free.
  
MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Minister whether the presidential pledge in his Manifesto, of professionalizing the Army, is on course. I would be more interested in hearing from the Minister the progress we have made on that. 

I thought that all this was part of it, but now what you have highlighted today has taken me a bit aback. I am looking forward to the progress on professionalizing the Army. I beg to be clarified.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, when the Minister made a statement, some of you were not even in this House. So, you are now asking questions about matters you did not hear. 

He was responding to a matter raised by hon. Awori yesterday, which the Prime Minister asked him to come and explain to the nation. The information is for you to take note; it is not for debate. So, we should confine ourselves to the matter, which he spoke about. Minister, please.
 
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you once again, Madam Speaker. I will answer hon. Awori again. I actually answered him in my statement but I can disaggregate my answer in order to make him see the answer again. 

The Sebutinde Commission Report was presented to this House not long ago and the action, which Government took, was also presented.  It is hardly two or three weeks since this happened. So, you know hon. Aggrey Awori of course is no longer of – So, I feel that I should remind him, because after three weeks maybe it is good to remind him of what we did. 

We presented the Sebutinde Report to this Parliament, we told this Parliament what action is to be taken -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, we take the procedures of this House with utmost respect. My honourable colleague stands up to answer my concerns and in his reply, among other things, he says, “hon. Awori is no longer”, with this kind of sign. That was an incomplete sentence or statement. He used sign language, the sentence was incomplete; “hon. Awori is no longer…” (Laughter). 

I do not know whether he meant hon. Awori is no longer sane, hon. Awori is no longer sober, hon. Awori is no longer young, hon. Awori is no longer old, hon. Awori is no longer a Mukiga, he is no longer a Musamia. Is my honourable colleague in order to insinuate certain aspects of my capacity to follow the proceedings of this House by use of sign language? He never completed his sentence; he was just using sign language.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If that sign language meant that you are not sane, he was saying that you are no longer insane. So, you are sane.  (Laughter).  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. So, the Sebutinde Report was clear and the action Government took was clear. 

Let me repeat that we have forwarded this report to all departments of government whose duty it is to take action arising out of that Sebutinde Report. I suppose that the various departments of government, which are supposed to take action, will then become answerable for the action they have taken. 

I have said this action is not arising out of the Sebutinde Report but a process that has been going on within UPDF. That is the point I made.

Hon. Wambuzi was asking about the modernisation of the Army. My answer is that yes, it is on course, it is going on very well. I hope that I will be coming to Parliament on this. We have gone very far with the Defence review. Because Parliament has been involved in this I am sure you have kept abreast with the phases that we have gone through. 

The Defence Review Unit did present its report to me and I have presented this report to Cabinet. From that report, which covered defence policy and things like that, I am going to originate a White Paper, which I will take to Cabinet. Ultimately, I will bring it to Parliament and in that there is –(Interruption).

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to also thank the Minister for giving way. 

In his response he has alluded to the cause of modernising and professionalising the Army as promised by His Excellency the President in his Manifesto. I know it will be difficult to accomplish this work without bringing the law governing the UPDF to this House, in fulfilment of the requirement of the Constitution. 

The honourable Minister has been on the Floor of this House a number of times with incomplete provisions of the UPDF Statute. He has made so many pledges to this House that he would bring the law before Members of Parliament, which have not materialized. 

May I seek clarification from the honourable Minister as to when the law relating to the administration, discharging of duties of the UPDF, deployment, and mention it, will come before this House? Then we can confirm that the process of modernization and professionalization of the Army is on course. I thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: To finish what I was saying in response to hon. Wambuzi’s point, the question of modernisation is central to the Defence Reform. Therefore, we will fully cover it in the White Paper, which Parliament will debate and adopt. 

I did indeed promise that I would lay on the Table the UPDF Bill this week. I did speak to the people who are handling the bill and I am told they have finished the proofreading. They have finished everything, what remains now is the printing. 

I am told we need to print 350 copies before I can come here. I was told last night by a legal officer that the government printer at the moment is unable to print them. Yes, it should be in print today but they are unable to print it in one day. So I asked them to find out, today, how long it would take for them to finish printing the 350 copies. 

As soon as they are available, I will come back here. If it is tomorrow, I will be with you tomorrow. The matter is in the hands of those who are – we are pressing them hard to make sure that this bill is here soon. Thank you.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE FIRST REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND OTHER RELATED MATTERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week we received the first report of the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS. Because we did not have enough copies, we deferred debate to this week. I know that copies were distributed and members may now contribute to it.

2.54
MR OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a well-researched and articulated report. I would also like to take this opportunity to pass my special tribute to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for the fight he has -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Omach, just a minute. I understand that for those who do not have copies there are still some copies outside. But I know that 250 copies were distributed last week.

MR OMACH: I would like to pass on my special thanks to His Excellency the President for the fight against AIDS/HIV, which he has championed in Africa and in particular in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, AIDS is a killer and every person in Uganda has been affected by AIDS in one way or the other. Having made these observations, I would like to talk about the following concerns.

The first one is access to subsidized drugs, which can treat HIV. As we talk now, Madam Speaker, only referral hospitals are able to give the very important Nevirapine for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission. I would expect that by now this government should be in a position to facilitate all district hospitals to be able to give this medicine so that children of affected mothers are not born when they are infected with HIV. 

We would also like it if the Government could be in position to extend sufficient drugs, which can deal with opportunistic diseases that come because of the deficiency in the immunity of the affected persons. As we talk now, a number of hospitals do not have enough drugs for these opportunistic diseases.  

The other thing I would like to talk about is safe blood for transfusions. One of the ways that HIV is transmitted is through blood transfusions. And in this country there are very few hospitals that have opportunities and equipment to test if the donated blood is safe and tested for HIV, Syphilis and Hepatitis. 

Madam Speaker, unless this is seriously addressed, we still have a lot of problems People will not be able to get safe blood. In some hospitals, because a patient could be very anaemic and blood has been prescribed, they would go ahead and give this blood and still our people would end up being infected.

There is the issue of testing for HIV before going into marriage. Madam Speaker, last week in one of the newspapers it was reported that one of the members of the front bench –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Omach, the Minister came here and said she did not say those things.

MR OMACH: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of testing should not be underrated. We should not only test our blood for HIV before going into marriage, but it should also be done to test for sickle cells disease. In this country sickle cells anaemia is increasing at an alarming rate. 

Therefore, I appeal to the Committee and the Ministry of Health to ensure that this information is given to the youth before they go into marriage. If they decide to do otherwise, that will be their own decision, but they should be made aware that if they are carriers of sickle cells, it would not be advisable for them to get married to each other.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to talk about the equipment that is available in a number of our hospitals. In particular, we have the problem of X-ray equipment. The district hospitals do not have the capacity to purchase this equipment and maintain it. 

Some opportunistic diseases like tuberculosis can be identified at early stages when we use X-rays. But in most hospitals, the X-ray machines are not working and, therefore, by the time those opportunistic diseases like TB are identified, they will already be at a very advanced stage. I, therefore, appeal that equipment that is necessary for the fight of HIV/AIDS should be availed to all the district hospitals.

Going back to the issue of blood, currently the Uganda Red Cross Society is mobilizing for a lot of blood to give out to people who are anaemic. We understand that the European Union, which has been financing the most part of this, is winding up its operations by December 2004. 

We also understand that Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, which is being supported by USAID, will be winding up around June of next year. 

Madam Speaker, if this happens, that means there will be a funding gap. This gap should be addressed by this Parliament for the Ministry of Health, so that appropriate activities could be undertaken even without support from the donor communities.

I would like to end by thanking the committee for the work well done. I do associate myself with the recommendations that they have given at the end of this report, in particular that Members of Parliament should be members of the adhoc committees in their sub-counties. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of the distribution of facilities at the district level in some cases is being politicised. This makes it impossible for some Members of Parliament to effectively supervise in areas where they have got conflict with the area councillors. I thank you.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for me, Member of Parliament for Budadiri West, who has been in this Parliament for the last three days, not to have a copy of this report? I am told the copies were put on the front desk instead of being put it in my pigeonhole! Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these were distributed. Since last Wednesday we have been distributing copies of this report. I can surrender mine to you.

3.05
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I start my contribution I want to raise an issue of urgent importance, but I fear that you may not give me a chance to talk.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we have rules in this House. If you have a matter of national importance, the rules say you must actually come and notify me at least two hours before the sitting. So, we are going to observe the rules, strictly. 

MR KAGIMU: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I also thank the committee for the report well done. I just have a few contributions to make. Let me start with this issue of the ebimansulo, which has been mentioned. They say on page 40 that these are some of the ways that encourage promiscuity, AIDS and so on. 

Much as I do not condone that they should be put everywhere - what they do in other countries - I think definitely we have to borrow some of these things. There are certain areas, which are gazetted for those things, and those who want those things go there. And I think these people should be adults. 

You see the problem, which we are facing is that these things are put everywhere, they are not regulated and children are allowed to go in. I saw in the Red Pepper a certain child was there at the stage, looking at a naked lady and it was terrible. A kid! This is terrible. How can these people allow these kids to go there? If they were adults like here, it would be okay. 

Definitely, I do not think you can force everybody to be a seminarian. Of course, I was in the seminary and it was a very strict life. But people are free to enjoy these things if they want to, but they should be adults. The people who should be prosecuted are those people who allow in kids to those shows. So, areas should be gazetted. 

Secondly, I appeal to the journalists –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kagimu, what should the age of these participants be, the ones who actually do these things? I want you to address the House.

MR KAGIMU: Oh, the ones who are performing? No, if they are over 20, I think it is okay. Once one is 18, I think he or she is a mature person, but I think 20 years is okay. Of course, if it is an old woman, she will not appeal to clients. If I want a young girl without wrinkles –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague continues referring to “these things”. What are “these things” that you are talking about? When you say, ekimansulo, is it Latin, Lusamia, Lukiga? What are “these things”?

MR KAGIMU: Madam Speaker, what happens in those dances is that, they put girls on the stage and then the girls start undressing. She takes off her blouse and she puts off her clothes one by one. So, in throwing the clothes away, they call it okumansula.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: I just want to clarify more. In the West they call it strip-tease - that is the ekimansulo. Thank you.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you. You have enlightened me. I see it in the papers but I have not watched it. So, Madam Speaker, I think that much as these things are condemned, if they are kept in those areas it is okay. 

What is most important is the problem of the journalists. The journalists go and take the photos and then they bring them to the papers. Then people who are not interested are forced to see. 

Okay, they may have a point that they are trying to fight immorality. But I think those areas, if they are gazetted, should be for people who are old enough. They should not allow in kids, and they should not allow in cameras. So, let it be there, people will not notice them. Those who are perverts, if they want to see, let them enjoy. If that is the way they enjoy their life, it is their business. 

Of course these ebimansulo, or strip-tease, pulls crowds. They are crowd pullers. I hope tomorrow the Government is not going to use them as models because they pull crowds and say, “Because they pull crowds, they have got to be models to fight AIDS.” That will not happen. I hope the Minister, Tim Lwanga, will know how to advise government on who should be a model and who should not. 

Another point is that when you do not eat meat, you do not ban it in your house. You do not say, “Nobody should eat meat”. If some people want ebimansulo they can go and see those things.  

The issue of orphans has not been well tackled in the report. It is getting out of hand. Non-governmental organizations can no longer manage because it is too much. We are burying people everyday and they are all leaving children behind. 

The report noted that because of extended families, they are grateful that these children are being looked after. But the extended family is becoming too stretched. They are no longer catering for those children. In fact, I will bring up a question for oral answer. I want the Minister to tell us what government has in mind for these orphans. 

I was thinking of putting up a separate ministry for these orphans because the issue is getting out of hand. A ministry for orphans would do. They mentioned one for the youth and children, but I think there should be a special ministry in charge of orphans. Now the orphans are approaching a total of two million! Who is going to cater for this?  

Madam Speaker, if you look at the future generation, if these are not brought up well, they are not going to live in peace. These ones who are not brought up well are going to be a problem. If in ten years’ time the orphans are going to be five million, you can imagine what is going to happen in 30 years. What generation are we giving to our descendants –(Interruption)

MR MAFABI: I want to seek clarification. My grandfather does not have a mother and father; he is an orphan. Should he be taken in that group?

MR KAGIMU: That one is an off layer. It is like the late Vice President who used to say that he was also an orphan. Those ones will not be considered. 

Madam Speaker, I think the ministry of orphans is very important. Paying school fees for these children is not enough. You must follow them pedagogically - make a follow-up on how they are living, how they are behaving. And homes should be established in different districts. 

Really, these children should be followed up so that they grow up into responsible citizens. If we do not do that, the future will be terrible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR KAGIMU: Yes, I am winding up. They talked about rape and carpet interviews, but I will not go into that. I remember hon. Mao wanted to bring a motion on that, about some employees who are being harassed sexually, I do not know where it ended. 

However, there is marital rape, whereby a husband is promiscuous and forces the wife into sex and he could give her HIV. I think that will be catered for in the Domestic Relations Bill. I will have to bring that up. Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

3.13
REV. DR KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairman of the committee for the good work done. The committee recommended extra sensitisation and the need to locate a few selected, innovative groups that can assist children with HIV/AIDS problems I think this is a commendable recommendation. 

I want to bring it to the attention of the chairman and the entire committee that in my constituency there is a lady who used to work with TASO. She resigned because she noticed that mothers who were bringing their children and mothers who were affected by the disease were getting counselling but no physical support whatsoever. 

She came back to a place called Maligita - a place very well known to my friend hon. Wadri from Terego - and she collected children. She has over 85 children of parents who have died leaving these children without any support. We have been to office after office looking for support for these children for two years now, but there has not been any support for these children. 

I wish it would become national policy that in each sub-county, at least we have a home identified to support these children, because they are all over the place. If you talk about orphaned children – (Interruption)

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Thank you very much, hon. Kefa Ssempangi for giving way. I would like to inform the honourable member holding the Floor that according to the Children’s Statute, 1996 institutionalisation of children should be considered as a last resort. Community-based options are most preferred. 

That means that such an initiative should come up with programmes that can support these children within the extended family system, rather than bringing them to an institution where they may lose touch with the realities of life. Thank you.

REV. SSEMPANGI: I thank the honourable member for that information but the Children’s Statute says this should be a last resort. What do you do when you have children who are completely desperate, totally without support, and whose family members have passed away? 

I understand there are relatives, but I do not think relatives are going to absorb all the children. There are homes, which cannot support even their own children because of the low incomes of the families. There should be some support to some extent, because not every orphaned child finds support in these homes. 

The committee does say, besides that, that supporting incoming generating activities and food security is a very important aspect. You cannot treat children by feeding them on medicine and an empty stomach. These children need to be cared for. 

Madam Speaker, before I came to this Parliament, I was Chairman of the National Council for Children and before that I was Chairman for Nutrition and Early Childhood Development. Money was given by the World Bank, over US $34 million, to establish resource centres in this country. 

The project was initially intended for 25 districts, as a pilot project, and it went up to 34. For the second phase it was to cover the entire country. To-date, this programme is almost at a halt. I know now that it is in the Ministry of Health and the World Bank is demanding very little money, about US $3.5 million, to be rectified so that the projects could cover all the districts in the country.

If this is not done and we do not get these projects throughout the country, how are the children of this country going to be assisted? Even some of the resource centres in the districts that received money are not completed for lack of funds. 

I do not know, since the Minister of Health is also here, maybe he can clarify to us why this first phase is not completed. Why not start the second phase so that many of our children in this country benefit? 

These are centres where mothers could go to be educated, to receive treatment and also be encouraged to receive funds for full security. This money could be available if the minister and the ministry concerned could take steps. I ask to be clarified on this matter and I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.20
MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to air my views on the report, or the subject on the Floor. 

Allow me to thank the Committee on HIV/AIDS and also the Seventh Parliament for their initiative and for their hard work, which ushered in this committee. It is a very important committee and indeed it has started demonstrating that there is need to focus very seriously on the issue of HIV/AIDS. 

As we are already ahead, Madam Speaker, I take off my hat from my baldhead to thank this committee for the work our friends have done. They have produced a very high standard report, from a young committee like this. I think they should keep up that spirit and vigour. This is a big task, which should be addressed with a lot of vigour in order to mitigate HIV/AIDS.

We hope that the way the committee has started is the way it is going to continue. We expect that this committee will continue reporting, possibly every three or six months, with in-depth reports. 

I notice that at the moment the report is general. I would like the report to become more specific on the data of what is happening in the world and how we are performing. What is happening in Uganda as far as this AIDS is concerned? 

We must not throw away our African culture because it is the technological culture. The African culture, originally, did not allow for the training of boys about sex. It only focused on training the girls. We have now changed in the 21st Century and we are saying all must be exposed. 

The Minister of Education, and indeed this particular committee, must focus on what sort of syllabus is necessary to teach an African boy and an African girl. 

Yes, you might say that there is no difference between the learning of the boy and the girl. But I think the original Africans were not stupid in differentiating the sort of information and exposure, which was necessary for the girl and the sort of information that was necessary for the boy. We are in a crisis and this crisis should be addressed appropriately by both the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education.  

Madam Speaker, the bell has rang, but there are many issues, which need to be attacked. Let us keep clear records of death rates. Those records should show what the primary cause of death is and what the secondary cause of death is. 

Very many people die in my constituency. Sometimes somebody dies and it is not recorded at a police station or anywhere. Because he has died of AIDS, he is just taken for burial. This type of handling of death is not very sensible and is not very friendly. Madam Speaker, I expect that should be taken up as a need.

Thirdly, since AIDS attacked Uganda, we should take advantage of it by creating institutes like the one in France. We should be able to exploit this and turn out to be superior on issues of AIDS. 

Yes, the President has done very well but we would like this to remain a mark for all our children, that this is where AIDS started and this is where we mounted a battle and defeated it. We could establish an institute specializing in AIDS so that it becomes a centre of excellence.

Since the time is very short, I would like to say that, yes, I thank the committee for proposing that Members of Parliament be on the committee. However, I would like the details of that. 

I also demand that the Members of Parliament be informed how the money, the US $42 million and other subsequent monies, have been used on a continuous basis. That way, we will actually compare it on a continuous basis with results, which are going to arise as a result of our efforts in attacking AIDS. 

It is very important at this stage to request the Minister of Health to come out with a standard reporting format. All levels, including LC I to LC V, Members of Parliament up to the district level could report on AIDS so that it becomes standardized. We should report uniformly so that this information becomes useful to all of us. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.26
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson for this elaborate and clear report. I have only three points to raise. 

The first point is on the issue of new interventions especially these that assist women to protect themselves against HIV/AIDS. As you know, when it comes to negotiating for safe sex, most women have a problem. Therefore, they are more vulnerable to HIV/AIDS. 

This is on the issue of micro-biocides. I would like to hear more on this and to see whether this form, which is used to spray and also to mitigate the spread of HIV/AIDS, is available. What has the Government got to say about it?

The other issue I would like to raise is that of war. In war, rape and defilement are used as weapons. When women are raped and defiled, this is one form that is considered as victory over the vanquished. 

In the case of Northern Uganda, there are many cases of HIV/AIDS and, therefore, when you are looking at this particular geographical location, I would like to hear what interventions the Government has in place to enable them access ARVs maybe at no cost. These people do not have capacity to earn a living as we speak.  

The third is to hail the report for capturing the gaps within the existing legislation. Madam Speaker and honourable members, it has been established that there is a very close link between domestic violence and HIV/AIDS. I see on page 16, you have said that there are gaps within the existing legislation. 

You have talked about employment, family, domestic violence, taxation, inheritance, property and criminal law. I would like to hear more from you, Mr Chairperson, about the support that you will give when Parliament enacts laws on these particular areas. In the pipeline we have the Sexual Offences Bill as well as the Domestic Relations Bill. 

Apart from these laws, I thought that maybe you would also highlight some issues on customs We have customary practices such as wife inheritance. 

There was also female genital mutilation, which until recently has been a very widely practiced custom in Kapchorwa. But I am glad to note that as at 30th November this year, the very people of Kapchorwa asked the Deputy Speaker to make sure that this Parliament enacts a law to ban it. 

I hope that this committee will definitely work in conjunction with this Parliament as well as such communities to make sure that such cultural practices, which spread HIV/AIDS and make people more vulnerable to HIV/AIDS, are also tackled.

Finally, I thank the committee for coming up with new areas, for example, tattooing. We see many students now with tattoo marks of different animals. The other issue is that of drug addiction. 

But it seems that we have not moved very fast on these areas. They are becoming increasingly fashionable and at the same time very dangerous as far as the youth are concerned because they do encourage the spread of HIV/AIDS. I thank you.

MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank the committee on HIV/AIDS for such an elaborate report, and a very good one at that.  

Madam Speaker, you know very well that the government of the National Resistance Movement has done very many wrong things. But at the same time, it has done good things too, one of which is the fight against AIDS. (Applause). 

I do travel a lot, Madam Speaker, to different parts of the world - Asia, America and Europe. Formerly, Uganda used to be known by the image of Idi Amin Dada. But today when you travel to Europe Asia and the Arab world, Uganda is known by the tag of a successful country, which has fought and reduced the increase of AIDS. I think that is positive and we must applaud the Government for that contribution. 

In line with that, Madam Speaker, I want to support the position of the AIDS Committee that time has come to take the AIDS fight further by starting what they have recommended as constituency AIDS task forces. I do come from a constituency, which is very sexually active. Some prominent people in this government have had a fracas in some of the nice places in my constituency, fighting over these good things of life. 

Very often I also interact with sex workers –(Interjections)- Yes, because these are my constituents. I do talk to them and I normally want to find out what their problems are. One of the problems they have always told me about is the level of poverty. They do not have sustainable incomes. Sometimes men abandon them with children and, therefore, they have got to engage in this business and look for school fees for their kids.  

So, this is one key aspect in spreading the fight against AIDS, because this is one way through which AIDS permeates society. If you are to be more effective in the grassroots’ fight against AIDS, I think we should put more resources in these constituency AIDS task forces. Then we can get to the common person, to the lowest person on the ground, and we see to it that we reduce AIDS prevalence.  

Madam Speaker, I listened very carefully when hon. Kagimu was submitting. I was very much moved and even amazed that a former seminarian, who was taught decency and morality and grew up that, has finally ended up in an area where ekimansulo is done and he can describe in detail what is actually done there. But that is not the important point. 

The important point here is that this work of gauging who is moral and who is not moral, I think, is not the work of us politicians. This job is for reverends like Rev. Kefa Sempangi, Rev. Bakaluba, Imam Sebaggala and many other people in that category. It is very difficult for us politicians to apportion who is moral and who is not moral, and actually if we continue on this trend we may lose the argument.  

I want to give you an example. What is the difference between this and a man who undresses and has sex live on television? And when that man returns, he is accorded a hero’s welcome and is even thanked for his heroic acts by being invited to a Presidential meeting, flying in a Presidential helicopter. That is one side. 

The other side is of a man or woman who is looking for Shs 100 or Shs 10,000 for a night. He or she goes on stage and undresses, dances and leaves the stage without doing the act. Who of us has got the capacity to judge who is more moral than the other? Like Jesus said, you throw a stone if you have not done it; and you can only throw a stone if you are really morally upright.  

I want to conclude by saying that the job of apportioning who is moral and who is not is not for us as politicians. (Interruption)

MS KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Madam Speaker, I am really feeling uncomfortable. I thought I should stand up because the honourable member time and again has referred to the fact that judging who is moral and who is not is not the job of us politicians. 

This House on Thursday passed a motion to the effect that we do not wish to associate ourselves with having Gaetano as our role model. The argument that has been brought out in the press has been, “Are politicians more moral, have they not had sex wherever?” and so on. 

Considering all this, I want to say this is not the point that was being raised by this House over that matter. The point that was being raised was that these two people, whether what they did was private or whatever, did not set a good example. And any Member of Parliament who does that kind of act would be immoral and would not qualify to be a role model for our children in this nation. That was the point. 

Whether Members of Parliament are immoral or have had sex on the moon, or wherever, the point is that, this is also not right. And none of such people should stand up and be glorified as role models for our children in this country. Thank you.

BRIG. JIM MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, hon. Mabikke, for allowing me to give this information. 

I would like to inform the speaker that he is right in distinguishing morality and the fight against AIDS. We are not talking about morality and Gaetano being a role model, but we are talking about him as a mobilizer against HIV/AIDS. 

As a mobilizer of the youth, I think it is important to put morals aside, use him to attract the youth and we give them the right information about the fight against HIV/AIDS.  Thank you.

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the hon. Minister.  I have heard him say something, which appeared strange to me. Honestly, this whole idea of “do as I say but do not do as I do” does not work at all.  

I remember one time there was this campaign against smoking. There was a great man, a great speaker, who came here and people went and listened attentively. Some of them were even dropping the cigarettes and swearing to stop smoking. But at the end of the day when he was about to walk out of the hall, he picked a cigarette, lit it and smoked. The whole thing just went pyaaa. So, honestly, there is no way; it is like you pouring water on fire.  

I have been dealing with youth. The youth, especially the youth of these days, are really impressed by those terrible things in their minds. If they come because Gaetano is there, they are coming because of what Gaetano has done. I discuss with youth. 

By the way, I was involved in the battle against AIDS right from 1986. I played a very important effective role. We used to fight with the bishops and the reverends. I know about mobilisation against AIDS. All these results are our work. So, we know what we are talking about. 

So, when you are calling the youth and you call Gaetano, in their minds they get what they are impressed about Gaetano, and that is his sexual conduct. You may agree, you may not, but that is the thing, I can assure you.

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, it is very important to take advantage of the issues, which have been brought forward - the enlightenment, which the hon. Mabikke is bringing on the Floor and the clarification, which was given to us by the Minister.

In the business of marketing, you must use all the tricks to attract the audience towards the message you want to give. I would like to clarify that the President was certainly being very smart to take advantage of the crowd flocking there because of Gaetano. 

After all, Jesus insisted that he actually died for sinners and, therefore, it is not right to throw away these youth, who are thousands. Attract them back to sanity and then address them in an orderly manner. That was the information I wanted to give, Madam Speaker.

MR KAGIMU: Madam Speaker, I always feel very uncomfortable when people quote our Lord completely out of context. When you come here and you say that Jesus came for sinners - I remember I brought a point of order concerning this the other time. 

If it had been a crusade like those of balokole where they bring a Muzungu from abroad or a local person, and then they start praying and ask people to accept Jesus Christ and to convert their ways, there Jesus Christ comes in. He comes in as long as you are leaving the old ways. 

You do not just quote “Jesus came for sinners and for the sick”. People are misleading us! It must be a crusade whereby you are denouncing what you did. This was not a crusade, which was denouncing what had happened. In fact, they were promoting it.  

Madam Speaker, before I conclude the point of order –(Interjection)- Yes, I am raising a point of order. Hon. Mabikke said we politicians do not have moral authority to condemn because we have been involved in such behaviour. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to mislead this House that the crusade was about calling the people to repentance? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, unfortunately I did not have the benefit of attending any of those functions, so I do not know what was said there.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will wind up. This is –(Interruption)

MRS SARAH NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am getting worried about the way we are carrying on business in this House. Is it really procedurally right to discuss Gaetano when we had the whole day on Thursday to do this? Is it right to bring him up again today as if we do not have enough business to deal with?

MR FREDDIE RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, following what hon. Nansubuga Sarah is questioning, this House unanimously passed a motion disassociating itself from using Gaetano not as a role model but from his participation in the event of that day. Is it now procedurally correct for members to proceed as if that motion was never passed at all? 

Or would the procedure be different if there was need to re-open debate on that motion, which was passed? Is the procedure being used the correct procedure?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the matter of the use of which role model was settled last Thursday. So, you concentrate on the other issues in the report.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to wind up by making the following statements.  The first statement, and which I want to stand by, is that debate of apportioning who is moral and who is immoral is going to divert our focus on fighting AIDS. 

You can see last session there was a motion, which was passed unanimously, and today some of us did not even mention names but some honourable members were very sentimental about this topic –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, you were not in the House last week; I know that. A motion was passed here, abide by it and do other things. You were not in the House last week.

MR MABIKKE: Yes, Madam Speaker, I am using that very motion –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not go back to that motion.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to say that in the fight against AIDS, there are two other areas that we must focus on and fight, or try to reduce very effectively. One area is youth unemployment. 

Youth unemployment is so rampant and it appears that the Government of Uganda does not seem to have a national youth policy or an effective employment policy for the country. So, in our fight against AIDS, it is important that Government also targets ways and means of trying to improve the unemployment problem in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I would like the Government of Uganda to tackle very seriously the issue of poverty hand-in-hand with fighting AIDS. I have been disturbed by most of the recent reports that I have read from the World Bank. 

The latest on the government strategy on poverty alleviation programme is to the effect that instead of reducing poverty, poverty appears to be on a rise. It rose from 36 percent to now close to 38 or 39 percent, which is a very worrying trend. 

As I told you before, some of our friends who engage in activities, which promote AIDS, give poverty as a reason for that status. So - I want to conclude –(Interjection)- I am winding up. Madam Speaker, I want to wind up by saying that government should tackle those issues.  

Finally, I insist that it is not the job of you politicians to apportion who is moral and who is immoral, or else you lose the debate on AIDS.

3.53
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to focus on legislative gaps in our campaign against AIDS. I am very perturbed that certain areas of our lives or professions have not been protected.

One, as a sportsman, to-date there is no law on what we call contact sports, regarding transmission of AIDS. In the United States, you have to be tested so that they know whether you are a carrier or not before you can engage in professional boxing. 

Why am I saying contact sports? If you are a carrier and by accident you bite the other person, you can actually transmit the virus. Two, in boxing there is a tendency of bleeding. When you have been hit in the face several times, you bleed and the other party can also bleed. The same gloves you use can actually transmit the virus from one boxer to another boxer. 

It also happens in football; you can make contact with the other player and transmit the virus. Madam Speaker, there is a legislative gap in what we call contact sports.  

Three, in medical practice, I am sure the Minister of Health will confirm that a number of nurses have contracted this awful disease through their profession, for lack of protective measures. When they are delivering a mother who has got the virus and they do not have enough gloves, the tendency is to transmit the blood through cuts on the fingers, edges of the nails, and these poor mothers through their profession contract HIV. 

I would like to get a statement from the Minister of Health. What have they done to safeguard the lives of the nurses and the doctors? Wherever you go to any medical facility, there is inadequate supply of the following: One, protective gloves, and some of these gloves have not been tested to make sure that blood cannot go through some porous roots to the other party.  

Two, syringes. The old method of boiling syringes for further use should be banned. It is another way of transmitting AIDS. I do not know what you have done in the Ministry of Health to make sure that every health facility has enough supply of disposable syringes. 

Madam Speaker, not long ago one of my colleagues suggested that it should be compulsory for couples intending to get married to be tested. I opposed that kind of proposal. Of what value will it be? These two people have decided to get married and one of them is maybe a carrier, and you are telling the other party, “Do not get married”. 

Nobody can be sure of what has been going on prior to the marriage. Maybe they had been sleeping together for the past one year, cohabiting. Now you tell them at the last minute that, “you cannot get married because you do not have a certificate to clear you that you are not a carrier.” 

Madam Speaker, this august House that makes the laws for this country should refrain from such a measure. For sickle cells, it is true that it is mandatory in the United States. You cannot get married until you have got your certificate clarifying or classifying you as a carrier or not a carrier. So, that one is useful and also it is in the interest of the two parties. 

But in this case, to inhibit people, to tell people they cannot get married because they do not have a certificate of clearance, I think it will be interference in the love affair.

Two, I am also expressing concern in terms of capital punishment. Madam Speaker, if you commit defilement, you are subject to capital punishment.  Can we also say that anybody who deliberately transmits the HIV virus shall be subject to capital punishment? 

Castration, as my honourable colleague says, is another way of handling the matter. But legislatively, we do not have a law in this country prescribing castration as a form of punishment. There is no law yet that says, “whoever commits this offence shall be subject to castration”. 

Capital punishment has never –(Interruption)- My honourable colleagues are prescribing, informally, that maybe we should now move a motion, a private members bill, to make castration a formal punishment for those who commit defilement. Right now my interest is the transmission of the HIV. Anybody who does it deliberately should be subject to capital punishment, and I would like to see that in the law books.  

Madam Speaker, on the matter of this medicine, ARVs, it has been a matter of international debate and negotiations. I think it is high time this country negotiated with the leading pharmaceutical manufacturers so that we get it on generic terms so that we are not subject to these high prices. 

I was shocked to hear from the President on International AIDS Day that a maximum of 300,000 people have got access to this medicine. Out of a population of 24 million, with a possible level of about two million carrying the virus, only 300,000 have got access to –(Interruption)

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The President never said anything like that. The information is that about 10,000 people are receiving ARVs. These are the known cases. Of course, there are more people who are getting the treatment from South Africa, Britain and so on, or others who do not want to be known. 

The number of people who need treatment, who have already developed AIDS, are approximately 150,000. And what the President said - actually he asked me to go and explain what we are doing. We said that next year we are going to start giving free drugs, ARVs, to some of the people. Some of the people we are going to begin with are orphans, those who do not have any of their parents. 

We are also going to give ARVs to people who are involved in research, like in the prevention of mother-to-child transmission. If a pregnant mother comes forward and is tested and we find that she is positive, then she should get treatment free of charge. When the child is born, if he or she is positive they will get treatment, and also the husband. Then we said that the process would go on gradually, as we get money for buying the ARVs.  

Secondly, we also said that the prices are coming down and that Government is also playing a big role. As you were requesting, we are already negotiating with drug manufacturers to come to Uganda and manufacture the drugs here. 

However, in the meantime, we are going to buy generic drugs, which will be cheap and will be almost affordable by the average person. A few months ago it was Shs 1.0 million for treatment for one month. Today, it is Shs 55,000 for treatment for a month. Hopefully very soon it will be like Shs 20,000 and on to Shs 1,000. 

There are also initiatives like that by President Clinton. Some pharmaceuticals are willing to give very poor countries free ARVs, and Uganda is going to benefit. We are also getting money, over $36 million, from the Global Fund to buy ARVs. So, the picture is not dark; it is positive. Very soon we shall have treatment for every one. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad my honourable colleague has supplemented what I was trying to say. As a matter of fact, the news he is giving me is even worse than I expected. I thought we had reached a level of 300,000, now he is telling me it is actually 150,000, which is really terrible. 

Secondly, he is saying unless you have got 50,000 per month you have no access to these ARVs. But I am saying, given our country, where we live on less than a dollar a day, the Government should provide this money so that everybody or anybody who has the problem should access that cure.  

Madam Speaker, my other concern is the area of human rights. One time, and it was terrible, this head of state we have at the moment tried to stigmatise another candidate. He was saying, “so and so is a carrier, do not vote for him.” He never apologised - (Interjection)- I do not have to say it, I do not want to get into another controversy. 

Those of us who were involved in the last presidential campaigns know that the President somehow never apologised to that particular candidate. Madam Speaker, my main concern here is the area of employment and human rights. 

Two days ago, there was a statement from the Police force that they were going to test their personnel with a view of either retiring or firing them. Today the Inspector General has come up with a disclaimer saying he never made such a statement. But, definitely in UPDF there is a programme that before you go abroad for further training, you are tested for HIV. (Interruption)

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much for giving way.  I would like to inform the member on the Floor that for some countries it is a pre-condition that you must be tested for HIV before you go to attend a course in those colleges.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Minister. I know, but as a matter of fact, let us call a spade a spade. The President, before he took up this campaign against AIDS, it was after Cuba had rejected 137 cadets of UPDF; he said, “I cannot train them in my country –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I think you are stigmatising those 137 cadets. Yes, because they are probably known.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I do apologise. As a matter of fact, I was trying to highlight how the policies of the Government are indirectly stigmatising some of us, some of the people who are in employment of the Government. 

Government comes up, an agency or a department of the state comes up and says, “we are going to test you for HIV”. Why don’t they do the same for malaria? They should say, “We are going to test everybody to see if you are a carrier of malaria or if you have been infected with malaria.”  But they want to test people for HIV. Why? (Interruption)

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Hon. Awori has just been preaching to us about contact sports, and he meant that these people should get mandatory testing. In the same vein, he is talking about people undergoing testing as being stigmatised. Can he help us know what his position is?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, noting that the AIDS scourge has already become a matter of international concern, at this juncture as a representative of the people of Lubaga South I would like to ask the Government to let us know in which areas it is carrying out the test as a pre-condition.

DR BULAMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will take the road less travelled by reminding honourable members that the newest committee, the Committee on HIV/AIDS, is presenting to you the first report. 

This is to nourish you with what we have come up with and to seek advice from you, and also to encourage you to sensitise the communities, the public, the society about voluntary counselling and testing. This is the only way for treatment, for training in the psycho-socio approach so that we know who to approach. 

It is to in that breath, therefore, that I request members that before you go completely from our report, advise us and at least stick to what we have put here, nothing at all! If it is Gaetano, if it is testing for the Army, are you saying we are perfect; we are 100 percent all right? No. And if we are not, can you please advise us. This is our first report and it will embarrass us if we do not know what to do next. 

Definitely, I am surprised that a soldier going for training abroad is deemed mistreated when he is requested to be tested! How? Even in some universities, before you go there they test you. It is good some honourable member quoted Cuba, and it is because of this that we want to avoid embarrassment, not to send our people only to be returned. You test them. 

Madam Speaker, I am not the chairperson of the committee but, please, help the committee to do a good job, honourable members.  Thank you.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that what I have been trying to do, it was even in my opening statement, is to point out legislative gaps, which were not adequately covered in this report. So next time round, also focus on legislation and how it affects this campaign against AIDS. 

I gave an example of voluntary testing before marriage. Should we make it compulsory? I am saying it is superfluous and it is not necessary. 

I gave the example of the contact sports, and my honourable colleague here would like to know whether it should be applicable in this country or not, vis-à-vis the voluntary or compulsory testing for people in the armed forces. The two are totally in separate areas. One is law enforcement. 

The people in UPDF and police do not necessarily have physical contact during the course of their work. So, really, there is no probability that a soldier or a policeman will transmit the virus to the person being arrested. 

While in sports, especially boxing, you keep hitting each other and you keep bleeding. These gloves carry the blood and they transmit the blood to the other person’s wound, which means direct injection of blood into the other person’s bloodstream. That is why I am saying we need to take this kind of thing into consideration. 

So, to explain to my honourable colleague, there is a difference between contact sports as a way of determining people who should play that game or not at all –(Interruption)

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Although there is no law and this Government may not pass a law that all sports people must be tested, because there are international conventions which Government is party to that prohibit discrimination, it is a right of any sportsman to insist that unless the other person is tested, they will not play with him. That way, probably, we can get a way forward.

MR AWORI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My honourable colleague has just supported me in a big way. I am glad to hear that. It is not often you people on that bench support me. But for a change we have made a midway - (Prof Bukenya rose_) 

Madam Speaker, you know I have the highest respect for the Vice President as a medical doctor, and he is a member of this august House. On this particular topic, I yield the Floor for his information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Awori, he thought you had wound up so he stood up. So, if you could wind up.

MR AWORI: Thank you very much. I would like to put it to the Minister of Health that at least one to five percent of his annual budget should be devoted to the protection of medical workers in form of giving them gloves and other measures, so that they are not exposed to contaminated blood. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.14
THE VICE PRESIDENT (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Can I take this opportunity to thank this committee of Parliament very much for this very good report. I really want to thank you. 

I want to raise a grey area where I think Parliament will be very crucial in helping HIV/AIDS reduction. Uganda is at very crucial critical crossroads. One time the prevalence of HIV/AIDS was 30 percent but today the prevalence is about six percent. Actually, the infection rate has reduced to about 1.7 percent.

Two, we have got these drugs they call ARVs, which if somebody who was bedridden takes, a month later he would be up and running. Now, that has a very important implication to HIV/AIDS. 

If you are in a community and you see somebody who was bedridden and after one week or so he is up and running, then your outlook to the disease pleasantly changes. You will think that these drugs have treated that individual and, therefore, you will no longer say, “If I go in, I am dead”. So, that is a very serious issue at hand today, and what I call the crossroads. 

In spite of that, the drugs may not cure you 100 percent and you will still have the virus. But as you know today, some people are beginning to say that HIV/AIDS is simply another disease like diabetes or hypertension. Because with hypertension and diabetes, you continuously take your drug and, therefore, you continue living your normal life. Now, that is the trend of thinking in the population today. 

However, I want to tell you that we still have a long way towards getting the drugs for HIV/AIDS in the same manner as we do for diabetes or hypertension. So, that is the crossroad. 

This is where we should have continued primary prevention, where we are saying, “please, abstain if you are very religious, and if you cannot manage to abstain, use a condom” and so on and so forth. And the people will say –(Interruption)

MR MOSES LUBOWA: Madam Speaker, I am in agreement that we are making positive trends in the direction of bringing down HIV/AIDS. But I am wondering whether the Ministry of Health, probably in collaboration with the licensing board, is aware that there is another source of contact through barber shops. 

I carried out a study in just one township and I discovered that in a township like Kireka or Bweyogerere, you may find about 200 barber shops and each one of them is being visited by about ten clients daily. That makes the number about 1,000. Are they aware that these people do not use sterilised machines, and that it is also a way of transmitting AIDS? 

I seek clarification on that one. In fact, the number is much bigger than people who visit these lodges and hotels. Yes, you may find that around Kireka maybe in a day about 20 or 50 people visit lodges to do whatever they do. But those who visit barber shops and salons are about 1,000. So, compare 1,000 with only 50 who go for sexual intercourse in these lodges.

PROF. BUKENYA: I do not know whether that was clarification for me. But I will tell you that I want to laud one thing, that we must continue to advocate for primary prevention, whether it is transmitted through gloves in the hospitals, disposable syringes, barbers’ equipment, condoms, dentists or whoever. 

The cry I am making to the committee and Members of Parliament is that we should continue advocating for primary prevention at all our rallies, at fundraising meetings. Let us continue reminding the young people, because I am telling you, today we need to emphasise primary prevention more than yesterday. 

It would have been better yesterday if I told you, “If you do this, you are dead.” But today someone can argue and say, “Yes, I will do this, but I will still walk. I have the money, I will still walk”. That is the crossroad I am trying to tell you about. 

I am appealing to you that it is today that we need to advocate more as politicians, as leaders, that we continue with primary prevention. However, if something goes wrong, we also have these drugs but let us continue preventing this disease. 

However, we must also as politicians understand the socio-psychological systems we are in, so that we look at the different groups differently. If there are people who are going for easy sex, the only thing you have to tell them is, “Please, use methods that will prevent you from getting this disease” rather than condemning them. And if you are in a religious group and you can abstain, I think we should also do the same.

Madam Speaker, I stood up to make an appeal to Parliament. In your rallies, everywhere you go, please tell these people that there is not yet a cure for HIV/AIDS, because there is actually no cure. Please try your best to avoid saying that there is one. Most people are now calling HIV/AIDS diabetes or hypertension, but the two diseases are different. That is the message I wanted to give, Madam Speaker.

4.23
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My emphasis is going to be on the way forward on the report, which has been presented. 

We have made very big progress in controlling AIDS in this country. I visited here in 1986 and on the day I came, the Libyan delegation was also here. I was staying at Speke Hotel. At that time there was no information at all about how AIDS is transmitted in this country yet in the international medical papers, Rakai was known, Naluwerere was known. It was known that those were places where the carrier rate was in some cases over 60 percent, but nobody knew that. I was surprised at how our friends were conducting themselves.

I have to genuinely congratulate the Government. What happened at the time was that the Government of Uganda accepted that there was AIDS in the country when every other country in the neighbourhood was saying they had no AIDS because they did not want to scare away tourists. 

That alone, and public education as it has been mentioned, enabled us to reach where we are. It is not drugs really. They might have had a small impact but what has made us reach this point is education. 

We should continue with education, we should spread education out into the countryside. That is where the problem of AIDS is now major. The education levels and poverty in the countryside are both conducive for the spread of HIV. So, it is important that we educate people in the rural areas.

Madam Speaker, when drugs come we get NGOs out in the countryside, but I think we should continue working through the Ministry of Health. Let the dispensaries be centres of education and let them be areas where people go for treatment when drugs become available. Let the pre-natal clinics become centres for testing and management of HIV/AIDS.

Hon. Awori is against routine testing but the way syphilis was eradicated in this country was that whenever a lady went to the pre-natal clinic, she was tested for syphilis. If she had it, she was treated. It was not compulsory but it was part of the routine management of pregnancy. The way Cuba has controlled HIV/AIDS is the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mallinga, they treated the lady for syphilis but what did they do with the man? Did they bring the husband also to get treated?

DR MALLINGA: Yes, both of them were treated. In medicine we have what you call catchment areas; people gather, you catch them and test them for a particular disease, like syphilis or HIV. 

We have a problem of secondary infections. Tuberculosis, which was almost unknown, is now coming up for two reasons. One, we tested once in the medical school and we found that 70 percent of us had been exposed to TB but because we were well fed, we were able to fight it off. But it remains in your lung as a little millet-size spot, called a Ghon lesion. 

At any time, if your ability to fight disease goes down, it flares up. And when this flared up in people who caught HIV, then people started coughing and now they are passing it onto other people. We should not forget TB when we are dealing with AIDS, especially in the rural areas. We really have to start combating TB.

Pre-marital testing; hon. Aggrey Awori knows that in the United States before you get a license to get married, even these days when the infection rate for syphilis is very low, you still take a test for syphilis. They give you a license to get married. 

I do not see anything wrong in passing a law in this country; that will be one of the catchment areas. If we find that two people have got AIDS then we have to counsel them, advise them on what precautions they have to take when they have children –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Dr Mallinga for giving way. In this country and in this Parliament there has been support for polygamy. So, how many times are these people going to test if there is support for polygamy?  

DR MALLINGA: I do not really support polygamy. It is going to die a natural death in this country. But as long as it is there, the woman and the man should be tested whether he is getting married for the tenth time. The woman with him should be tested. It would be advisable for the other women also to be tested because the whole group is vulnerable. If the man is tested, the woman he is going to marry is tested then the other women should also be tested. 

Cancer of the cervix is like a transmitted disease also. The way to deal with it is that all women admitted to hospitals should have what they call a pap smear for screening cancer. Along the way when we get resources, we should really make it part of a routine testing when somebody is admitted to the hospital. 

There is some political implication. It is not compulsory but it is just part of the management of a patient. When you go to the hospital, certain tests are taken routinely. So, a routine HIV test should be one of the tests to be taken.  

Sex education has been mentioned a little vaguely. It was not emphasized. I would like to emphasise that as part of the curriculum in primary and secondary schools, sex education should be taught. It would save a lot of lives in this country. 

Some people do not think that you get HIV through sex. So, Madam Speaker, sex education should become part of the curriculum in our primary and secondary schools. Thank you very much for listening to me.

4.33
MS JACQUELINE KYATUHEIRE (Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this very good report. 

My concern is on page 8 of the report, bullet No. 2. Here the committee notes that more than 50 percent of new infections of HIV are occurring in young people in the 10–24 years age group. And that everyday more than 7,000 young people are infected with HIV, meaning that people are being infected every minute. 

Madam Speaker, the report goes on to say, “Young women are biologically more vulnerable to HIV infection than young men. HIV infection among young women aged 13–19 years in Uganda is 20 times higher than in young men of the same age.”

If you go to page 35 of the same report, you read that there are no voluntary counselling and testing services in some districts and these include Bugiri, Bundibugyo, Kalangala, Kanungu and Nakapiripirit. 

This is very appalling because around the late 1980s, there was a lot of campaigning against HIV transmission but I think there has been laxity in this campaign. I vividly remember that most leaders at the time, and particularly the President, always talked about AIDS at every opportunity they would get. 

I remember he used to tell people not to go near the anthill because if they went near it, then they would be bitten by a snake. At the time I was an adolescent and in a way this message carried on in my life. But as you look at this same page -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank you honourable member for giving the way. I would like to help hon. Jacqueline Kyatuheire, who was young at that time. 

Actually, snakes do not reside in anthills. They actually reside in those holes where anthills existed at the time. He used to refer to them as pompogoma. He used to say, when you know that snakes reside in pompogoma, why do you put your hand in it? Most likely if the snake is there, it is going to bite you.

MS KYATUHEIRE: Thank you very much my elder for that information. Madam Speaker, I raised this to emphasize the impact these messages were creating on the youth. I have a feeling, and a strong one at that, that government is putting more emphasis on people who are already infected rather than trying to avoid the infection. 

This year’s theme was “Celebrate Youth, Celebrate Life.” I was at a loss as to whether I should celebrate this day with my people in Kanungu District, because I did not know how to help them out of this problem. 

If you look at areas very deep in all our villages, the youth, and very many other people who are interested in knowing their HIV status, are not able to do that. If you look at Kampala here where there are those services, people find it very hard to go and know their status. What about people deep in the villages who do not even have a single facility where they can go and test from? 

At this point I would like to strongly request government to try to make this a priority, rather than letting people get infected and after they are infected give them ARVs, which is more expensive. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.38
MS AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on HIV/AIDS for the report. 

When we are debating this HIV, I want us to know that it is a very dangerous scourge. To me it is not a matter of an international issue but it is a personal issue. It confirms your death when you are seeing. In fact, for your remaining life you will stay in trauma. 

Why do I show great concern? You will find that this country lost its moral spirit some years back. The moral behaviour of this country has totally decayed. That is why you find that even in this House when a Member of Parliament stands to condemn papers that expose the naked body, the whole House does not support the debate over that ruined paper. 

Madam Speaker, that is why we see our young generation moving around half-naked, because we have totally imported the western culture. Where do we get these pictures? We get them through the computers. These are not ours; they are imported into this country.  

Madam Speaker, this brings my attention to page 21. But before I lament on that, I would like to take this particular chance to thank the minister concerned for using the youth to change the behaviour of the people of this country. The problem is cited; about four pages have been illustrating how the youth have been exposed to this danger. 

I would really like to thank the Minister, or whoever organized and put in the Big Brother team to tell the people to change their behaviour. I thank that sector so much, because all that we are supposed to do is to become balokole, is to change our attitudes. If you have been doing something, stop doing it so that we reduce the rate at which this AIDS scourge is spreading.  

The committee clearly stated the use of the CHAI funds in the district. I would like to say, if only these CHAI funds were utilized through the secondary schools, higher institutions, even in the universities so that we control the behaviour of these people from where they are coming from, then we shall reduce this problem that we have in this country. 

I mention this because as we are seated here, even some Members of Parliament do not know whether the CHAI funds are there in their districts or not.  This is a call to the committee to also put emphasis on this so that this House gets a periodic report on the importance of the CHAI funds in decentralized districts and at the centre here. Then we shall be up-to-date with the activities of the CHAI Fund.

My other point is on women versus AIDS in this era of unemployment. The women are still dangerously exposed to HIV because of the second positions we are always getting in this country. 

You find women are deputies, and they will never give employment to any person given the fact that we have privatisation activities in this country. And the privatisation is never controlled by the Government system. I want to charge –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the honourable member on the Floor. How does being in the second position expose you to AIDS?

MS ANGUPALE: Madam Speaker, I always reserve my comments. It is very important in this House that people allow somebody to finish a phrase before they raise a clarification. 

I am saying that in women being deputies, they do not have responsibilities to employ and the majority of this is in the private sector. Therefore, when a woman is going to seek for employment, the first thing men do is request for sex and there is no option -(Interjection)- It is happening! I wonder why the honourable House is denying it. It may happen to your own daughter -(Interruption)

MR BRUNO PAJOBO: I would like to inform the honourable member that the subject she is tackling is a very important one. We have carried out research and we found out that it is difficult for women to get promotions or even be employed, and these big people, the men, demand for sex. This is a fact. So, that is a big issue for us. 

Even recently when we had these girls from Tri-Star, they came out openly and said that they have been tortured by those Sri-Lankans, sexually. So, what she is saying is true.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank you honourable member for giving way. It is true, and even when a woman goes to sit for an interview and she is about eight months expectant, she is most unlikely to get that job. And yet they do not ask the man whether he has left a pregnant woman at home. These are issues, and it is the reality. We must address them. 

The issues of sexual harassment in employment lead to economic insecurity, which pushes women to do things, which they should not be doing. I thank you.

MRS ANGUPALE: Thank you for the information hon. Byamukama. Hon. Member for Workers, this is why the workers continuously put you in this House, to talk on behalf of the people. 

Honourable members, I would like to inform you that we do not need to deny this fact. Even recently on the Tri-Star issue, the ladies were telling us they were sexually harassed. Some years ago in the Electoral Commission, somebody committed somebody’s wife because they wanted to promote her. These are things that you know. I do not know why you put your heads down when people are talking about it.

My other point is on page 11, about the use of retroviral drugs -(Interruption)

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Is the honourable member aware that women are also harassing some men? (Laughter). Sexual harassment - it is in this report, and we have also been reading in papers about women harassing men.

MS ANGUPALE: Madam Speaker, I do not know that one. As a teacher, I always want evidence, just as we have been proving here. But -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what hon. Angupale is saying is that in most cases it is the men who are in position and are able to exert pressure for sex, because they are in the position of power. They decide whether you get a job or whether you get promoted. That is what she is saying. Could you tell us a number of women who are in those positions? (Laughter).

MS ANGUPALE: Madam Speaker, I think we do not need to debate that much. The evidence is that men are number one. From A to Z they are number one.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also giving information. There are well-to-do and well placed businesswomen who employ young handsome boys on condition that the boys satisfy them sexually.

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In fact this morning I attended the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee meeting. The police officer who came to brief on the law of being idle and disorderly told us that whenever they are patrolling around this the hotel triangle of Nile Hotel, Sheraton and Grand Imperial Hotel, they find some ladies standing around. And that actually these ladies sexually harass our police officers. Thank you very much.

MS ANGUPALE: Madam Speaker, I do not think that is sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is a situation where somebody has got her rights, is entitled to a job, she has got the qualifications but you deny her the chance because she has refused to give in to sex. Those ladies stand there to wait for whoever comes for them and they do not force you.

That is why earlier on I said that the committee needs to use this CHAI Fund in institutions. I believe these are young girls from institutions, or freshers from university. They need to be modelled before they come out with such cases.

My next point is on anti-retroviral drugs. Madam Speaker, I expect the committee in their tours or endeavours, to meet the technical group in future. They should give room in such a way that the use of these drugs should be clearly stated to the users and beneficiaries, that is the people with HIV. 

Why do I say that? Very many people already fear using these tablets because of one scenario. I do not know whether by the time they go in for those drugs they are totally worn out, or the drugs are so strong for the body that it breaks them down. 

Experience has shown that the majority of the people going for these drugs end up dying. I would like to assure the Minister for Health that people are already getting worried about it. 

There is need -(Interruption)

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The people who are dying are probably too weak to stand the drug, or maybe the disease has already weakened them. 

However, the reason we are actually slow in reaching everybody is that once you go on the drug you cannot stop. If you stop, you die. And when you are on the drug you have got to be monitored before they continue the drug or give you different drugs, and so on. The equipment for monitoring is actually more expensive than the drug. 

That is why we are waiting to get more money from the Global Fund, among other sources, to get enough equipment and enough trained personnel to reach everywhere. That way, whoever is on the drug will be monitored. They will not only be taught but also stay in close contact with the doctor who is giving the drug. Thank you.

PROF. BUKENYA: Madam Speaker, I really want to reassure the honourable member. The drugs against HIV/AIDS are extremely effective. They really are. 

But there are different regimes for different levels of how you can fight the disease. If your CD4 is maximally reduced - these are components of white blood cells that help you to fight a foreign body when something comes to you –then you use a certain regime. 

But there are people who have not been going through the normal process of diagnosing the status of the HIV/AIDS and access to drugs. Those are the wrong ones and they get into problems So, you must access the right dose, the right combination for the level of the severity of the disease.  

Secondly, once you start taking them you must go, periodically, for blood assessment to see how much your immune system is coming up. If you do not, you can also have a complication. Even if you are in Luzira, you can still have the CD4 count taken. But really, it is wrong to say that people take the drugs and they die.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you please wind up?

MS ANGUPALE: Yes, Madam Speaker. Before I wind up I would like to say that this is the talk of the community, and that is why we are charging the committee to inform the community. This is the information we expect the communities to receive so that they take these drugs and survive. 

I have tried two people and the third person refused and gave me that statement. So, I believe that the committee will educate the communities accordingly.

Finally, on page 4 the committee nicely talked about the reduction of blood-to-blood transmission through strengthening of blood transfusion services. I want to enquire from the Minister, how is this country going to prevent total transmission of AIDS through blood transfusions? 

I am not a technical person, I am not a doctor, but I understand that when you acquire the virus, you must wait for three months before you are tested positive. I believe when you get blood from the donors, you may get blood from somebody who acquired it last night and test it and it tests negative and then you give it to the patient. How can we control that scenario? Thank you very much.

4.54
MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort-Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues who have thanked His Excellency the President and the Government for having put up a protracted struggle against HIV/AIDS. That is why we are a model. In the whole world now we are the talk.  

I have just a few concerns. The committee has written a very good report, especially on the youth, but then it has only narrated the problems It has not given us the proposals or the recommendations about how the youth should be handled. 

Madam Speaker, we should know that there are two categories of youth. There are youth who are at school and youth who are in the villages. These youth who are in villages are not much catered for. Even those who are at school, there is a problem in our education system. There is not much guidance and counselling because we do not have enough people to do that. 

I do not know whether I am mistaken, but I would like to request the Minister of Education and Sports to carry out massive training in guidance and counselling for our youth in schools and the youth out of school.

There is another issue, about recreational facilities in the country. I have been travelling in many parts of Uganda and recreational facilities are minimal. They are there only for students or pupils in schools. But for those out of school, I do not see where they do their sports. 

So, there is that problem. When they do not play, where are they going to put that excessive energy, which they have as youth? They are likely to engage in sex and get AIDS. So, there is need to plan for these youth who are out of school.  

Now I turn to the mass media. The mass media, especially newspapers, are doing a good job. But then on television there is not much, especially on our Uganda Television (UTV), about the fight against HIV/AIDS. 

There is a lot of counselling, there is a lot of information to people that they should use condoms when they are having sex, but then other aspects are not being emphasized. So, there is need to have more information in our mass media about fighting HIV/AIDS.

I would like to emphasize that as the Government goes on to fight AIDS, they should emphasize curative measures. They should also emphasize preventive measures. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.58
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. Actually, it did bring me to life. They did note very clearly that certain districts like Kalangala do not have testing centres and yet almost all of us here have been talking about being tested and counselled. 

Some of the districts like Kalangala, which have fish, - the second highest foreign exchange earner - are not catered for when the foreign exchange has been got. They are not given some of these centres so they do not know where they are. 

Actually, they look at their way of life, because they are healthy looking, all of them use their eyes and say, “We are fine, we cannot be sick”. And I think that way of testing is very dangerous. 

Most of them leave their homes in order to go and look for fish. And of course because they are very cold, they look for fish at night. During the day they need to be warmed up and yet they leave their homes very far behind. In the process, they end up changing partners and I think that is a very dangerous situation. 

Some districts need to be looked at and I am sure in the studies they should be considered. When I look at where the committee visited, they did not visit such districts that have a high potential. We need to analyse this, and it is very easy for us to get those areas and get the testing/counselling services to them.  

Then think about the medication. Madam Speaker, we have the school-going children and most especially the girls. We have heard that at age 12 the girls start menstruation. What they have to use every month for menstruation is very expensive - about US $ 3 a month - and most parents cannot afford this. 

Parents, and guardians in the case of orphans, have faithfully told these girls to sleep with a man and get pregnant. At least they will get a release without spending three times, twelve dollars. At least they will have that relief and that is because they are poor. (Interruption)

MRS GERTRUDE KULANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What the honourable member is raising is very important. I appeal to Government that these sanitary towels should be tax-free because they are basic. They are a necessity just like salt and mosquito nets.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would wish to inform the honourable members raising that point that there is no tax absolutely on these sanitary towels.

MRS KAVUMA: Thank you, hon. Minister, but you know even without tax they cost 3 dollars a month. You should see how difficult the situation is. So, something needs to be done to help. (Interruption)

MRS DOROTHY HYUHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ruth Kavuma for giving way for information. Whereas I agree with the Minister of Finance that now the sanitary towels are tax free, we are advocating for something in Education, and when the report of Social Services comes to this House I want us to get overwhelming support. 

Under Universal Primary Education (UPE) where we have a majority of the girls dropping out of school from Primary 5 to Primary 7, we should use part of the capitation grant to procure sanitary towels and give them to our girl child. We should do this in the same way it is used to procure textbooks and other instructional material for primary schools -(Applause)- even at secondary level. 

I pray that at the time when we are analysing the policy statement, it will be overwhelmingly supported and we pass it –(Interjection)- certainly for free.

MRS KAVUMA: Thank you very much. Somebody said the teachers will take them, but the teachers are teaching these girls and they could as well benefit.  

Madam Speaker, in the report we have a mention of child-headed families and this is a very serious situation. The committee proposed school fees for secondary school going children. Now, if we have child-headed families, there are probably those children who are in primary schools. I doubt whether these children who are heading families have food to give these children going to primary school, let alone at home. 

I would really like to emphasise the issue of a meal, at least porridge, in primary schools instead of depending on parents packing. I mean, these children do not have anybody to pack for them; they probably did not even have food the day before. 

I think we really need to look at this, because if we do not, then these children will of course go and sleep around in order to get something to eat. And probably they will do this with the teachers, and then what next? They will spread HIV/AIDS even more. 

So, I think we need to look at it a little bit more seriously and see that this is also an area that would help us in the move to cut down on HIV/AIDS. 

I would like to make a very quick point on orphanages. They could be good but I feel quite a number of them need investigating. At least I know some in some districts where the orphans are being used as sex workers. Some of them are actually got from there to be used for bimansulo. They are being told, “we are looking after you. You do not have any parent so go and mansula and contribute towards your upkeep”. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.05
REV. HAMLET KABUSHENGA (Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to add my voice to thank the committee for doing a job that is very thorough. I also thank the President and the Government for all the interventions that have been put in place, which clearly formed a very important basis for the committee to do their work.  

I would like to comment on section 2.5(3) of the report where the committee articulately observes that in our local situation, there has been an invasion of foreign cultures that have raped our culture and eroded traditional morality. I find this to be very true and I wish to say that the work of this committee and our august House is to provide a law and enforcement of such a law on the digital media. 

In talking about the invasion of foreign culture, one of the institutions being referred to is the Internet cafes, which have increased in popularity yet which lack any form of legal or government regulation. There is no law. 

As we talk about sex education, which would teach the positive aspects of human sexuality, we need first of all to prevent the damage that is being done through the digital media. The outcry against the Red Pepper has been deserved, but people need to realise that maybe for every one copy of the Red Pepper that is being sold, there may be 100 young people who are surfing live pornography without any regulation.  

Sometimes when we talk about these things in the House, people are quick to put the label of moralising, but I think this label is not always deserved. Many people are doctors but not many people are adolescent educators. In the psycho-dynamics of adolescent learning, what they see is the most important thing. 

The message they hear of avoiding unsafe sex or whatever, is not as important to them as the graphic pictures that they see in the Internet cafes. 

Studies of pornography have been made in the world and three observations have been made. First of all, they have a desensitising effect. A young person who goes to the Internet cafe and sees a person who is raping a wild animal suddenly makes provision for that concept in their minds. That is what they call desensitisation. 

If someone has got a phobia against flying, in psychology they have what they call systematic desensitisation. They bring you closer to what you fear until you do not fear it any more. So, when we hear in the press that a man has been fined for raping a goat or a pig, we need to know that this invasion is teaching our younger people certain behaviour and that we are not combating it. 

Secondly, pornography has been said to be suggestive. A young person who goes into an Internet cafe when they are in their teenage learns more by imitation than by listening or any other way, and so it has a suggestive component. What they see, they want to go out and practice. This is not moralising; this is psychology. We need to mark this. 

Thirdly, pornography has an addictive trend.  People are being treated for being addicted. The more they see, the worse they get. A person starts by surfing and seeing people who are half naked. After some time they are no longer satisfied with that, they want the fully naked, and then they want to look at live sex. These are issues for which we need a law. 

Sometimes you think about foreign cultures and we think that they are very permissive. True as that might be, they have got systems that regulate and protect especially the young people. They say if you are going to see these things, you at least need to be of an age where you have got control of your own lives. 

But our Internet cafes are not allowing our young people to do that. A nine, ten, eleven or twelve year old will go into an Internet cafe and open up any website. It is asking too much if we ask the people who operate these places to voluntarily regulate, because there is a profit interest for them. The more airtime they sell, the more profit they make. 

So, I want to advise this committee and to request this House to put in place a law and to enforce a law that puts on the Internet service providers the burden of protecting the young people. If a child who is not 18 years old is found accessing live pornography, it is the owner of the shop who should be taken to court. 

There have been technological advances in the control of these things. It is possible today to install software in every Internet cafe, which makes sure that people do not access certain websites. Counter software has been manufactured because the people –(Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, I am so glad the member holding the Floor has mentioned that. That software costs just two dollars, and I even have it in my own computer here in Parliament. Nobody on earth, no idiot, nobody can send me these spams. They cannot send them to me because I have controlled it. 

So, it would be so good if every Internet cafe could prove to the public that it has this software and these teenagers cannot have any access automatically to this dubious, terrible, horrible pornography we see. Thank you.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am aware that the law prohibiting publishing, printing and consuming pornographic material is in place. I think what is lacking is the policing.  The law is there; it is adequate. All we should be thinking about is how to police the publication, the consumption and the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, do we have an Act on pornography or you are talking about the Penal Code?

MR RUKUTANA: The criminal law, yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Penal Code?

MR RUKUTANA: Yes, the Penal Code has a specific provision prohibiting pornography.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But don’t you think we need a law removed from the Penal Code really?

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Madam Speaker, I think what hon. Mbabazi is proposing, which is good, is to impose a duty on the owner of the cafe, which solves the problem of policing. That if we find any young child accessing pornography in your cafe, then we shall withdraw your license, and you know it is a condition. Before you get a license, you make an undertaking that you will be responsible for the young children not to access these bad things.

MR RUKUTANA: That law I remember also prohibits disseminating pornographic material. So, as I stated earlier, all we have to do now is to put in place a mechanism to ensure that those who disseminate and those who consume are brought to book. But the law is there.

MR MBABAZI KABUSHENGA: Thank you very much, honourable members, for all your contributions. I think the one obvious fact, Madam Speaker, is that digital media has come and presented itself as a unique type of media. People who are accustomed to policing traditional media seem to think that this is beyond the realm of policing. 

We also need to realise that in countries where these things start, the people who offer the Internet licenses will give you a choice. You are either going to be pornography-free or you are going to be in a place for those who are perverted and want it. 

Because ours are not regulated, many people prevent their children from even benefiting from the good programmes, which the Internet has got to offer. And so I would like to see –(Interruption)

MRS ANGUPALE: I thank you very much, Reverend, for that point. I would like to inform you that when the issue of the Red Pepper appeared before this House some time back, we actually demanded that the Minister concerned finds out if there is any law, which could help us stop publication of such nude photographs that could mislead the children. 

The Minister, who has been holding the Floor, was there seated. Occasionally, I find him consuming the Red Pepper. (Laughter). He did not even help to tell us that there is a law and advise the minister in charge to find any solution to that. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the point raised by hon. Kabushenga is very important. I am not satisfied that what is in the Penal Code is adequate to cater for the matters he is raising - licensing, regulation and monitoring. Maybe there is a different law completely outside the Penal Code.

REV. KABUSHENGA: Thank you very much. So, I think there is need to monitor this through the people who get licenses, because the people who are making counter software that enables prohibited websites to be accessed in spite of the prohibition, are working round the clock. They are working round the clock because the producers of pornography, I hear, are paid a ridiculous amount of money. So, it is a commercial thing. 

I suggest that we go out as a House to protect the young people by putting this burden on the people that are licensed to handle Internet materials. Let us educate the local population so that they will know the dangers that our young people get from seeing these bad examples.

Madam Speaker, the traditional mode of transmission of HIV/AIDS in this country has been heterosexual.  There are countries, which have been entirely homosexual, but the Internet cafes are making our society a place of both. If we adopt both modes, then the mode of transmission and the rate is likely to more than double. I thank you and I beg this House to take heed to this fact. 

5.17
MS SYLVIA SINABULYA (Woman Representative, Mubende): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to the rest of my colleagues who have thanked the committee for such a comprehensive report. I also want to appreciate the efforts of Government towards the fight against HIV/AIDS.  

Madam Speaker, the report did make mention of a number of NGOs and stakeholders who have joined hands with Government to fight HIV/AIDS. Whereas I appreciate the efforts of these NGOs and CBOs, I want to note that a number of people and organisations have taken advantage of the fact that there is a lot of money for HIV/AIDS to form fake CBOs and NGOs, so as to tap this money for HIV/AIDS. 

Recently I was talking to some officials from AIM. They were telling me that they are so disappointed because they are working in 14 districts in this country and as soon as the people learnt that they are giving money through CBOs, so many CBOs were formed to access this money. But when you go on the ground, there is nothing much to show for the money which these NGOs and CBOs got. 

So, I urge the ministry to keenly follow up the issue of these CBOs, which are coming up as a result of the money that is coming, and then afterwards they disappear. 

Madam Speaker, the committee also mentioned the issue of child-headed households and my colleague from Kalangala also gave a contribution on that. I want to say that this is a very serious issue, which is developing in this country, and it has very serious implications. 

One of such implications is that these children who are heading households cannot access education because they have to look after their siblings, they have to fend for themselves and, therefore, have no time to go to school. 

I wonder what the Ministry of Education is thinking about this, because I know some non-governmental organisations like Action Aid and Save the Children have made some attempt to provide alternative forms of non-formal basic education forms in some districts like Mubende, Kalangala, Nakasongola and in Karamoja region. But then these efforts need to be supported by the Ministry of Education. 

For instance in Mubende District, Action Aid had opened up 120 centres but when they finished their business, 100 of its centres were closed. Now these children who had had a chance of accessing education are no longer accessing basic education.  

So, I would like to know whether the Minister of Education has a special policy, because even these orphans who head households should have an opportunity to access education.

I wish to support the recommendation of the committee that each district should hire a fulltime focal person for HIV/AIDS activities. I know that right now in those districts where the Uganda AIDS Control project is, they have what they call district focal persons. 

But these people are very busy because they are recruited to perform other duties. They do not have enough time to do the work on HIV/AIDS. Maybe that is one of the reasons why this project has failed to reach to other districts of the country. There is a problem of coordination in those districts where it went first. 

So, I strongly support the recommendation of the committee that since HIV/AIDS is a very big scourge, someone should be recruited at the districts to take over the responsibility of coordinating the activities of HIV/AIDS. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.21
MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU (Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I make my brief contribution, I would like to go back to what the Rev. Mbabazi was saying about the Internet cafés.  I do not see why we would even have to impose huge taxes on those who are running these cafes.  All we need to do is to get the software and install it in every Internet cafe.  

Every Internet cafe has what they call a server, and that server is just one computer from which all other computers connected to it get all the information. We just need software from the Ministry of Education installed in every Internet cafe, which has a certificate to operate, and then automatically without even having to get policemen to monitor, no one can have access to these pornographic materials.

As the Reverend also mentioned, should any Internet cafe feel that it is not enough for it to operate without showing people pornography, then we would provide them with an even stronger and more expensive software. This software would allow them to have spam, as we call it, and then they pay for what they are demanding for. 

We can also be able to stand somewhere and know that whoever goes into that Internet cafe is not going there for anything else but mainly to see pornography. I think this is a very simple way to monitor this. 

If we think the software that is available on the market is not enough for us, send me to Bill Gates, I will have him develop the software we need and we will not have this problem anymore. That is an offer from myself.

Madam Speaker, the committee talked about men who take advantage of young women. These are rapists! It is a fact that there are some terrible men, who are probably sick in their heads, who know that they have the disease and decide to rape young girls, leaving older women. 

I think in the war against AIDS we have to take action against these people. We have to impose a specific law, that if you rape a woman - some can even rape men – and you have tested positive, and it is proven beyond reasonable doubt that you have done it on purpose to infect others, then why don’t you get castrated. We get rid of you or they send you to jail for so long that by the time you come out, you are too old to rape again.

Lastly, I was so terribly shocked by someone who even claims to be the main supporter of the Movement system but at the same time cannot even see the concepts of the Movement. High on the agenda of the Movement Government - and it is evident everywhere - is the war on AIDS. 

Last year in September we had a meeting of Members of Parliament from the Commonwealth, and I was on my annual leave in the United States. One of the resolutions that were passed on the war against AIDS was that Members of Parliament should voluntarily go for HIV testing and set an example to the rest. 

I do not know whether I was too naive on that, but I immediately picked up the phone from my host and made an appointment for an HIV test. I did this so that I am not the odd man out and find when I come back home, everybody is tested and I am not. 

So, I did this and I tell you, for those who have never done it, it is an awful experience to go through before you get your results. It is awfully scaring. But the moment you get your results and they tell, “Hey man, you are free”, I tell you, you can even invite the whole village to go partying because you know you are safe. 

AIDS is like a metal drilling through your brain telling you, “Hello, you have been messing up all this time, you have not been careful, but today is judgment day, you know what is going to happen to you”. And when you get the results either way, especially when you do not have it, you are very happy. You proudly announce that you are safe. 

This is what I did when I came here. When I faced the press I told them, “Hey look, I did exactly what our Members of Parliament in this meeting of the Commonwealth proposed”. 

Then on radio I was so terribly shocked when someone interviewed honourable Nadduli. He had actually even never seen me, but this is his way of thinking, that he is promoting the Movement. He said, “That man is always even in the opposition and that is why he says he is safe. I think he is sick himself. Why did he have to do it? He bribed them.” That is someone who claims to be the ultimate cadre of the Movement! He is contradicting the huge efforts our President is doing.  

Madam Speaker, as I conclude I like to make a request to my fellow Members of Parliament and even those who are in the gallery. Whoever thinks that it is important to fight AIDS, the first thing we should do is to have this AIDS test taken. 

I would be so happy if every three months you arranged this. Just as our Catholic members union here do, every Wednesday we have mass and we do attend. Those who want to, attend and those who do not want to, do not attend. 

In my case, I would be so happy if my constituents read that every three months the Speaker of Parliament, or Madam Speaker, arranged for those who wanted to go for testing and Nsambu was top on the list. In the same way as we influence, I know this would do a lot for our public. We would not even have to discuss Gaetano. Thank you very much.

5.29
MR PETER CLAVER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I am personally disappointed by the attendance in this august House given the importance of this report. 

The Baganda have a saying that, “Lubaale mbeera nga nembiro kwotadde.” If people in United States of America were here to witness what is in the House now when we are discussing a very important report like this, I think they would really be disappointed. So, I think we should be serious on issues like these, which are very important. Let it be on record that we should be serious.

Madam Speaker, I want to first of all appreciate the recommendation by the committee that we get ARVs free of charge in this country. That is very good. But the problem with these ARVs, if you are not tested, if you are not monitored, they can be useless. 

The information I have is that testing alone for the viral load costs almost Shs 300,000, which is beyond the reach of almost 80 percent of all Ugandans infected by HIV/AIDS. In Uganda now we have only three centres, which can test CD4 count, and these are JCRC, Uganda Virus Research Institute and Mildmay. The rest of these laboratories have no machines to test this so  –(Interruption)

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank you, hon. Mutuluuza. We have more than three now. There are those, which you know, but we already have one in each of the regions in the country. And we are expanding; we want to get to the districts as I said.  

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Minister, for that information. Another problem I see in this fight against AIDS or caring for HIV/AIDS victims are the so many so-called Community Based Organisations (CBOs), which access funds but end up using these funds for their own business. I am wondering whether the committee is aware of this. 

There are a lot of CBOs who pose to be serving the community but just try to access funds. After getting the funds, they do their own business. I think the committee should look into that.

Another issue is the misuse of money. Madam Speaker, I happen to be close to people who work with HIV/AIDS. But I believe out of the money that is sent to Uganda, in most cases the beneficiaries get only less than 20 percent. The rest of this money is wasted on cocktail parties, travelling, expensive vehicles, mention it. I think this Committee on HIV/AIDS should also look into this issue.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, one time the newspaper quoted Dr Mugyenyi of JCRC saying that actually these ARVs are very cheap to produce. I think instead of begging and wasting all this money on travelling and what have you, we should concentrate on getting ARVs produced locally so that many people can access them. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.33
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to join others to thank the committee for such an extensive report. It has been very informative, and I think we shall go away from here having learnt a little more than we came with. 

I want to also thank the Government for the effort, money and everything that has been put in to bring medicines to Uganda, to bring specialists to Uganda and everything that has come in to assist Ugandans to fight AIDS. I want to thank the Ministry of Health for all that they have done in advertising against HIV/AIDS. 

There is a lot in the mass media, especially on televisions where they tell those who may not necessarily have read the papers that HIV/AIDS is a devastating disease.

I will go to Page 37 where it is says, “Access to anti-retroviral (ARV) drugs”. Madam Speaker, I want to agree with the committee that drugs have not reached the grassroots people. To-date, as they mentioned, more than 50 percent of our people who are suffering from HIV/AIDS may not necessarily know where these drugs are and how much they cost. Their caretakers equally do not have knowledge or access to the drugs. 

I want to suggest that it is necessary for the Government to have a downward and upward flow of information, so that our people can receive information concerning drugs and other things concerning HIV/AIDS. Then our people at the centre can also get this information and they will know that their people at the grassroots have not got the medicines or do not know anything about HIV/AIDS. They will then find a way of reaching them. 

Otherwise, I want to tell you that if you go to Iganga, to the remote villages, people have not heard of the drugs and where they can get them.  

Madam Speaker, I think a lot has been said about this, but I want to repeat that behavioural change is a necessity. Like it or not, we shall preach and talk but unless people change their behaviour, this scourge may not be something easy to fight. 

So, I am saying that let us enforce behavioural change for all ages and in all social places so that when we come to learn about the bimansulo, we just do not talk about them. Let us make a law to convict those people who are getting money from the girls who are doing the bimansulo. Unless we take drastic steps, we shall find that in one or two months very many people will have been affected and infected.

Another thing, Madam Speaker, these rapists and defilers are killers; they rape and defile mainly the little ones who are innocent. I think the sentences, which are given to them, should be harsh and punitive. They should not be tried by the LC courts but by the courts of law, so that they give them punishments that they deserve. 

In LC courts at home, you know what happens. One hen or a cock is enough for one to be released. This is not a case where we really have to take very slow steps. I think we ought to see to it that all cases are tried in courts of law.

I am also worried about young men and women in higher institutions of learning, in universities. I have learnt that those people have no effective rules and regulations, which can prevent them from moving anyhow. I have learnt that some of the girls we find hanging on the roads are from such higher institutions of learning. 

There should be rules and regulations, which these people must follow so that they are kept within, and they should be adhered to. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.40
MRS WINFRED MASIKO KOMUHANGI (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the members of the committee for the report well written. I just have two issues to raise. 

It is on record that women have been doing a lot of work regarding community mobilisation in health issues. I also think that everyone knows that women in this Parliament played a big role mobilising for the measles immunisation and other things. I think we have done a very good job.  

Madam Speaker, most women come here on the affirmative action, for the district seat. But I am not happy with this report when it mentions on Page 25 that they are going to put up constituency AIDS task forces. 

In these AIDS task forces, the area MP will be the chairperson while the woman MP for every district will just be a member and an ex- officio at the district level. I think if we are really to get good results, we cannot put women in such positions. 

I would imagine there would be an AIDS task force at the district level where the Woman Member of Parliament would chair, because they have been very active and it is on record. Therefore, just making them members and ex-officio is very unfair, and we might not get the results that we need. 

Therefore, if the committee did not realise that maybe it had made an error, it will be high time for them to re-consider this issue and put a constituency district AIDS task force, which will be chaired by a woman. Another issue – (Interruption)

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you a lot, Madam Speaker.  Although I am going to respond to most of the issues, I thought I would respond to this one immediately. 

First of all, we know that the Uganda AIDS Commission and HIV/AIDS partnership have proposed task forces at different levels. They have proposed and actually implemented what they called the district AIDS taskforce, which is chaired by the chairperson of the district along with other people. 

They have also proposed a district HIV/AIDS committee chaired by a technical person. After that, they went on to propose a sub county task force. In fact they have what they call DAT, SAT, PAT, VAT up to village level. 

At that time there was a missing link, there was nothing at the constituency level. Therefore, the committee thought that since we already have a health sub-district for each constituency, the Member of Parliament could play a role there. We would have this constituency AIDS task force, which would report to Parliament because the district task forces do not necessarily report to Parliament. 

We thought that if you made a Woman Member of Parliament a member of the district AIDS task force, then you are in a way compromising her ability to oversee the activity at the district. That is why we thought, since these structures are already in place, we can only insist that the Woman Member of Parliament becomes an ex-officio. She would come and just see what happens, but become a member of each constituency AIDS task force. 

However, we are open to suggestions. I am sure even these are not cast in stone. We can discuss this issue. We can even take whatever recommendations you have deliberated on to the Uganda AIDS Commission and the Ministry of Health, to see how they can work out a solution.   

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, chairperson. I hope you will take this as a concern from the Women Members of Parliament. We should be involved and most likely form maybe a monitoring committee at the district level, which we can chair. Because we shall certainly be good links to link with Parliament and also to check what is happening at the district level – (Interruption)

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for allowing me to speak. I am glad Dr Tumwesigye commented on the structures of the Uganda AIDS Commission because it has structures right from the national to the district level. They are also planning to go to sub-county, parish and to the village. Theirs of course is bigger and focused. They have specific programmes.

We like the creation of constituency AIDS task forces but we will have, as he said, to discuss how they will relate to the other structures so that they do not conflict or overlap. So, I think we shall discuss the idea of the committee and of hon. Masiko and find the best way to define their roles. Otherwise, I think it is good to have everyone involved in the war against AIDS. Thank you.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, honourable Minister. The reason we came up with this is because recently, we had the Women Members of Parliament of Kenya. They told us that they actually chair committees in their constituencies. So, maybe we could also borrow from what is happening in Kenya to see if we can get involved. 

If we are really to involve Members of Parliament at the constituency level, I think we should see how we could also involve Members of Parliament at the district level.  

Another concern I had on this report was about the different players in the implementation of the HIV/AIDS programme. I hope this committee will be serious when they are looking at the activities carried out by these different implementers. 

What has actually happened is that you hear that in the district there is a programme funded by one of these implementers. But when you get down there - I know it is a bottom-up approach - you find that actually it is scattered in one sub-county and within that sub-county is one parish. So, you hear that a certain district is covered when actually the activities they are carrying out there are very minute. 

So, I think there is need to harmonise the activities of all these different players in the districts and to monitor them seriously.

Madam Speaker, I have just been out in the constituency but there is a big concern. Some of these programmes that have started have already started giving excuses of having financial problems and they are disbursing money quite late. 

I can give you an example where they have given money to programmes for three months, and they had made this on a basis of one year. They have spent another four months before they disburse the second quota. 

Within those months, people come from Kampala to monitor the activities - the consultants, people doing needs-assessment, those who want to see what is happening. Actually, these people reported that they had got seven very huge vehicles of a high-powered delegation from Kampala to monitor activities that would have been on for six months but have actually been on for only three months. So, I think there is need for us to be very serious and to monitor what actually is happening. 

It would also be nice for us to access information, to have the data on the amount of money that is disbursed to different areas and the kind of activities that are taking place around that. Otherwise, we might fall into a trap of having a lot of capacity-building and other things being much more than the actual activities that reach the rural poor. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I hope this is a serious issue that will be considered by the committee. It would be nice if we were furnished with information. I thank you very much.

5.49
MRS IDAH MEHANGYE (Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for this comprehensive report. I do thank the Government, especially the Ministry of Health and the President, for the initiative in the AIDS prevention. 

Uganda has become so special in the effort to reduce HIV levels, and that is a credit on our part. I would like to talk mainly about the youth and a few areas where I would think we need some legislation to emphasise what we would like to see in our community. 

I would like to thank the committee for bringing out the young people as people who really need special attention, and indeed they do need special attention to be protected against this deadly disease, AIDS. I would like to put emphasis on prevention and control of drug abuse and alcohol when we are dealing with young people. 

I do not know what our policy is on drug abuse. When travelling towards Fort Portal, on the way towards Mityana, there is an area there where young people sell what we call mairungi. And they openly wave down the vehicles to stop and buy this drug. 

In some areas like in Kyenjojo, families do have big gardens of marijuana. It is in some area in Katoke. But any way, I have seen it because I did visit that area at the time when I was still working with GTZ. We thought that drug abuse was one of the factors that lead young people to get involved in sexual activity. 

Now, I would like to know, what is our policy on drugs? If drugs are sold so openly on the road and are grown in gardens, how do we control that?  Maybe some people are growing them as a source of income. How do we give them an alternative source of income so that we can get rid of this drug abuse?  

Another concern is on defilement and rape. There has been a kind of increase in this. Maybe it is because we are open, talking so much about defilement and rape. But how sure are we that these people, teachers, big men who are defiling children are not doing it with a purpose of infecting them with HIV? 

What policy have we put in place so that maybe if someone is defiled and the defiler can be traced, he should be tested for HIV without calling it stigmatising, but as a punitive measure? So that we prove if these defilers are not really infecting our young people intentionally and on purpose.

I would like to talk about prostitution and sex workers. You know we tend to close our eyes or to pretend that we do not have prostitution around, but there is prostitution. Some people tell me sometimes in the evening on some roads within this city of Kampala, some young girls or women line up as sex workers to do business. 

What is being put in place for one to protect the prostitutes and sex workers themselves? Much more, what is being done to protect the very people who go with them? Those people must be having business and that is why they line up there. 

Who are the people who go there? They are our sons, our husbands, and they are the men around. Surely, how are we protecting the people? What policy are we putting in place so that we protect these people and those who go to them?

I would like to talk about co-ordination of the HIV programmes in this country, which hon. Masiko alluded to. There are lots of programmes and NGOs, both national and international, dealing with programmes handling reproductive health and HIV prevention. How are they co-ordinated? 

Quite often we have asked about who co-ordinates HIV programmes. The Ministry of Health co-ordinates a bit, the President’s Office co-ordinates another piece, the Uganda Aids Commission they say is the bigger coordinator; who really does co-ordinate the HIV/AIDS programmes? 

You will find that there are lots of programmes in some particular districts and areas and there are none in other areas. Kamwenge definitely has the least of them, if at all. Of course they come, they are in Wakiso, they are in Mukono, they are near the city where facilities are a lot easier. They are just along the highway. But when you go inland towards Kamwenge, these NGOs and organisations do not reach there. How are these programmes co-ordinated so that they reach every part of this country? 

Possibly one thing we should ask for is a list showing us which organization is working where and how much of that area is being covered by the programme. Like hon. Masiko put it, a very big organization said it is in a particular district but it is working only in one sub-county of that district. 

When you look at the map, you read that a certain programme is in this district, but how much of that district is reached by that particular programme? We would be glad to get that list. Possibly, that is the way we can address the gaps in the places that are not reached.

Lastly, honourable Minister I do thank you especially for the programme of mother-to-child prevention of HIV. I always fail to say sorry for the little babies who get infected by reason of a mistake, which is not theirs. When the man and woman are in love, this baby is not there and then the baby is born condemned to die. I thank you for that. 

However, I do not know whether you are aware that some areas do not have these testing centres. The women in Kamwenge, for example, will not make it to the testing centres in Fort-Portal, or move from Kamwenge to Kabarole or Fort-Portal for testing. Remember these are poor, rural people and they cannot afford to travel these distances. So, service delivery in terms of these testing centres is vital. 

Honourable Minister, I would like to know what plan you have to reach the rural areas of Kamwenge so that I can mobilize the mothers to go for testing, so that we have very safe and HIV negative babies. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a matter, which somebody raised on the Floor. Two members have said it this afternoon and it has been said in other debates too. That is the allegation that university students are the ones who hang around the post office and these other places. 

I do not know whether anybody has done research on this matter. I do not know whether anybody really knows it for sure. If somebody wanted to improve her prospects on the streets, she could pretend to be a university student, very intelligent and very beautiful. 

It has been said with such finality in this House. It is as if people really know that those children are university students. 

I would like to appeal to the members that if we have no proof, that kind of blanket statement should be avoided. It has been said many times and I would like to appeal to honourable members to go easy on that, unless we have proof. Could I invite the Minister of Health to –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I rise on a point of procedure and I will be brief. I have a problem. We usually raise a point of procedure in respect to frontbenchers and sometimes they are absent. But in this case I have a problem with a kind of precedent we are setting. Here we are discussing a committee’s report and we only have two members, the chairman and the vice-chairman of the committee, present. 

We fought very hard for this committee and to many Members of this Parliament it is a matter of life and death. What do we do? I would like your guidance. Do we ask members to show cause as to why they are not here? 

We have our Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee. If we continue like this, we will end up with only the chairman in the House when they are presenting the report. It is very serious and I think it needs to be addressed. I need your guidance on this.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, the point of procedure I am raising arises from what hon. Ida Mehangye said. To the best of my knowledge, the subject we are debating is co-ordinated by the Uganda Aids Commission, which is placed in the President’s Office. I would have expected the Minister in charge of the Presidency to say something. 

For most people who have been contributing, their contributions were geared towards the Ministry of Health, as if he is the co-ordinator. I am aware this is a multi-sectoral programme whereby I expect the majority of ministers to answer. 

For example, issues concerning youth out of school, most people were directing it to the Minister of Education but we have a whole Ministry in charge of Youth and Children. They should be here to respond. The programmes of youth in school should be answered by the Minister of Education. 

So, I am puzzled. Who is really going to give us the Executive’s position as far as this is concerned? Is it the Ministry of Health, all ministers, or the one in charge of the Presidency? I have that procedural concern. (Applause).

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Hyuha for raising this important point. 

I had already noted down the issue raised by hon. Mehangye. Honourable members may recall that we have always discussed this issue especially in the Committee of Social Services, about the Uganda AIDS Commission being in the President’s Office and how it relates to the Ministry of Health. 

This is especially when we are talking about funds, because they are reflected in our budget but then they are in another ministry. Because of the limited ceiling given by the Finance Ministry, we always want them to be clearly under the President’s Office. 

We will continue to discuss it but what I want to say today is, health being the implementing arm of most HIV/AIDS issues, we did consult with my colleagues and agreed that I come here and attend to them. We read the report and we harmonized our positions. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me respond to hon. Byamukama’s matter. I was hopping I would not have to address this matter but it has been raised and now it is on record. 

As far as I am concerned, any member who is out of this House without my permission must explain where he or she is. I expect that the reports of the committee are reports of the whole House. So, both the committee members and the other members of the House are expected to be here. 

Maybe we shall ask the Committee on Rules and Privileges to invite those members who are not here to explain where they are.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, when you look at committee reports such as this, you might find that less than half the members have signed it. Is that indicative of things that are beginning to happen in the Plenary? 

Over and above that, I have always expressed concern on a matter that the Minister of Health has tried to clarify, the domicile for the AIDS Commission. 

I sit on the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs and we only see the AIDS Commission once a year. There are so many anomalies in that commission. But at an appropriate time it should go back to its proper domicile, the Ministry of Health. In the President’s Office it is being handled like a baby of State House; nobody talks about it. 

I can give you an example. The Chairperson of the AIDS Commission makes Shs 6 million a month when the man who is running the Commission makes Shs 2.4 million – that is the man who is there day to day. 

The chairperson makes Shs 6 million, maybe because he is a Bishop! But the way we see it in our committee, this is a special baby of the President, “do not touch it otherwise, you will hurt his feelings”.

6.08
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Brig. Jim Muhwezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking Parliament for giving us a committee to deal with HIV/AIDS matters alone. This is very important because AIDS is a different disease and it needs proper attention. If you had not formed this committee we would not have had this report and heard all these contributions, which are very useful. 

The committee has outlined a lot of programmes, which are going on, carried out by the Government in the fight against HIV/AIDS. We have benefited a lot from the contributions made by members and some new proposals, which have been made. We shall go back and consider them and perhaps implement them and bring them back to Parliament to discuss. 

For example, hon. Omach talked about the sickle cells disease, that people should be tested for it before they get married. I think that is a good idea, because if they do not then they get problems and we incur a lot of expenses afterwards yet we could have avoided such expenditures. 

The X-ray machines are not available in some places but the Government is already putting in place mechanisms to acquire new machines, as we had time to discuss during the budget discussions. 

Hon. Omach raise an issue about what would happen when donors withdraw from certain programmes. Most of those programmes have got plans and mechanisms in place for the Government to take over, which were inbuilt. We have been building our own capacity and these programmes will go on. 

Hon. Kagimu raised some issues of orphans that we need to pay particular attention to. What I want to inform the House is that we now have money specifically for orphans, from the Global Fund. Money from this fund is intended for prevention, treatment, care and support, and all this includes the orphans. 

That also goes also to cover the issue raised by hon. Rev. Ssempangi, on the orphans.

On the nutrition and early childhood issue, which hon. Ssempangi raised, we are still discussing with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to see how to wind up the programme properly. We have not yet exactly harmonized our position but we have informed them that it is better, even if they do not want to continue with this programme as they have indicated, to at least end the programme properly. 

The World Bank is willing to give us money to wind up this programme. We hope to convince the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development not to see any problem with this, as they seem to do.

Hon. Wambuzi talked about sex education. Sex education is tricky. When you say that you are going to introduce sex education, you are calling for trouble from parents. They think you are going to teach children how to play sex, and other things they did not know. They would like to believe that the children do not know, although we know that many of the children actually know, and in the wrong way, from the wrong people. 

However, on HIV/AIDS, we have done something else. There is education on HIV/AIDS, not on sex, and the Ministry of Health prepares messages for Primary 1 to Primary 4, and for Primary 5 to Primary 7, which we pass over to the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports is under instructions to give circulars to all primary schools such that every head teacher assembles children once a fortnight to read these HIV/AIDS messages. 

The children need to know because it was discovered that about –(Interruption)

MRS KAVUMA: I would like to ask the honourable Minister whether the head teachers, who are supposed to read out these messages, have been taught how to do it. Have they gone through some orientation courses to know the way the messages should be read? 

The fact is that even head teachers are shy to talk about these different issues. And the messages, the Minster has said, range from Primary 1 to Primary 7 though they are supposed to be read out at assembly. Which part is read out at which assembly and for which section? Thank you.

MRS NAMIREMBE BITAMAZIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague, who is addressing a question to the Minister of Health. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports working together with the Ministry of Health have developed what we call age appropriate messages. We think there is a message for Primary 1 to Primary 4, the eight to ten year old pupils, and then the top group. 

We have even gone further with the crusade to write manuals. The manuals are supposed to empower the teachers and head teachers to learn more about AIDS and, therefore, be able to communicate the message to the appropriate age. We have run through quite a number of workshops and conferences to empower the teachers and school authorities to communicate these messages.  

So, Madam Speaker, I want to assure the hon. Members of Parliament that the teachers are gradually being empowered to deliver these messages and we are working closely with the Ministry of Health for technical input. I thank you.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: I thank my colleague for that explanation. The point here is that children in Primary 1 to 4 are of a different age group from those of Primary 5 to 7. That is why they are separated. They are given different messages at different assemblies. But, it is very true that we have worked together. We have got a committee, which works with the Ministry of Education on this. 

There was a proposal that we should have a reporting mechanism right from LC I. I do not see any problem with that. As I said earlier on, we need to involve everybody. 

If we can involve the LCs in the HIV/AIDS initiatives, I think it would help us a lot. It could probably access the population and teach them about the advantages of testing to know their status on HIV. Maybe in the end we will reduce on the infection increase, which later on becomes a problem. It creates orphans, we need drugs, and so and so forth. So, that one is welcome.

I have already discussed the issue raised by hon. Mabikke, and you ruled that we do not discuss it again, Gaetano. But we made the point. 

I just want to remind the members of what the President said at Kololo on World AIDS Day. He said that if you say we remove these ones and they do not get involved because they are of this moral standing and so on, it is like the saying in Runyakore that, “Nibagaya engabo oti shana twihemu abagurusi?” 

They are saying that we do not have enough troops, you put your hand up to bring a solution and you say, “Why don’t we remove the old men?” When they are saying that the troops are not enough, you are saying that we remove some of them? We need everyone, including the sex workers. If they can join the war against HIV/AIDS, so much the better.  

Hon. Awori rightly said that we need some legislation to reinforce our efforts in this fight. I do agree with you, and the Government will support such laws that are pro-protection of the population. So, the ball is in your court, hon. Aggrey Awori. We have no problem with that. 

I want to say that we must also be aware that there is a problem of discrimination. When you start testing, you create a problem for those, so we have to balance it up. We have to be very careful so that we do not appear to be discriminating against those who are sick, because HIV/AIDS is a disease but it does not stop a person from working and functioning. We only stop the spread. 

Like you were saying, in the case of the boxers, why should we not intervene, stop them and test them. As I said, although we cannot do that, we do educate people that HIV/AIDS is transmitted –(Interruption)

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A number of hospitals require the use of counsellors and as I talk now they are not enough. As if that were not enough, they are not on the establishment of the civil service. 

Talking about legislation, is it possible that the role of counsellors, which is very important in the fight against AIDS, is put on the establishment of the civil service so that they can be appropriately employed to do the needful? Thank you.

BRIG.  MUHWEZI: I think that is a good idea but what we have to do first of all is to introduce a course in the universities for counselling, because even counsellors are not available. That is one of the reasons why we do not have enough VCT centres. There are others, as I will say later, but that is one of them. 

The point I was making is that because of mobilization and education of everyone, even in sports, an individual may demand that, “I am not going to fight with X unless he is tested.” But that means that he himself must be tested and found negative. That is when he should demand that the other opponent is also proven negative for them to play together. 

Otherwise, in principle the idea of legislating where there is a need is a very good idea. The same as defilement and the spread of AIDS; I do agree that we check the law. If the law is lacking, we should make a distinction between normal defilement and defilement with intention to infect the victim with HIV. This could attract a hasher punishment. 

I think we have already answered the issues on ARVs, the anti-retroviral drugs. 

I appreciate the contribution by hon. Mallinga on education. We need to intensify education and not stop. As His Excellency the Vice-President said, what is now crucial is the problem of people becoming complacent. They may think that now that there is a drug, we no longer need to care about the way we behave and so on, yet even the drugs, which are being used, have not been given a long time to be tested. We even do not know what happens after 15 years when you are on these drugs. 

So, unlike diabetes or hypertension, these drugs of HIV/AIDS are still new so no one knows what happens in the long run. It would be dangerous for someone to think that now AIDS is a chronic disease not a fatal disease. That would be dangerous. Therefore, education needs to continue and Members of Parliament are at the centre of doing this work. 

On the question of secondary infections like TB and others, already the Government is doing a big job. It is one of the things this government did in the fight against HIV/AIDS, to treat TB, malaria, and sexually transmitted diseases. 

The Government is already making sure that the drugs for these diseases are available at every health centre as much as our resource envelope can allow. 

On the expansion of voluntary counselling centres, as I said earlier on, we have to go slowly for different reasons. The idea is that we should have voluntary counselling and testing, but when people come forward and test, first of all you have got to have in place a solution. 

If someone is sick, first of all, you must have someone to counsel him if he is positive. If someone is very sick and needs treatment, you must have the drugs available if he has the money. 

We also we have to monitor when someone goes on the drug, how far he has gone, what treatment he should get, whether he should change the drugs. But as I said, the equipment for monitoring the viral load is not yet available. But as I said, we are getting money from the Global Fund. 

We are also getting support from donors like United States, and one of the things we are requesting from them is free testing equipment, which we shall put in all corners of the country in order to have centres for testing. I need to mention that we already have 171. (Interruption)

MS KYATUHEIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The clarification I am seeking from the Minister regards the people who take these anti-retroviral drugs. I understand when you reach a certain level this virus cannot be detected in your body. 

So, in a situation where someone is testing for purposes of getting married, would this person get infected? And if it happens, don’t you think this is also another way of spreading HIV? Thank you. 

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much. No, when they talk about a test for treatment, they are talking about the level of sickness. It does not mean that you are negative. So, still the test for HIV/AIDS will be positive except that the viral load will be very low. Even if it disappears completely, like it does in some people, when you test for HIV you will be positive. So, there is no such danger. 

I was saying that so far we have about 170 centres already. I have taken note that some districts like Kalangala and Kanungu do not have any yet. But I am going to make sure that special attention is given especially to Kalangala where because of good feeding with fish people look very well and they mislead others, like the hon. Member of Parliament said. So, we are going to make sure that we get there very quickly. (Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you. Are the 171 centres for testing HIV virus or the viral load?

BRIG. MUHWEZI: They are for testing HIV. I have already said that we have four in all corners of the country - Gulu, Kabale, Mbarara, Mbale, and Kampala of course has many more centres. There is JCRC, Mulago, Uganda Virus Research Institute and so on. That is for the viral load. 

But for testing HIV, we are in the process of even procuring equipment, which can test in 10 seconds. We have got samples of them. I have those, if anyone is interested, which a family or an individual can use so that you know your results without other people knowing. We are going to use this money to buy this equipment so that individuals can test and know their status. (Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, the chairman of the committee talked of both viral load and HIV testing. I wanted him to clarify on that.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: I think what he means is, if you can test the viral load, you can test the other one. But the ones I am talking about are for testing for HIV only, the 171. 

Well, I do not have to repeat what many members contributed, which I noted as good points. As I said, we shall put them in our programmes –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I have listened attentively. I think Government needs to come out clearly and tell us a solution to child-headed families as a result of the AIDS scourge. This problem is rampant. 

I think we have not accomplished our mission if we can fight HIV among the youth and forget those little children who are heading families as a result of the AIDS scourge. Is there any programme Government is putting in place? These child-headed families are very rampant in my constituency.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, there is the issue of palliatives, and morphine is increasingly being used. Is it an illicit drug or not? There are other drugs, which fall in this category and they have not been declared licit drugs. Could the Minister clarify on this so that we know the way forward?

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, honourable members. As for hon. Rwamirama’s question, we have got money now for orphans, about US $50 million. We shall discuss with Parliament how to use this money to support the orphans, beginning with the most needy. 

As I said earlier on, among the people we are going to start giving free ARVs are orphans who do not have both parents. So, that is one way we are going to help them. 

As for morphine, which is a drug for palliative care, we have already allowed all the health centres, up to health centre IV, to have this drug available for people who have terminal illness so that they die peacefully without pain -(Interjection)- Yes! Of course, you know some of those drugs can be abused, so we have to be very careful how to handle them.  

How are we protecting the people from getting bad blood through blood transfusion? One, we have the best blood bank in the whole region. The blood bank at Nakasero is the best in the whole region. So far, we have established more branches in all the regions of the country and in all our health facilities and hospitals, including the NGO hospitals. There is good blood, which has been tested and is free of the virus; even Mbale has.

Hon. Basaliza said that we should concentrate on preventive rather than other methods, which is very good. That is where we start and then we go to treatment, care of the sick, support of the families and so on.  

Yes, I accept the proposal about sanitary towels, but I think the ball lies in the court of my colleague, the Minister for Education. But as Minister of Health, I support the suggestion that it would be good to give the girls free sanitary towels.

I also support hon. Mbabazi’s suggestion about the control of these Internet cafés and other places where children are exposed to bad things like pornography.

Yes, it is true that we have got so many NGOs and CBOs coming up and we need to monitor them very closely because some of them may not be utilizing the money they access properly. This needs the support and effort of everyone, because you are the people on the ground and you know best whether some of these NGOs are doing a good job.

Hon. Nsambu was talking about the importance of testing. I think we agree that those who are courageous enough should have themselves tested, because there are now advantages in being tested. You can be counselled and educated on how to live your life. Also if you need treatment, then you can start early so that the doctors do not tell you that, “it is too late, had you come earlier…” So it is important for everyone to know his or her status.  

Hon. Mutuluuza was talking about very few equipment. Yes, we have always admitted we do not have enough equipment but as I said, we are on the way. There is now a campaign that people who are giving money for HIV/AIDS should also support health services delivery. 

When people are sick of AIDS, they need treatment for other illnesses. And since there is a lot of money which people are putting forward for HIV/AIDS, it should extend to looking after the health provider, buying equipment and so on. These are the discussions we are having, especially with the donors.

Finally, Madam Speaker, may I take this opportunity to inform the House on HIV/AIDS related matters. Uganda is going to host the Secretary for Health and Human Services from the United States of America, who will come with a high-powered delegation of over 100 people. 

They will include: the Director General of the World Health Organisation; the Director General of UNAIDS; the Co-ordinator of the Bush Initiative for the US $15 billion, Ambassador Tobias; the Chief Executive of the Global Fund to fight HIV/AIDS and the head of CDC; the President of Fitzer Pharmaceuticals, the biggest pharmaceutical company in the world and many others. 

They will be visiting five countries including Uganda, Zambia, Kenya and Rwanda. They will be visiting Tororo, where some of the projects supported by USA, CDC and other projects are based. They will visit TASO where they supported the construction of a big complex, the Joint Clinical Research Centre, Uganda Virus Research Institute and others. 

This is very good. They are visiting Uganda because of the way we handle HIV/AIDS. Secretary Thompson is visiting mainly as chairman of the Global Fund to fight HIV/AIDS. But as you know, he is also the Secretary of the initiative where United States is putting US $15 billion to help poor countries to deal with HIV/AIDS. 

I am informed that he will make a big announcement; I don’t know when, but I am all ears. Recently, Uganda was also invited among five countries - Zambia, Kenya, Nigeria and Ethiopia - to attend a meeting with President Bush and Prime Minister Blair. The purpose of this was to talk about the US$ 15 billion. They are going to form a task force and start with our countries. 

I attended the meeting at 10 Downing Street and we hope that when Secretary Thompson comes here, he is going to announce that we are going to access this money. Some of it will then deal with the issues you have raised here. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you very much for the support you have given the Government in the fight against HIV/AIDS. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. Just before the chairperson comes, I have a small message for the Minister of Health. 

I want to add to what the members have said on the issue of sanitary towels. I would like you to pass on to humanitarian agencies the need for women in displaced camps to access these facilities. 

The refugee women, women who are in prison; all these people have no capacity to earn, but when plans are being made by the men, they do not know these problems so they do not plan for it. But it is a very, very serious matter. Thank you.

6.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Madam Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to thank the honourable members for their contributions. I am quite humbled by the compliments that came from the members. 

I also wish to thank the Executive for ably participating here, because we even have the Vice President and now the Leader of Government Business, and the Minister of Health who is also the Vice Chairperson of the Uganda AIDS Commission. 

Many members have made a lot of comments concerning the HIV/AIDS Committee report. I cannot claim that I can go through all of them, otherwise we would be here for a long, long time. Allow me to highlight a few issues that members have raised, which we are addressing and would also like the Government to consider. 

Many members have raised questions concerning the young people, which the committee has also highlighted. I am happy that this year we also focused on the young people. But what comes out clearly as not very well addressed is the question of employment. 

The committee has taken the bother to look at the policies concerning that. One member commented that there is no national youth policy, but actually there is a National Youth Policy. 

When you look at our government sectors, for example the Ministry of Education, you realise that in the secondary section alone there is a gap of 11,000 teachers and 5,000 non-teaching staff. If all these were filled, some youth would be employed. 

When you look at the health sector, it is performing at 53 percent and they returned Shs 9.8 billion unutilised. 

When the Social Services Committee was interfacing with the Ministry of Finance, we were told by the Secretary of Finance that Shs 15 billion was returned last year for the Wage Bill. It had been budgeted, earmarked, but people were not recruited. Therefore, even with the money that is available, we can employ more youth.  

The committee also visited 26 districts and while there, from Bugiri to Moyo, from Kisoro to Kotido, we saw redundant youth just taking local brew. You really wonder how long it will take the private sector to put up factories in all these corners. 

Therefore, that is something to look at. How fast should Government withdraw from business, especially in a country like Uganda where there are wars on very many fronts? So, that is one issue, employment for the youth, which members have talked about seriously.

Many members talked about CHAI. Somebody from Arua and also Dr Ssempangi talked about the nutrition project. The two are related, and I want the Leader of Government Business to note this. 

If we analyse the HIV/AIDS Control Project, we see that it is funded by the World Bank. We borrowed US $47.5 million to implement this project from July 2001 to June 2006. In other words, now we are almost halfway through its implementation in all the 56 districts. As we speak, the project is only in 30 districts and many members have been saying, “our districts, our districts.”  

Our committee called the AIDS Commission and informed them about this. They gave us assurance in writing that this financial year they are going to take on an additional 12 districts and possibly next year, take over the remaining 14.  

Within this project, there is a particular project called Community-led HIV/AIDS Intervention (CHAI), where communities are mobilised. These communities then write proposals and get money, up to five million shillings. 

When the President was in Kabale last week, the youth asked him about this project –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Can we get clarification on what criteria you base your selection of those areas in districts?

MRS KAVUMA: We also need to know more about the CHAI Project. What has been put in place to cut down on the bureaucracy and to ensure sustainability? Because most of the CHAI projects I know are not supposed to be money generating. How can we sustain this when the funding is finished?

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thanks a lot for those two questions. Of course, as you realise, I was not part of the selection team. We would actually need a lot of time to discuss the issue of CHAI. I think the committee could arrange a national forum where we could call these people and the Members of Parliament and we discuss these questions. 

In the resource centre, which is going to be set up by the committee, and for which the Speaker has already given space, we shall avail most of this information so that any Member of Parliament can go and look at it. But suffice it to say that 30 districts were selected and the project was to cover all the 56 districts. We are now halfway and there are indications that we shall cover all the 56 districts.

Regarding the community HIV/AIDS interventions, about 4,200 communities had submitted proposals by November this year. Only 1,900 have been approved and a total of Shs 9.2 billion. Parliament allocated the CHAI component US $15 million. As we speak, about US $1.1 million has actually been dispersed to only 803 communities out of the 4,200 that have applied in 30 districts. 

Why am I going into all this detail? I wanted to indicate that a similar project on nutrition, funded by the World Bank, approved by Parliament to be implemented in 25 districts and later on expand to 34 districts, was implemented. 

However, the time for the project has almost ended and there is very little money remaining. Some money was used by the Ministry of Finance for something that had not been approved by Parliament - about two million dollars to UBOS. And about 1.5 million changed because of fluctuations between the SDR and the US dollars. 

About 4,592 LCIs in 34 districts had been promised this money, up to two million. Each community would be told to either propose a food security item, like caring for HIV/AIDS patients with nutritional food, or set up an early childhood development centre for the children. Some of them gave land and built halfway. 

As we speak, 81 percent of these LCIs either have incomplete sub-projects and incomplete houses, or they have not even started. That is in the 34 districts. This is the same World Bank and the same communities that we are going to with broken promises. 

Therefore, I want the Leader of Government Business to note this clearly and take action on the nutrition project as well as the CHAI. We must save CHAI before it falls. They delay going to implement up to community level and when they have just started, the project ends. The communities have already been mobilised, they have even produced counterpart funding –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: We have heard that so much money was used for purposes for which it was not intended. I would like clarification, since the Leader of Government Business is here. Why do such things happen and why do the relevant ministries not take on their mandate? 

The Ministry of Finance is overloaded with a lot of projects. And we had earlier on recommended that they divest themselves from these projects so that they can be handled by the relevant ministries. 

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform the House that we are already discussing with the Ministry of Finance about this project.  It is causing political problems, it is halfway finished but they are saying it is over, and they cannot even wind it up properly. 

We are discussing with them and we have not yet gone to the Leader of Government Business. I hope we will resolve the issue.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you very much for that information. Another issue that was a concern for the committee, and which has also been raised by members, is the question of voluntary testing and counselling. 

It is really not acceptable to find that we still have districts that do not have these centres. A person in Kalangala who wants to wed, do you expect that person to board a boat and come to Masaka for testing? So, really, we must provide VCT services at the earliest opportunity. 

That is not the only problem. I am sure the Minister of Health will note that even those districts where there are testing facilities, there have not been any testing kits since March 2003 in the government units. So people will go there and will not be tested. 

Of course, I understand that there is something being done and possibly by January there will be kits in most of these health units. But you can imagine from March to January; this would mean that in future we must plan early enough, because there is a lot of red tape in procurement in the World Bank and what have you.

Many members have asked questions about ARVs. The Vice President has also commented on them. What the committee emphasised is that: one, we have a lot of money coming. In fact to be specific, we have US $36.3 million from the Global Fund, out of which US $9 million will be for ARVs. 

The Global Fund recently approved US $62 million specifically for ARVs. The Minister has also informed us that the Uganda AIDS Control Project and the World Bank have put seed machines in regional hospitals. We are also hoping to get money from President Bush and there are quite a lot of other funds coming.  

The World Health Organisation has put up what they call a three by five initiative; by the year 2005, three million people will have been put on treatment, and Uganda is a big target. When we say that we are going to provide the ARVs to only orphans and a few people in research, it shows that we really need to do much more. 

When you visit places like Nebbi, you find people in the villages who you cannot tell that, “we got ARVs worth US $1.5 million which we gave to Mildmay, Academic Alliance and people in Kampala”. So, we need to move very fast and provide these ARVs to as many people as possible – (Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, chairperson. I did not capture in your report or from the Minister the strategy put in place regarding ARVs to subsidise services to fight against HIV/AIDS, to assist the low-income earners. 

By low-income earners, I am referring to the teacher who is earning Shs 100,000, and a nurse who is exposed to HIV infected persons in a maternity ward everyday. All these health workers face occupational hazards, if I can use that word, as stated. 

When I attend some of these meetings, I get reports. I am sorry hon. Minister of Health, but you quote other organisations or agencies that are trying to subsidize for their health workers, like Bank of Uganda, and yet we should be the example. I want a special strategy to be clearly stated as we talk of these monies coming in. 

How much do we really subsidize on ARVs for teachers? The problem in schools is very big. The vulnerable ones are the orphans, as you have clearly stated. And I am happy that the Orphans and Vulnerable Children Policy is being generated by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, working closely with your ministry. 

These orphans will access AVRs, but what about the women? Among those vulnerable, I want civil servants, teachers, health workers who are exposed, to be part of the target group so that we realise the number, which is being stated by the chairperson.

BRIG.  MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Maybe I should tell you more about how we intend to give these ARVs. First of all, we have more money than what Dr Tumwesigye mentioned. We got another US $60 million in the second application we made to the Global Fund and most of it is for ARVs.  

However, the position we are taking as a policy, that we are not giving everyone, is because we do not know whether it is sustainable to give drugs to these people. Because if you say we are giving everyone, you must be sure that you will continue. 

Once a patient goes on this drug, she or he must continue, otherwise if he or she stops he or she dies very quickly. That is why we are careful to start with those who are badly in need and those who can reasonably afford to be on their own.

As to who will get, we mentioned the orphans and the people who are involved in the prevention of mother-to-child transmission. Once the mother tests positive and gives birth to an HIV-positive child, we will give the child, the mother, the husband and the family. 

You have mentioned the other category I had forgotten, the health workers. If someone is a health worker who is likely to have contracted the disease in the course of his or her duty, they will also get free treatment. 

But we have not closed; we can always discuss, see how much money we have and see which other category, maybe teachers, we can include. We can discuss. We are really open.  

As I said, the drugs are going down really very quickly. What we are planning is that we shall put ARVs on our drug list eventually. But we do not want to come out so quickly because we are still attracting people to give us money. If they hear that we have already declared that we are giving everyone, they may think that we are moving too fast. 

However, considering all these interventions, pharmaceuticals like these Indian pharmaceuticals, Hetero and Cipla, have already agreed with President Clinton to give very poor countries drugs. Clinton, the former President of America, is the one who negotiated with them and announced about five countries that would benefit, and Uganda is not one of them. But definitely, we shall also access. 

So, I think we should not fear. I am sure that by May next year, we are likely to have the drugs on our free drugs list - drugs which we will distribute free of charge.

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, I have a proposal to what the honourable Minister is suggesting. When the President was making his keynote address recently, and even on several occasions, he has mentioned that we have a big problem with our Army, and I think this also includes our police force. 

I think as a Parliament we should look into this as the Minister ponders on ways to sustain our situation. I think the Army should be given a huge priority. These helpless men and women are working so hard for this nation. We also have the police force. Obviously, they are paid extremely less than they should actually be paid. I would propose that our forces be given a high priority when we are giving out the ARVs. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, are you likely to bring that matter here?

BRIG, MUHWEZI: Absolutely, Madam Speaker. We will bring this matter so that you assist us to decide which groups should get these ARVs. Thank you.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thanks a lot, Madam Speaker. To conclude on the ARVs, I am happy that the Minister will be able to bring this question to the House to decide on who should get publicly available free ARVs. 

I want to comment on the fact that when you talk of ARVs, people tend to think that you will then affect prevention significantly. But research has shown that when people are on treatment effectively, as the honourable member from Kanungu said the viral load is so low. Now, when the viral load is so low, the virus is not there in semen and vaginal fluids. 

So, if you had a critical mass of people and you treated them, then you also impact on prevention because the suppliers of the virus in a way will have reduced and this will be confirmed through testing.  

Also, these people who are sick are very high transmitters. If somebody is down with AIDS and somebody says, “Although you are sick, God said whether you are sick or you are okay, we should enjoy.” Now, if somebody is sick and has sex, automatically that person will transmit the infection. So, by treating all these people who are actually sick, we shall have impacted on prevention.

Two, when many people are on treatment, then voluntary counselling and testing will become easy.  People will come out openly to go for testing because they know there is a solution. And when people come for testing, they are counselled on prevention.  In a way, that also reduces mother-to-child transmission. 

So, there are so many benefits. Although we have also to keep an eye on the ball of prevention, we should also encourage treatment as a priority.  

I know hon. Mutuluuza is away, but he was asking so many questions on machines. On the viral load machines, now the World Health Organization says you do not need all these things to effect treatment. Even the CD4-count machines, you do not need all of these. 

They have come out with what they call low-cost monitoring. They use a simple microscope, look at the cells and say, “let him start on treatment”.  So, they have simplified all these things. And I still submit that by the next World Aids Day, each constituency, each health sub-district should have VCTs and should have anti-retroviral treatment. 

There are a number of issues, which I can just talk about slightly and then conclude, Madam Speaker. A number of Members of Parliament asked for a list of programme implementers. We shall avail a list of programmes in different districts and specifically for Kamwenge. 

I know very well Kamwenge has Uganda AIDS Control Project, AYA, UNICEF, and Community Resilience Project (CRP) by USAID. All that is in one district. But of course as she said, sometimes some of these projects may not be seen on the ground. 

A question also comes in about the Ministry of Finance. We would not be talking about all these things if the Ministry of Finance did not bring in the issues of macro-economy. The monitors put macro-economy considerations ahead of micro-economic considerations at household level, and at the expense of social services. 

Therefore, we have to see that for the money that is being promised to the country, the Ministry of Finance will not come and say, “We cannot allow all this money to come in”. It happened sometime back when there was about US $2 million for VCT services and that was not available. That is sometimes why we have some of these districts not having VCT centres from NORAD, to be specific.

With respect to oversight, a number of members mentioned NGOs. I think the committee cannot be able to do all that. You only give us information, but also work with Government to see that there is a lot of work that can be done by these NGOs. 

I represented the committee in Botswana. It was very clear that the Government there has put free ARVs in every health unit. They have also put PMTCT services in every health unit, but people are not coming for testing or for ARVs. Of those who come, 37 percent of the pregnant women are HIV-positive. This indicates that where they are coming from, there is HIV. 

They do not go there because there is a lot of stigma. In our country, although there is stigma, it has reduced a bit, mainly because of the 2,000 NGOs and CBOs, including the Philly Lutaaya Initiative, TASO and WHO, who are in field. This is lacking in some other countries. 

Although we might condemn NGOs and CBOs, I think they are doing good work. We need to identify the wrong ones and make sure there is a criterion to access money.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I wish to say that the committee will look at all the proposals and all the comments by honourable members of Parliament. We will try and endeavour to comment in writing and make that available to the members. 

Once again I wish to thank all of you for contributing. I just want to say that the question of the Uganda AIDS Commission and the Ministry of Health had been brought to this House and was discussed some time back. 

At that time it was indicated that the House passed a Statute in 1992 and as of now we have to continue as per the statute. We have to amend the statute if we have got to make any of those changes. 

To solve all that, in Rwanda, in Zambia, in Ivory Cost, they have even put a Minister in charge of AIDS. So, that can also be able to solve all those problems

I wish, therefore, to appeal to the House to adopt this report. Once the recommendations of this report have been adopted, we shall endeavour to work with the ministries to make sure they follow those recommendations and implement them.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I put the question that the first report of the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

7.09
MR AMON-REEVES KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move an oral notice of a motion as per Rule 38 (1) of the Rules of Procedure. 

I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to establish a Domestic Security Force, which will become an Act, and we shall abbreviate it as DOSEFO. 

It will be comprised of LDUs, home guards, the Arrow Boys, ant-stock theft unit, Amuka Boys and others, to be legally recognised by Government, and be officially catered for during the performance of their duties when it becomes an Act. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable member, you have of course satisfied the provisions of Rule 38, but I think that there is a bill coming before this House. If I look at it after it is tabled and it does not contain provision for auxiliary forces, then I will proceed to put your matter on the Order Paper. But you have satisfied the requirement for notice. Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: What he is going to move makes a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund. Can he actually move, under Article 93?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think the Government should appreciate that members have been for a long time asking for a law to cover the LDUs, Arrow Boys and Amukas. So, it is a matter of concern. If he brings it and we find that we cannot move, then you will object.  

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, I do not know if I will even be able to sleep, or even the people in Masaka. We do not know if they will be able to sleep over excitement after hearing about our LDUs. 

As I speak now, out LDUs in Masaka are about to stage a strike because they have not been given anything to cover their work. They move around with guns. I just cannot believe that even the Prime Minister cannot see this. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, we are talking of forces that we have even paid for. These forces exist, LDUs, Arrow Group, to mention a few. We know Government is releasing money to them and what the House is concerned about is that they should be regulated by law. 

So, if Government does not bring it, I think it is not proper for them to say that because it brings a charge on the Consolidated Fund, we should not move. It is not fair!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not for debate today. He has given me oral notice that he intends to move a motion under Rule 38. I have said that if I peruse through the UPDF bill, which is coming either tomorrow or on Friday, and it does not contain provision for auxiliary forces, I will put the matter on the Order Paper. (Applause). 

Honourable Prime Minister, I have not seen the bill, it has not been read for the first time. So I do not know.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I want to assure you, Madam Speaker, that it does contain those things. That is the information I want to give. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muzoora, you have given the notice. Honourable members, thank for the work you have done today. The House is adjourned to 2.00p.m.tomorrow afternoon. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.13 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 December 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)

