Wednesday, 9 December 2009

Parliament met at 3.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

P R A Y E R S

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. I would like to inform you that yesterday, before we concluded, there were a number of complaints and objections from the various parts of the country in relation to the creation of districts, and during the course of today I have been receiving complaints from other parts of the country which I want the government to consult over and agree; specifically from Butambala and Kalungu, and the others which the members raised yesterday. 

So we shall not complete the creation today, I want them to consult during the course of today and tonight, and then we can complete it tomorrow; so that everybody is satisfied. So, we are moving to the next item, we skip three.

3.23
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to react to your communication with regard to Kalungu. First of all, I would like to seek your permission to be away from Parliament tomorrow. I will not be able to attend the sitting. 

Secondly, I made a comment on Kalungu yesterday; Kalungu has no problem. I noted yesterday that it seems that being a woman, I cannot account for Kalungu. I gave my position as far as Kalungu is concerned. So I stand here to make an inquiry and have it clarified to Parliament and Uganda as a whole. 

I want to find out whether women Members of Parliament taking care of the districts are subordinates of the Members of Parliament who are responsible for the constituencies within the districts that our decisions should be treated as second-class! I want you to put this on record so that in future we can know whether we are indeed second-class MPs –(Interjections)– yes! It means I cannot say anything for Bukoto as one of my constituencies. Otherwise, there is no problem with Kalungu District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not want to go into the details of this information I have received. I want the minister to examine it with all of you today; you and your colleagues. I am giving you an opportunity to harmonise your positions; please finish with the minister before you come back with a conclusion tomorrow. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 38,000,000 (EQUIVALENT US $57,760,000) AND US $10,000,000 FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (AFDB) OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP AND THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) FOR FINANCING THE MARKETS AND AGRICULTURAL TRADE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I beg to move that Parliament authorises Government to borrow UA 38 million from the AFDB and another US $10 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) for financing the Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement I. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded; please continue.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

“WHEREAS a loan agreement for UA 38 million and another US $10 million is to be concluded between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the African Development Bank Group and BADEA respectively, for the purpose of financing the Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project I;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions;

AND WHEREAS under the same Article, clause (2) of the said constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loans for their approval and authorisation; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is hereby authorised to source the said loan of AU 38 million and US $10 million from the African Development Bank Group and BADEA upon the terms and conditions therein reinstated.” 

I beg to move. 

3.29
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mrs Erinah Wangwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. 

Introduction

This is the report of the committee on National Economy on a request by Government to borrow UA 38 million which is equivalent to US $57,760 and US $10 million from the African Development Bank Group and the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) for financing the Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement I. 

The request was presented to this House by the hon. Minster of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and was referred to our committee for consideration in accordance with Article 159 and rule 152(2) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. 

The committee has scrutinised and considered the request and report as follows: 

Methodology

We met the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, The Minister for Local Government, The Parliamentary sessional Committee on Agriculture,       Animal Industry and Fisheries and The Parliamentary sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government. I would like to lay on the Table the minutes of our meeting.

We also studied and made reference to the following documents: 

The Minister’s brief on the loan request; the Project Implementation Plan; the Project Appraisal Document; the Loan Agreements between the Government of Uganda; and The African Development Fund and BADEA; the feasibility study report for improving Markets in Urban Councils in the Country (July 2008). I would like to lay them on the Table as well.

The committee also undertook field tours to the 26 market sites under consideration of which 21 are located in municipal councils. These are: Jinja, Entebbe, Masaka, Mbarara, Kabale, Fort Portal, Arua, Lira, Gulu, Moroto, Soroti, Mbale, Tororo and Kampala; and five in town councils. These are: Hoima, Kasese, Busia, Kitgum and Lugazi. The reports are in the files that I have already laid on the Table.

Background

The Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project I (MATIP-I) is an enhancing factor under the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) and in particular pillar 2 and 3 in which Government seeks to enhance production, competitiveness and incomes and the provision of agricultural extension services.

The need for the construction of the central and auxiliary markets in Uganda was as a result of the recommendations of the feasibility study that was commissioned by the Government of Uganda (GoU) through the Ministry of Local Government (MoLG) in March 2008 to review and assess the infrastructural and operational state of the markets throughout the Country.

The findings of the study were indicative of poorly managed, dilapidated and overwhelmed market infrastructure, resulting in poor working conditions country wide. All markets were found to be overly populated and lacking in basic social amenities including toilets, drainage and sewerage systems. Therefore, the government’s affirmative decision to reconstruct them with support from development partners, the African Development Bank and BADEA.

Due to limited resources the project will be implemented in only 26 municipal/town councils in all the four regions of Uganda. Twenty one of these markets (18 central and three auxiliary) will be financed as lot one of phase I by the ADB through the ADF allocations and the Government of Uganda, while lot two of phase I which consists of Five markets, three in Kampala, one in Jinja and one in Masaka will be financed by BADEA and the Government of Uganda.

The markets are: Arua, Gulu, Kitgum, Lira and; Soroti Main markets; Jinja, Lugazi, Busia, Tororo, Mbale, Kasese, Hoima, Masaka, Mbarara Central markets, Wandegeya, Ntinda and Busega (KCC), Kimaka (Jinja), Kansanga, Mpanga (Fort Portal), Entebbe-Kitoro, Nakulabye, Kasubi, Nyendo (Masaka), Mwanjari (Kabale) and Lopeduru (Moroto) markets. The rest of the markets will be improved as additional resources become available.

Rationale for Bank Involvement

The ADB through financing rural-based infrastructural initiatives especially in the construction of agricultural based markets curved a function through linking primary rural markets with secondary urban ones and strengthening the agricultural value chain in Uganda. Through the implementation of its large agricultural portfolio in Uganda, the bank has created a well grounded leverage with positive results and impacts thus giving it a comparative advantage in implementing programmes with infrastructural orientation. 

The vast experience accumulated through implementation of Area–Based Agricultural Modernisation Programme (AAMP), Northwest Smallholder Agricultural Development Project (NSADP), Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Project I & II (CAIIP-I and CAIIP-II) and an added value of implementing MATIP-I. MATIP-I will have a vertical integration with CAIIP-I and CAIIP-II of which operations will have huge multiplier effects in commercial agriculture in Uganda.  

BADEA on the other hand has been and is involved in rural infrastructural initiatives. For instance, water supply and sanitation project for small towns, Kafu–Masindi Road and construction of 21 bridges in Northern Uganda project. All these initiatives are geared towards the improvement of the agricultural sector in Uganda through the provision of better infrastructural services.  

Programme Overview

The Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project-I (MATIP-I) will be implemented in 26 municipal/town councils in all the four regions of the country by joint financing from the Government of Uganda, ADB and BADEA.

The ADB jointly with the Government of Uganda will finance Infrastructural Development for 15 central markets at Jinja, Busia, Tororo, Gulu, Mbale, Soroti, Lugazi, Hoima, Lira, Kitgum, Masaka, Mbarara, Fort Portal, Kasese and Arua; Three auxiliary markets of Lopeduru-Moroto, Kitoro-Entebbe, Mwanjari-Kabale and Three Kampala City Council (KCC) markets at Ntinda, Wandegeya and Nakulabye. This will be referred to as Lot One (I) of Phase I.

On the other hand, the Government of Uganda jointly with BADEA will finance the Infrastructural Development of five  auxiliary markets, three  in Kampala (Kasubi, Busega and Kansanga); Kimaka market in Jinja and Nyendo Market in Masaka. This will be referred to as Lot 2 of Phase I.

The components of the project will include:
    i. Market infrastructure development;
    ii. Market management and trade enhancement with a sub-component of capacity building;
    iii. Project management and coordination.

The project under Lot I of Phase I will be implemented over a period of five years (2009-2014) and is estimated to cost UA 42.22 million. The bank’s share will be UA 38 million (90 percent) and the Government of Uganda, including contributions from municipal/town councils; UA 4.22 million (10 percent). 

The project under Lot II of Phase I will be implemented over a period of three years (2010-2013) and is estimated to cost net of taxes but including physical contingencies, US $11.48 million of which US $5.07 million is in foreign currencies representing 44.16 percent of the total cost; and US$ 6.14 million in local currency, representing 55.84 percent of the total cost.

The number of beneficiary vendors is expected to rise to over 22,000 million after construction of the markets from approximately 16,000. It is further estimated that over 900,000 households, which is about 4.5 million people, within the catchments areas of the markets will benefit directly or indirectly from the project. 

The re-constructed markets will provide increased trade opportunities between rural and urban markets and serve as wholesaling centres for intra- urban and cross boarder trade especially for agricultural commodities. These commodities constitute 40 percent to 50 percent of products traded in the markets. 

Vendors will also benefit from improved marketing and trading capacity in which additional volumes and sales of both agricultural commodities and merchandise will result in increased employment and income, leading to improved livelihoods. 

In Uganda, it is estimated that about 80 percent of women are engaged in production and trading activities. Vendor associations and market management committees will be expected to partner with their respective municipal and town councils to manage the re-constructed markets.

The re-constructed markets will further improve hygiene conditions and reduce post-harvest losses through the installation of facilities to meet demand, for instance, construction of cold storage units for fish.

The Project Objective

The overall sector goal is to contribute to poverty reduction and economic growth in Uganda through the enhancement of marketing of agricultural produce and other merchandise.

The specific objective though is to improve market place, the economic and social infrastructure thus inducing incremental production and marketing of agricultural commodities. This is hoped to enhance incomes of vendors, increase employment and customer satisfaction. 

The Project Components

The project comprises three major components namely:
    1. Market infrastructure development. Under this component, the following activities will be carried out -
    a) Re-construction of 26 markets including economic infrastructure development, lock ups, stalls, cold storage units for fish and meat, restaurants and eating kiosks;
    b) Service infrastructure including building paved pitches or spaces, vehicular parking or loading areas, water supply, washrooms, solid waste bays, drainage, fire fighting systems and day care centres; and
    c) It will provide detailed design and construction supervision services.

    2. Market management and agricultural trade enhancement. This component will undertake the following -
    a) Establish management and market information systems in each council including market survey and traffic flow assessment;
    b) Undertake Training of Trainers (TOT) courses for commercial  and community development officers of which 50 percent will be women;
    c) Provide market management training to councils, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, and Ministry of Works and Transport staff, vendor associations, private operators and transporters. All these will target at least 50 percent of the women.
    d) Provide gender and leadership training to councils and vendor associations.
    e) Train vendors in entrepreneurship, all of which will target at least 50 percent female participation, land use and environmental green business, specialised training in improved slaughtering and hides and skins processing, meat processing, preparation of live chicken, dressing, fresh fish storage and handling, food processing including fresh fruit and vegetable handling plus the provision of agro–processing demonstration equipment, food safety, hygiene and quality control.

    3. Programme management and coordination:
This component will be responsible for the following:
    a) Planning, management, coordination and implementation of project activities with a specific focus on addressing gender equality in accessing project benefits;
    b) Provide technical assistance including gender training and main streaming;
    c) Monitoring and evaluation including gender responsive reporting in quarterly progress and supervision reports and;
    d) Procurement of relevant office equipment and vehicles.

The Project Implementation

The Ministry of Local Government will be the executing agency of the project. The coordination of the project will be undertaken by the existing project facilitation team, which has been in existence in that ministry for the last ten years; it has a considerable experience in project implementation. 

The head of this team will be the overall coordinator of the project supported by already existing engineers, financial controller, monitoring and evaluation experts and a Ministry of Local Government engineer who will play the role of infrastructure advisor. 

To address the gaps in expertise under the project facilitation team establishment, the project will recruit full time procurement and marketing specialists. An environmentalist and gender expert will be hired for three months per year throughout the life of the project. The ADB field office in Uganda will be an important link between the project facilitation team and the Bank on all issues that pertain to the project implementation.

The inter-ministerial steering committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Local Government will provide policy and implementation oversight. Each municipal or town council will appoint a project support officer as a link to the facilitation team responsible for the day-to-day implementation of the project. 

The project support officer will over see the implementation of the project in terms of coordinating the supervision of construction works and capacity building programmes.

The administration and management of the markets will be the responsibility of collaboration between the beneficiary local governments and market authorities and the elected vendor associations in the respective areas. 

For sustenance of the markets beyond the project, Government will cause the local governments or councils to allocate a minimum of 15 percent of revenues collected from the markets to be kept in a dedicated account for maintenance and operations of the markets. The rest of the revenue will be for revenue enhancement for the local governments. 

The Ministry of Local Government will sign a memorandum of understanding with the respective local governments and councils for that purpose. Withdrawals from the account will only be upon a requisition by a vendor association or the accounting officer of that local government or council.

The Loan Terms and Conditions

The ADB financing has the following terms: 
a) 	The loan amount is UA 38 million, which is equivalent to US $57.56;

b) 	The borrower shall repay the principal of the loan over a period of 50 years after a 10 year grace period commencing from the date of this agreement at a rate of 1 percent per annum. 

c)	The borrower shall also pay a service charge at a rate of three quarters of 1 percent, which 0.75 percent per annum on the principal amount of the loan disbursed and out standing from time to time.

d)	The borrower shall pay a commitment charge, which is 0.50 percent per annum on the un-disbursed portion of the loan, which shall begin to accrue 120 days after signing of the agreement; 

e)  The principal of the loan shall be repaid in equal and consecutive semi-annual instalments, the first of which shall be payable on 1st June or 1st December, whichever immediately follows the expiration of the grace period.

The BADEA Loan

a) 	The loan amount is US $10 million. 

b) 	The borrower shall repay the principal loan over a period of 40 years after a 10-year grace period commencing from the date of this agreement at a rate of 1 percent per annum on the principal amount of the loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time.

c) 	Interest and other eventual charges shall be paid semi-annually. The dates of the payments will be fixed on the basis of the first day of the month following the first withdrawal from the loan account.

d) 	The borrower shall repay the principal of the loan in 60 semi-instalments after a grace period of 10 years to be calculated from the first withdrawal from the loan account. 

The other conditions attached to the financing include:
    a) Provision of the legal opinion of the Attorney-General on the legal validity of the loan amounts for ADB and BADEA respectively;
    b) Government has to provide evidence of land ownership of either itself or the beneficiary local governments to the sites that have been identified for construction works before actual construction of individual sites begin;
    c) Designation by the local governments or councils of a project support officer to oversee implementation at the local level and liaise with the project implementation team;
    d) Government is to ensure that the respective local governments conclude memoranda of understanding with the Ministry of Local Government to open dedicated accounts for the deposit of a percentage of revenue from the markets for operations and maintenance; and
    e) All procurements under the programme to be in line with the rules and procedures for procurement of goods, works and services of the financiers, which are in line with our PPDA law.

Observations and Recommendations

    a) Note was taken of the hostility and suspicion amongst the vendors and the local leaders accruing from lack of information and sensitisation of the vendors. 

	In relation to the above, it was noted that the vendors were not comfortable with the idea of the local leadership being involved in the forefront management of MATIP-I project due to their corrupt nature and past poor record where district property had been sold and monies divided amongst the district leadership and the councils, citing the case of the Mbale taxi park. 

	In that regard the committee recommends that sensitisation of the vendors should be fast tracked and intensified to ease the underlying hostility between the vendors and their local leaders. Further, Government should investigate the cases of corruption at the local level and take remedial action.

b) 	The committee observed that the amount of funds requested for seems to be inadequate considering the fast growing population and the vast number of vendors involved in the business.

	It was also noted that considering the available funds, the markets under MATIP-I project may not be built to completion hence putting the future of the vendors to uncertainty.

	Further to note is the fact that Government, through this loan, seems to be addressing a problem that should have been addressed five years ago instead of addressing a problem of 30 or more years to come. 

	Our recommendation on this is that Government should seek for more funding in order to ensure this Phase is adequately financed to completion and the designs should be altered to accommodate much bigger populations for the up coming years. This will prevent the progression of re-demolition and reconstruction in future.

    d) It was observed that various issues seem to be un-clarified. For instance, most markets were constructed using individual funding and in some instances individuals are still servicing loans to that effect while others possess leases of up to 49 years and others claim to hold land titles.

	Our recommendation is to the effect that the contentious issues pertaining to land ownership and acquisition and compensation should be fast tracked in order for Government to gain access to the loan and fast track the project.

    e) Concern was further raised on the ambiguity of the Government’s position on ownership and management of markets, that is, whether to engage into private partnership or go wholly public. 

	The committee recommends that Government is urged to come up with a clear policy and position as regards ownership and management of its markets in order to avoid future scrambles between the vendors and private developers and investors.

    f) The committee noted that with the modernisation of the markets, it was likely that the rent would go up hence becoming unaffordable to the intended end users.

	We, therefore, recommend that Government should vehemently advice councils not to charge exorbitant rates after the construction of modernised markets lest the intended end users who are the original occupants of the markets are pressed out.

	Further still, first priority of occupancy of the modernised markets should be given to the current occupants or vendors of the existing markets.

    g)  It was noted that the cost of demolition of some of the existing structures in the markets for construction would surpass the cost of construction, for instance, Mbarara and Gulu markets. Furthermore, some of the markets under MATIP-I project had just been constructed or renovated. So, it did not make logical or cost effective sense for their demolition as per local government plans.

	So, we recommend that Government, which is the implementing agency of the project further carries out a feasibility study to establish the cost effectiveness of demolition and the possibility of incorporating some of the viable structures into the new designs of some of the markets before actual construction can commence, for example, the fish cooling plant in Busia and the super markets in Mbale. 

	Further, where incorporation of existing structures into the new designs fails or where demolition costs surpass actual costs of construction, virgin sites should be sought as alternatives.

    h) Note was taken of the fact that involvement of the local leadership in various projects is low hence creating a problem in the monitoring; and in the case of markets, price and quality control. 

	Government is, therefore, urged to largely involve the local leadership in the projects within their areas of jurisdiction and advise the donors on that issue as well.

    i) Note was also taken of the pending clearances on some of the identified sites for construction, for example, in Kasubi, Kansanga, Ntinda, and Wandegeya markets where negotiations are still ongoing with the Buganda Land Board; Busega, where advertisement of the land is pending; and Nakulabye, where negotiations are ongoing with the Mengo Government, which is running the market although it is owned by Kampala City Council.

	We recommend that Government is urged to urgently settle these pending land issues and acquire the respective title deeds in order to gain access to the loan as stipulated as one of the conditions in the agreement.

The committee noted the political deadlines attached to the construction of the markets due to earlier pledges made by His Excellency the President. We recommend that completion of the markets under this project should be fast tracked to avoid castigation of the political leadership by the population. 

The committee further noted the lack of appreciation of some of the architectural designs for the markets by the vendors with the view that they did not suit their daily operational needs.

We recommend that the implementing agency involves the vendors and other stakeholders at the initial stage of drawing the final architectural designs of the markets in order to avoid contentions at the time of actual construction. Furthermore, all designs should be drawn to be user friendly to persons with disabilities. 

Notice was taken of the absence of a plan to bring on board the new upcoming municipalities as regards construction of modernised markets. 

The Ministry of Local Government should draw up a comprehensive plan to include new upcoming municipalities in its next phase of modernisation of markets. More funding should also be sought to cater for the modernisation of markets not included in this phase. 

It was noted that Government does not normally fully commit to the stipulated terms and conditions in the loan agreement hence attracting a commitment charge on the un-disbursed portions of the loan and in this case 50 percent per annum. So, Government is urged to always fully commit to the stipulated terms and conditions in the loan agreements in order to avoid the attached penalties.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, considering the committee findings, it was realised that the objectives of this loan are of utmost importance especially given the fact that most of Uganda’s population is engaged in agriculture and agricultural trade; noting that the largest percentage of these are women and the markets are largely used as the mediums of trade. 

Further to note is the issue pertaining to increased job creation with the increased number of vendors accruing from a large occupancy in the bigger modernised markets. 

Further, acquisition of this loan will enable Government to fulfil some of its key obligations under PEAP (2005/08; extended to 2009) and in particular Pillar 2 that caters for enhancing production, competitiveness and incomes and; provision of agricultural extension services, Pillar 5 - provision of effective market management services; and Pillar 7 - building of physical infrastructure.  

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow Units of Account 38,000,000, equivalent to US $57,760,000 and US $10,000,000 from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group and the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) for financing the Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project (MATIP-I). I beg to Report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Hon. Members, Uganda is this week fortunate to have hosted the World Intellectual Property Rights Forum in Kampala yesterday and today and I am happy to inform you that some of the participants are here: Hon. Mwansa Kapeya, Member of Parliament from Zambia. He is up there at the distinguished strangers’ gallery (Applause) and hon. Mabinty Funna, Member of Parliament from Sierra Leone. You are welcome. (Applause) 

In the public gallery, we are delighted to have a delegation from Nazigo sub-county in Kayunga District. They are represented by hon. Nayiga Ssekabira. You are welcome. (Applause)

Where is the Shadow Minister – is it Local Government or Finance? This is a report from the Committee on National Economy. Ok, since there is no shadow minister, you have five minutes each.

4.01
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the committee for this report on the proposed borrowing. 

I am in support of intentions to improve agricultural marketing and production in this country. This loan is intended to be executed by the Ministry of Local Government, that is, the Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project. 

What is the reason of rushing and really trying to push things against the limited time because of the forthcoming elections? How sure are we that we shall deliver quality in light of the intention now to rush things? Shoddy work ought to be avoided and I am sure that rushing is one of the contributing factors to shoddy work. 

On that point, therefore, whereas I agree entirely with the intention for having to improve the standards of agricultural trade in our country, I think the ministry ought to, first of all, answer or give us an assurance on the observations and recommendations of the committee. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe just for the record, I do not know whether Government would consider assisting the local governments to acquire land for some of these facilities. I am saying this because part of my constituency is in the cattle corridor and we were allocated two markets: one in Buyende and another in Bugaya. We have already opened the one in Buyende although the other one was delayed because the local government could not afford the money to pay for the land. 

4.13
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRIES AND FISHERIES (Ms Christine Bako): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee is bringing this report in the limelight that the activities that are going to be undertaken by this loan are going to be implemented under the PEAP framework. 

But as a country we know for sure that PEAP has actually failed and now we are heading for the National Development Plan (NDP) and yet we do not know as a country at this moment what the strategic interventions in the NDP in the agriculture ministry are. 

Now here comes a gigantic loan, which is a-third of the current budget of the Agriculture Ministry. It amounts to US $133,520 million and this makes us ask one question: “Are we really investing in agriculture?” The implementation is in the Ministry of Local Government but the loan is in the names of the Agriculture Ministry. 

The current issues in the Ministry of Agriculture are not the markets or market improvements per se. The country is yearning for a systematic framework and policy that we do not have; the country is looking for water for production and we do not have that; the country is looking for real investment in agricultural research and we do not have that. 

As I talk, this loan is far more than the money invested in NARO and how can we as a country begin thinking about a loan to this tune for the development of markets when we are not even addressing issues to do with disease control?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the sector minister.

MS BAKO: I am the shadow minister overseeing that ministry. So you will be –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the shadow agriculture minister. Is it in order for her to be oblivious of the fact that we are talking of entire value chains for production from the garden to the table and that this loan has components that are talking about cold storage, value addition like chicken dressing, fresh fish storage, vegetable handling and provision of demonstration equipment? Is she in order not to accept information from the agriculture minister –(Laughter)- and to accept that surely production must go with the entire value chain? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think she wanted to inform you about the components of the loan. 

MS BAKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling and with due respect to my minister, you need to know that I am a trained agriculturalist and I have a Masters Degree in Agribusiness Management. Therefore, I know what you are talking about as far as value chain systems in the Ministry of Agriculture and agriculture is concerned.

Before she derailed me from giving her the truth and the ultimate truth, we were talking about actual investment in agriculture in real terms and it is not a lie that this is a-third of the current investment into the Agriculture Ministry. 

Fundamentally what this loan implemented today is just a total reflection that this is an illicit process because this Government has not delivered to us the National Development Plan and we know for sure that even PEAP expired; PMA exists without a legal framework. Please, hon. Members, let us take this country as our own! It is not going to be the dynamics of the loan -   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I did yesterday, in my communication inform the House that the National Development Plan is ready and I invited you Members to go and attend.

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, you may wish to know that I am part of that NDP because through the APRM process, we are part and parcel of the development framework. So I really know what I am talking about and the fact that we do not have it at the moment makes it very difficult for us to understand strategically what the investments in agriculture are. Therefore –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have received information that we have a problem in the recording department. They are asking us to adjourn for ten minutes so that they can re-organise. The system is not recording you and yet I want you to be on the Hansard. So, I suspend the House for ten minutes. 

(The House was suspended at 4.15 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.25 p.m. the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, before the ICT failure, we were talking about the value of this loan and I was informing this House that Shs 135,520 billion is a third of the current budget of Ministry of Agriculture. I was therefore asking whether this was real investment in agriculture. 

They are talking about financing markets and agricultural trade improvement, and I indeed highlighted that the current problems in the Ministry of Agriculture are not what this loan is being asked for. We are in short supply of water for production. At the moment our disease control financing is very inadequate; our agricultural research value is not even Shs 520 million. 

If we are borrowing in the name of agriculture and agricultural trade, we also needed to ascertain whether we are operating in the right environment. When we were talking about the NDP, like you highlighted, that it is complete, Madam Speaker, we do not know as a Parliament what the contents are as far as agricultural investment in this country are concerned. Hence, we cannot just go on as a Parliament to approve this loan given the fact that it was requested at a time when PEAP was the overall development framework. The lawyers might need to advise us about the situation we are operating in.

I indeed highlighted that the country yearns for a very comprehensive input policy that at the moment we do not have. And if you asked the my minister here what the strategic investment in marketing of agriculture produce and other related products are, I bet she will not be able to tell you. For the simple reason –(Interruption)

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, is the Shadow Minister for Agriculture in order to insinuate that I do not know what I am doing? That I am not in charge of my own ministry? I have invited her many times and I know she and the Committee of Agriculture have been participating in the five-year investment plan of the Ministry of Agriculture. 

During the break, we had a chat and I told her to wait and raise those issues of water for production, the issue she is continuing to relate with markets for produce, when I present the sector investment plan here. Is she, therefore, in order to even misguide the House and insinuate that I am not in charge when I am fully in charge and she knows that? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think let us focus on this loan and its purpose. 

MS BAKO: Actually, Madam Speaker, you are very right on this one. She is still developing a sector investment plan. The question is: what did the other ministers, prior to her existence as the Minister of Agriculture, do? This implies that we do not even know what we are marketing in this ministry. 

The markets are being requested and we need to invest in the markets. Fine, we are going to erect very huge and nice structures where there will be day care centres but what are we going to sell in these markets? For example, the hides industry in this country is dead. Ask me how today, in this country, we market hides. How do we market them? I bet there is no answer to that.

Most of these loans, for example, those that are related to agriculture being implemented in other ministries blurt out what they call the overall country investment in agriculture. So, when you talk about Shs 135 billion and you put it on top of the Shs 400 billion that already gives a figure of around Shs 500 billion and it will appear as if the country is really doing something in the Ministry of Agriculture and yet this is a starving nation. So how can we therefore request for this loan and as a Parliament approve it when the real issues in the Ministry of Agriculture are not being addressed? 

My honourable minister was telling me that this is something related to markets and trade. For goodness sake, what has the Ministry of Trade done? What is it marketing?

You are talking about value addition. Fine, why would value addition in the Ministry of Agriculture be in the other Ministry of Local Government when we know for sure that the backward and forward linkages in the two sectors do not involve Local Government? It is the Ministry of Trade and Ministry of Agriculture. (Mr Ahabwe rose_) Madam Speaker, I have no time. You might want to give that information to the minister who will in the end develop the sector investment plan.

Finally, looking at the aspect of programme management and coordination, my best friend is an agriculturalist and has been dealing with projects. There are things called “technical advice”, “technical assistance”, and the issues to do with gender training and gender mainstreaming are components of this loan. 

For goodness sake, what does the Ministry of Gender do? And you have “technical assistance” and this technical assistance comes in the names of people who are supposed to be in the know and they are driven in expensive vehicles; their children are being educated in very expensive schools. The conditions of technical assistance are so exorbitant that you will not be surprised that they take more than half of the project value. Do we know in real terms who this technical assistance is? -(Interjection)- I cannot lay my husband on the Table -(Laughter)- but she knows him very well because they deal with investment. 

My appeal to this House is this. We should not hurry to pass this loan because it is not investment in agriculture in real terms. Unless we legally now say and accept the NDP as the overall framework in which Government is going to undertake all its investments; yes, we can but for now we cannot for the simple reason that it is going to be an investment in an illegal framework. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Shadow Minister, how can agriculture really exist without access and markets?

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, I wish to answer you. We know for sure that it is not the structural markets but the cash markets that we are talking about. As long as you have the cash to pay the farmer whatever nice farm gate price, markets already exist at the farm gate. So by every standard therefore, when you are asking how agriculture can develop without their existence, try to sort it out because that Pillar 6 they talk about in the PMA framework is not necessarily the infrastructure but the whole marketing system. So, in this case this loan is not talking about a marketing system but a static structural establishment.

4.35
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you for the opportunity. Let me start on a note of politicisation. Today, we are talking about this loan but on 28 November 2009, the Minister of Local Government was in Gulu meeting the market vendors. He promised to work on the markets, which was very good. But as long as you do not politicise it by saying that this FDC is useless - 

HON. MEMBERS: Who said it?

MS AOL: The minister said it. But I told him that although sometimes you see these people putting on yellow T-shirts from the outside, from the inside, they are blue -(Laughter)- this is taxpayers’ money. The loans that we are getting here are going to be paid by all Ugandans. Why do we have to attach it to the NRM? We must all go and talk about development and improving services and improving the infrastructure for our people instead of politicising it. Sometimes some of us will just talk again because you have politicised it. 

Secondly, I think the technical people have not done their ground work well. Why do you want to demolish Gulu Market and maybe Mbarara Market and then during reconstruction, you do not complete the work? You are not going to complete the work because pages 12 and 13 of this paper show that there is no confidence in the constructors completing some of the infrastructure that is going to be demolished. 

If you are going to build markets for us, please, build them to completion because we will not tolerate seeing our women in the rain just because the funding has not been enough. So, I feel that while the intention is good, the ground work has not been done well. You have all these observations that have been made here; please, go and do more work on them.  

There has always been fighting between the vendors and the local governments here mainly in the centre and we do not want this to occur again, especially upcountry. Please, spare us but if you go and try to push your agenda of politics, then tomorrow we shall see the local governments fighting with the market vendors. We need to find the best way of harmonising the two. 

The market vendors must know that the local authorities must also have their own share in these markets instead of just focusing on votes only. Sometimes we do not need to focus much on the votes but at the end of it all when we have done so, we shall get the votes. But you go and say, “Oh, we are going to do this, and you are going to be the owners.” They are going to be the owners but tomorrow when the local governments want to put their feet down, they will say, “Do not forget that the Minister of Local Government came here on 28th November and promised us this”. 

There is no way we are going to accept that the local authorities should also have control over this. Let us help our people better and moreover, the Minister of Local Government who is in charge of the district councils, the divisions - (Interruption)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I thank you, hon. Aol. The information I want to give you is that I am a member of the committee but as we went to these markets such as Kasese, and Mpanga in Fort Portal – of course we know that markets are breeding grounds for politics but again we sensitised those people that politics should be left out of the infrastructure building process. We told them that they should wait and build the markets first since markets are there to bring in people, and then they shall be better off when the markets are built. 

But also, the Ministry of Local Government assured us that they did not want to excite the members before the loan is committed because they know that if Parliament refuses to approve the loan, there will be a backlash. So, they mildly went to these markets and gave them little information such that after approving the loan, they will give them all the information they need. I thank you. 

MS AOL: Madam Speaker -(Interjection)- as long as you will give me my time; I will take the information. 

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank my sister for giving way. She received me very well in Gulu and I am very grateful for the reception the people of Gulu gave me. 

Yes, I am the Minister of Local Government but I am also an NRM party official. Markets are one of the items that the President, who is the Chairman of the NRM party, promised. This is not to say that the markets will benefit only the NRM members but the point is that they are part of the NRM manifesto programme pledged to all Ugandans by His Excellency the President, and the market in Gulu will benefit all the people of Gulu, and I did make it clear that the NRM was about to fulfil its pledge to the people of Gulu and that is what I was launching when we were together, hon. Member. 

So, the information I would like to give you is that what I said was not in bad faith; it was the honest truth and the people received it very well. That they were dressed in yellow was not an offence and that is the way to go. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MS AOL: That is the problem. If I only knew that you were just a party official, maybe I wouldn’t even have appeared there. Sometimes we need to move with one heart. Let us not try to have many hearts. That makes it very difficult for us to be so accommodative and welcome our people when we go for matters to do with development. I care a lot about those women of Gulu but when I hear my minister speak, really biting me - and even the President. If that is what the President pledges, then I am afraid that is where the problem really lies. Let us not try to politicise any development ventures. Let us work together in the areas of development. When time for politics comes, then there we can go and try to bite each other. Thank you.

4.45
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to contribute to this debate. I would like to thank the committee for the report that was delivered to this House. I find a problem with this loan. The principle however is that I support it and I support the intentions of the loan but I think that as Parliament, if we pass this loan today, we will be putting the cart before the horse and I would like to urge you on two fronts -[Mr Kiyonga: “Donkey.”] or donkey, as hon. Kiyonga may know it. It is not about Kumi not being there, it is not about Gulu or Soroti being on the list or Mbarara that we control, but it is about the rationale while passing this loan. 

The committee has done us great service in indicating that there are a lot of outstanding issues that need to be tackled before this loan takes off. It has highlighted the issues of land where in many cases we do not know who owns land –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, I would like you to restrain the Secretary-General of the NRM. He is disrupting the flow of ideas. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have some order, please? He is unable to think when you are talking. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What the committee has raised are pertinent issues in their observations. They also prescribe recommendations on issues of land, for example, where in certain cases the ownership of land is not very clear. In some cases there are negotiations that are going on with Mengo but you are the same people who harassed Mengo and the Kabaka here when we were considering the Land (Amendment) Bill and now you would like to negotiate with him? This to me brings a lot of uncertainties that we need to clear before we pass this loan.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the Member on the Floor made a very big allegation about this Parliament and my Kabaka, that the Kabaka was harassed. I am called Ruth Nankabirwa, Member of Parliament representing Kiboga District. I do not know of any time when my Kabaka was harassed by this Parliament, which is mandated to pass the resolution because we are discussing the resolution and it is Parliament which has that mandate. Is the hon. Member in order to insinuate that this Parliament harassed the Kabaka by passing the Land (Amendment) Bill without specifically substantiating? Is he in order to mix up issues?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not recall His Highness the Kabaka coming to Parliament or meeting us. Can you substantiate how we harassed him?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I know that the Kabaka is the Ssabassajja, the Magulunyondo, the husband of all women -(Laughter)- and whose word is gospel truth. By disregarding the suggestions of the Kabaka, in my view, he felt harassed. 

Secondly, I sat on the Committee of Infrastructure that was considering the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007 and a delegation from Mengo representing the Kabaka came. The Kabaka’s views and Mengo’s views were grossly ignored. This, in my opinion, can be construed to mean harassment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what happened was a disagreement and not harassment. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I thank you for the guidance and would like to continue. The other aspect surrounds –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, you ruled and guided that there was a disagreement and not harassment. Can the honourable member withdraw the word “harassment” so that the record of this august House is put right? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have said that the views of his Highness the Kabaka were brought and they were not accepted. That was a disagreement; that is dialogue. So, that is not harassment. Please, withdraw the word. 

MR AMURIAT: Most obliged, Madam Speaker, and I hope that satisfies the Minister of Finance. But talking about finance and also believing that this rush decision is politically motivated, as is clearly spelt out in the committee report, I think as Parliament, we should be able to stand and have a spine that would help us to resist the interference of parliamentary duties by the Executive.

In saying this, I am mindful of the recommendation under nine on page 15, where we have been told that we are rushing to have this loan approved because His Excellency the President wants it to be approved. It is clearly written here. The President’s deadlines have to be met and this is the reason and a good reason in the view of the Executive that we should pass this loan.

4.54
MR OTTO ISHAA (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): I want to thank the committee for the report. I find this report good especially on the observations and recommendations. But in the conclusion I find something, which is disturbing. The committee observed and recommended that there are a number of things that are not right and should be first put right before we can go ahead to use this money for this good objective plan of Government. They went ahead to say that as Parliament we should pass this loan.

In most cases, when we are deliberating in this House, we tend to ignore the recommendations of the committee and fundamentally we concentrate on the concluding remark that we should pass the report and the loan. We should take into consideration the recommendations that are always made by committees of Parliament. I think when they are doing these observations and scrutiny they tend to go into the details of the whole thing on behalf of Parliament but when the committee comes here with a report and giving very good recommendations and then later on they contradict themselves to say, “I therefore urge this Parliament to pass this motion” it is very confusing. 

But I want to go to the point in this particular report, of marketing. Marketing is one of the pillars of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA) but we considered NAADS first phase and second phase as another pillar of PMA for production but for all this time we have not concentrated at all as Government on the marketing aspect of the seven pillars of PMA and yet today we are coming to borrow money to start up the marketing process. This is not conclusive as per the recommendations of the committee. There is need to come up with markets that can fulfill the obligation of the seventh pillar of PMA.

I want to refer to one of the recommendations of the committee where they said that the money that we are going to borrow is not going to be enough to finish the whole project and Government may again have to borrow more money to complete the project. Why should we come here and borrow this money when we even know that we are not going to finish the project of constructing markets? Why shouldn’t we prepare ourselves as Government and come up with a clear amount of money that we need and we debate comprehensively and pass it, construct the markets and utilise them effectively? Why do we consider piecemeal approaches?

4.59
MS CONCY ACIRO (Independent, Woman representative, Amuru): I would like to thank the committee for the report. I am not going to support this loan because of one reason. I remember yesterday we were debating about the creation of new districts and the reason why we are creating the new districts is to take services closer to the people but when you look at the list of the markets, which we are going to borrow the loan for, we do not even see the new districts there. I am not sure whether the people who are living in the new districts are not human beings or if they do not need markets. Take for instance, Amuru District where we do not have a single supermarket –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: I would like to give the information to the hon. Member that when you look at these markets, they are regionally distributed and these are major markets that have been serving this country. In the last seven years most Members have been complaining because markets were not reconstructed save for others that have been affected by fire like Mbale, Jinja and others. This is not actually looking at all districts but regional markets. I would encourage hon. Aciro to support this and maybe others will come later.

MS ACIRO: Thank you, for your information but in the report we are talking about poverty reduction. How can you reduce poverty in markets, which are already developed? If you are serious about poverty reduction, you should consider those that are not yet developed. We should come here to borrow loans for these new districts which have got nothing in place. 

I would like to comment on the bridges. In rural areas, most of the feeder roads are crossed by rivers and this makes it hard for farmers to cross when they have their produce. In this case if you are saying that we should deal with the developed markets, how are we going to help the rural people down there? There is need to help these new districts. I am not going to support this motion and I actually feel very vulnerable.

5.03
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I begin by thanking the committee for bringing this report but I rise to oppose the motion on the Floor. While I agree that it is important to improve markets dealing in agricultural produce, I have a few concerns, which I wish to raise. One is the attitude of this Parliament and this country that for everything that we need, we must borrow money.

It has been reported here in this Parliament that our loan management skills are deplorable. Why do we continue to borrow money when we have admitted here on this Floor that our management of previous loans have cost this country a lot of money? Shouldn’t we first consider, work on and improve our loan management skills? That is the first thing we should do otherwise we will continue to release this money for this country just because we think we must borrow for everything that we need.

This country is almost collapsing under the weight of foreign loans and public expenditure and everybody knows that. I have a question for Government: Is borrowing the only form of raising funds that we can depend on? Can we not depend on other forms of internal capital such as reducing corruption? So much money is lost on corruption! What about public expenditure? Can we not look for investors including sitting tenants who are always crying to be given the opportunity to own and develop their own markets?

The cost of public administration, if managed, can be used to raise funds for what we need. The New Vision or The Daily Monitor of yesterday carried a story of President Museveni travelling by commercial plane, moreover in economy class. That was excellent! I think we should take it on from there and start talking about internally raising funds for such activities. In Ghana, public servants, in response to the global credit crunch, are using public means. In India, recently, they passed a resolution in Parliament for Members of Parliament to start travelling economy class while they are undertaking public functions.

In 2007, three heads of state came to attend CHOGM on commercial jets. The presidents of Guyana and Cyrus and the Prime Minister of Malta travelled on Emirates in business class with me. I travelled in the same plane with them. That is why such countries do not have to borrow a lot of money as they routinely do this. We must improve our loan management skills.

These days all banks have marketing officers all over the place. They go round looking for people to borrow money but sensible people in this House have declined the offers to borrow on the grounds that they are overcommitted and cannot afford it. Why then do the representatives of the people in this House just accept to borrow money for the people we represent yet they decline for themselves?

I strongly recommend that we establish other avenues, and they are there, for internally fundraising and particularly cost saving, budget cuts and finding investors as we improve our loan management skills -(Member timed out_)

5.08
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. Borrowing money to develop markets may be a good idea but the problem we have is that this government of the NRM has got no policy on developing markets and running them.

In 1994, Government borrowed money from World Bank to develop Owino Market and indeed the market was developed. As we speak today, the same government is saying that it is leasing or selling the market to the vendors.

These markets have vendors and dues are collected from them all over the country but what is very unfortunate is that the dues from most of these markets are just eaten by a few individuals who collect them. I have got a very serious problem despite the fact that my own constituency is a beneficiary because - you know, when the President was campaigning against the powerful Mabikke in 2006, he stopped around Kansanga - knowing that I am a potential contender to the seat. He stopped around Kansanga and asked the people, “What is the problem here?” They said, “The problem is markets.” He said, “I have given it to you and here it is.” This meant that even this is not well thought out.

I have a problem with this. What is this Government’s policy on developing and running these markets? We are not going to commit taxpayers’ money to repaying the loan. We are going to get this loan, build markets and in one or two years, the same markets will be sold to either private individuals or to a few vendors. Again, if we are having dues collected, why don’t we use these very dues to repay the loan instead of committing our already overburdened taxpayers to repay this sort of loan? Vendors are making money in these markets and they pay dues.

This loan is a good idea but we need to rethink it. We should throw it back to the committee to redraft it. (Mr Wambuzi rose-) No, you have colour clash, what order are you raising? Blue, yellow, black – (Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I was hesitant to put an order because the first statements were very good but I have been forced to stand here and ask whether the honourable member holding the Floor is in order to argue that development of infrastructure for our peasant traders should stop, yet they need a place where they can sell their things from? How can you stop development of infrastructure like roads, yet I have been a market consultant for the honourable in his constituency? He was anxious for that market to be built for his peasants. Is he in order to say it is wrong for infrastructure to be developed for our needy population so that they have a market where they can sell their products from? Is he in order to put a roadblock for infrastructure to be developed for our peasants? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, you know in this House we have been complaining about the gap between the rich and the poor and the lack of access to markets by the population. Why are you objecting to giving the peasants additional facilities? 

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my well-coloured colleague for raising – multi-coloured: blue, yellow, what? (Laughter) It is true hon. Gagawala was hired as a consultant – I introduced him to the vendors of Kansanga Market because they had a plan of redeveloping the market before the President went to the constituency. They wanted to borrow money from the bank. However, they encountered problems. The first problem was about the ownership of the land. This is such a serious problem that it was even raised in the report. Most of these markets are occupying someone’s land, including Kansanga. Kansanga Market sits on someone’s land and there are issues to resolve. The case is in court.

Secondly, the people of Kansanga made a budget of Shs 4.0 billion to modernise their market. When I see this US $10 million loan, which is nearly Shs 18 billion - it is possible for Kansanga to consume all of it. If the vendors have drawn up a budget of Shs 4.0 billion, how much are you going to give them from this loan? 

Although we need development in our areas, it must be planned and well-thought out. That is the difference I am going to bring when I take charge of government in the coming years. We must think, we must develop and have serious policies. We are not going to do things haphazardly. NRM, you have been here for 23 years, you ought to do better than what you are doing now.

I pray and request this House to refer this loan back to the committee for further scrutiny. I want to thank you.

5.16
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Madam Speaker, before I raise my other concerns about the loan, allow me to say right from the onset that the intention and the spirit of the loan mean well. It means well because marketing infrastructure is vital in post-harvest handling. Farmers are given a platform to negotiate for prices and it eliminates middlemen. Marketing infrastructure has numerous advantages. A whole paper can be presented on that. It is on that basis that I support it. 

However, there are serious concerns the Minister of Finance, in consultation with the sector ministry, should look at especially when we are addressing priorities of the agricultural sector. Marketing is one end-point of the value chain. We need to understand the acute problem we have. The Ministry of Agriculture will agree that the problem now is not markets; it is irrigation. It is that rural physical infrastructure, which is embedded in the PMA strategy. 

I do not know whether the Ministry of Finance takes care of what has been done when it is designing these projects. A programme called CAIIP – for Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme - under the Ministry of Local Government I think is building these markets. AAMP did so many. 

When you are travelling to Kabarole, you will find a market called Matiri, but not so much food is there on sale. So I do not think marketing infrastructure is a priority compared to irrigation; I do not think it is a priority compared to organising farmers to teach them agricultural techniques, which are friendly to climate change. Therefore, while it is a priority to increase this infrastructure for the markets, it is also imperative to look at how we can boost production that will feed into these markets (Applause) or else these markets will be for the bats and wild animals to sleep there.

I have no issues with the infrastructure. It is good. It has got its advantages, but is it a priority? Is it number one? Having given those misgivings and also being aware of the advantages, I support the loan. Thank you so much.

5.19
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this loan because of the following reasons: 

We all know that marketing is the beginning of production or marketing inspires production. Many times in this Parliament, we have complained about our farmers producing and being frustrated by lack of markets or market facilities. Therefore, I support this loan. I know that these markets are vital and are going to stimulate production. 

I also want to remind Members, particularly the ladies, that many of the sellers in these markets are women. In fact, I wanted to request Government to make sure that when markets are constructed, they are gender-friendly so that women can go with their children, breastfeed them, have a place where to put them to sleep so that they operate in these markets -(Applause)- while conducting their roles as mothers. 

Having said that, I think the issues raised by the committee – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take information?

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to pass over to my sister, hon. Mary Mugyenyi is that I went to a market in Entebbe–Kitooro and the problem we found there was that the administration of that market was telling women who had delivered to leave the market place; that they do not want women with babies to come to the market yet these are low income earners who do not have the capacity to hire nannies to look after their babies. One woman was forced to throw a child after it had been born because she thought that she was going to be chased away from the market if she continued to carry this child along with her. So, actually what the Member said was right.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you so much, for that information. I was going to say that having said that, I want to request Government to look at the issues raised by the committee in that document that are really of concern, for example, the issue of land clearance. I know from experience that ADB would not disburse the loan if there are no clear land titles of land owners. And these are the reasons that normally delay the implementation of loans once they have been approved. And we know that we have been approving loans here but when it comes to implementation sometimes the timeframe ends before the loans are implemented and the structures are in place. So that has to be dealt with. 

The other thing I wanted to raise is the issue of the wetlands. I have information from the Ministry in charge of Environment that many of these markets particularly in Kampala are proposed to be developed in wetlands at this particular time in history when the whole world is convening in Copenhagen to discuss climate change and global warming. And we know that the wetlands are attacked, cleared and destroyed, we continue to inflict more dangers to our environment and to global warming. So, I would like us to be assured that the markets that we are proposing to develop are not going to be developed in the wetlands. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know we have a very long agenda and yesterday I informed you that we have only seven working days remaining. 

5.24
MS OLIVER WONEKHA (NRM, Woman Representative Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on the National Economy for this good report. I would also like to thank the committee for having involved the Committee on Agriculture in the field trip because this is indeed infrastructure to address issues in agriculture especially marketing. I was on the eastern league where the observations that are made in this report are true. 

On the issue of suspicion between vendors and local governments, we found out that there had not been enough sensitisation of the vendors in as far as this project was concerned. Because of lack of information, the vendors did not think that the local governments were going to deal fairly with them in the construction of these markets. In fact, in Mbale they told us that they would deal with the centre than dealing with Mbale Municipality as a local government because of this suspicion. They said that there was just too much corruption in the municipality and so they were not ready to move out of the market place to go anywhere because  as far as they were concerned, the municipality had sold all the land that they had jurisdiction over that they did not even have an inch to move them to. So, this suspicion made the preparation for this loan rather difficult.  

Having said so, I would like to commend Tororo Municipality for their preparedness for this loan. The market was clean, they already had a signed Memorandum of Understanding between the local government and the vendors and they actually challenged us and told us that they were ready to implement the loan there and then if it was available. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of land ownership is real. I support hon. Mugyenyi in what she has just said because it was an issue in the field. Some of the vendors had actually bought the small plots where they had erected the structures in which they were operating from while others had leaseholds of 49 years. So ownership, acquisition, compensation - and we also know that land ownership, availability of title deeds are a condition for the acquisition of this loan. So Government or the implementing agency is urged to ensure that this issue is really sorted out.  

Just like hon. Mugyenyi said, I also urge especially fellow women to support this loan because one of the components this loan is going to address is that very issue that hon. Kizza  raised about the women who have been kept out of the markets. We know that women own kiosks; they are the food vendors and so need a clean environment. 

In this particular loan, there is a component to address gender issues. I support the acquisition of the loan because it will address, among other things, care centres, clean health facilities and banking facilities. We know about time and poverty as far as women are concerned: you have got babies, you have the caring to do at home; you have to sell the tomatoes. So if these facilities are nearby – there is clean water, the bathrooms are there; I know women need bathrooms more than men – things will be better. 

On the issue of employment, we know that employment is a real issue and this government is not going to get everybody into formal –(Member timed out_)  

5.29
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report and I express my support for this loan request basing on the following reasons:

Jinja Central Market got burnt in 2004 but for the last five years, the people of Jinja have been appealing to Government to come to their rescue. People have been operating in stalls made of polythene bags and papers. So, when they are included on this list, I have all reason to support them. 

The Opposition has been building on this as it has been a fertile ground for them in Jinja. It was everyday building on this as an issue that the people of Jinja have been promised air. When this facility is put in place, I feel Government will have a very big milestone in as far as politics is concerned and although Members said we should not talk of politics, they are inseparable. The reasons why some Members are opposing especially from the Opposition is that they want to continue having mileage in Jinja as far as this is concerned and for that reason, I support this loan request. 

The involvement of local governments as alluded to by the committee is indeed pertinent – (Interruption) 

MS ALASO: I have very attentively been listening to this debate and I have heard people oppose, support and give divergent views. However, I did not hear anybody specifically opposing because of Jinja. Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that we in the Opposition generally hate Jinja when we are actually doing everything to capture Jinja? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the general theme on one side of the House has been that we should not approve this loan because it is not structured and designed and yet it touches Jinja. So he is right. Proceed.

MR MUWUMA: I really thank you for that wise ruling. Jinja is one of those markets that are benefiting and I had to quote it as a specific case. 

Before, I was talking of local government development. When you look at the CAIIP programme, there was little involvement of local governments. The contractors are sourced and paid by the centre and yet you tell local governments to go on monitoring. How do you monitor something you did not initiate? Something you did not have an input in, the involvement of MPs is nowhere. So, they say the MP is supposed to do his oversight role. What can you monitor that you did not understand right from the word go? Apart from approving the CAIIP programme, we did not have any other update or information as far as CAIIP is concerned. We feel that as we approve this loan, let us be informed of our roles and those of local governments right from the word go. 

I also have another reason of supporting this loan because it will be used in providing cold storage units for meat, fish and chicken. Such perishable products have been a problem. Two months ago, I was in hell with the farmers that I managed to secure for agricultural implements like broiler chicks. When they matured, they got to the stage of sale and the farmers invaded me and they were saying, “Here are your birds, we need market.” I could not help the situation because the cold rooms were not provided for. So I pray that we support this loan since it is capturing such facilities. 

I also agree with the committee recommendation number 11 where they say that they should consider upcoming municipalities like Iganga and Masindi. I would implore my sister, hon. Concy Aciro, to also agree with this recommendation whereby they are saying Government should look for more funds to take care of districts that have not been provided for. I thank you so much. 

5.35
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to start off by thanking the committee for the good report and also express my support for the motion. I would like to make the following observations:

The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry was not included in the consultations whereas on page 8, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry will be involved.

Mukono has also been included but after passing Buikwe District, Mukono will have no market and as of now, it has no market in the municipality. 

The objective of this loan is very good although what I must point out is that the farmers may not benefit directly but the vendors. As a matter of fact, the vendors are discouraging farmers through fleecing them. I would like recommend that we also think of farmers’ markets where farmers can bring their items and sell them without being fleeced by the market vendors who act as middlemen. For example, if you brought a pineapple to Nakasero Market, the middleman may get Shs 200, the transporter Shs 400 and the farmer ends up with nothing. So we need Government to think about the markets for farmers. 

On page 5, the committee tells us that they will have a huge multiplier effect in commercial agriculture in Uganda. That “huge” is not measurable and I wish the committee could give us an idea or at least an indicator through which we can monitor this project and see whether it is on course or not. We should strengthen the research department of this Parliament because we need more in-depth research into whatever we present here as a committee, individuals and the Speaker’s Office. We do not know where the warehouse receipt system fall in as far as these markets are concerned. The linkages are missing and I think we need both longitudinal and cross-sectional data analysis.

The committee on page 10 gives us the terms and conditions. I would also like to know what fraction will actually go to the market construction other than administration and other things.

When you look at the figures, each market has an average of about US $2.5 million, which is not little money and definitely we want to know maybe- do we have an impression of what one of these markets will look like or are we just buying a pig in pork? What percentage will go to sanitation? I think we need to know about the sanitation issue - (Interruption)

DR ASIIMWE: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information is about sanitation in markets. I am happy about this loan and I support it but the problem we have observed over a long period concerns sanitation and hygiene in markets. The local authorities, town councils and municipalities have not really taken this problem into account. They have not addressed the problem of sanitation and hygiene as far as food handling is concerned. In most cases, people have been infected from the food they buy from the markets. You find vegetables mixing with meat, fish and cooked food and yet there are disease causing organisms which are in form of spores. Even when you cook your food, some of these spores cannot be destroyed. So, they are transmitted into your body and you fall sick. 

I would suggest - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that information? (Laughter)

DR ASIIMWE: The information I want to give is that as we consider this loan, the ministry should consider employment of food inspectors in markets so that it is a very strong component. 

Finally, Madam Speaker -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh my God! No, you have smuggled it in. (Laughter) You are stealing hon. Mugambe’s time. Hon. Mugambe was on the Floor. You were supposed to give information.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you honourable colleague for the information. For sure sanitation is an issue especially where foodstuff is concerned. I think my colleague read my mind and that is very good.

Still concerning sanitation, normally when it comes to cold storage, there is no separation between, let us say, fish and fruits and other different types of foodstuff. That causes a problem of hygiene. So, when they are constructing these markets there should be separation of items so that they are not mixed. This is why we need to know what the impression of the markets we are trying to construct is. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.42
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand up to support the motion that this loan be approved by Parliament because it is going to go a long way in helping our people, especially the low-income earners. It is not true that the construction of these markets is not going to help our people. Actually, to the contrary, it is going to help the farmers and the local people who bring food to markets in urban areas. 

I am saying this from the experience of Mbarara and Mbale where I was town clerk. When people bring food to the market, those vendors in the market buy only what they can sell in a day. After that they cannot buy anymore and these small scale people who have brought food, especially on the bicycles, start moving around looking for other places where they can sell their food because the absorption rates of the vendors in the markets that exist now, which are very old since they were built in the 1940s and 50s, is very small and therefore they only buy what they can sell in a day. 

This means that these people bring in very little and cannot go back the very day to bring in more. Actually, during Christmas days, these local people who bring food on bicycles make two or three trips depending on the distance they are moving because then the market is very good and everybody is buying. This time, everybody is going to bring in as much as possible because I take it that these markets are going to be modern and there are going to be spaces for fruits, fish, meat and everything that can be sold. 

The affluent people cannot go to our markets to shop. People with vehicles cannot go there to shop because there is no parking. The small time buyer or even the wholesale buyer cannot go to the market because there is no parking. Our markets have been burning because all the areas that were for fire fighting were built in - the lanes were built in. There is no way the vehicles can come in like it happened in Mbarara. A fire fighting vehicle was there but it could not access the market to stop the fire because of the way the market was built. This time round I take it that the market will be very big, and there will be all provisions. 

My only problem, as it is in Mbale, is the management of the market, the management of the money from the market and the maintenance of the standards in the market. Who is going to be the owner of these markets? Who is going to be the biggest stakeholder in this market? Because in most cases, councillors are interested in what is brought in daily and they take it. There is no money provided for maintenance of these facilities that are going to be put up in the market. 

It is my request that the ministry responsible considers setting aside money, at whatever level it will be, so that the facilities that are going - because in markets, for example, in the Mbale Market, we had flush toilets but they were not using them because they could not pay for water and National Water was always disconnecting the water. So, how are we sure that we shall continue to have water, electricity, we shall continue having the cold rooms working and the sewerage lines are okay. The sewerage lines in urban areas were planned for the population of that time and the type of food they were eating is not the type of food we eat. For them when they would go to the toilet, the volume they would release is not what the people do release today and therefore this clogs the sewer systems.

The most important thing is for the Ministry of Local Government and Government not to say that they have experience from other programmes. Definitely, we cannot be here very happy that CAIIP is performing very well; it is not. Actually, CAIIP would be very good because it would have small markets in the rural areas where food could be carried wholesome to the big markets that are going to be put in towns, but they are moving very slowly. They have not done even a quarter of what is expected and yet we are supposed to be in CAIIP II -(Member timed out_)

5.48
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice in thanking the committee for coming out with this very good report. I would like particularly to thank them for visiting all the 26 markets where this project is going to be implemented including Mpanga Market in Fort Portal Municipality. 

Just last month, on the 30th, we marked ten years of the East African Community integration and at the summit that was held on 20th, the five heads of state agreed to sign the East African Common Market Treaty. I think this loan has come at a time when we really need it most because we shall be having the business community from all the five partner states bringing their merchandise here to Uganda.

I want to strongly support this motion. I knew about this loan two years ago when there was an idea of selling off Mpanga Market. I thank His Excellency the President because at that time when those ideas were prevailing, His Excellency the President had to intervene and stop the selling of these markets.

There are issues and challenges that are raised in this committee report and I hope they will be addressed appropriately by Government. On page 12, there is observation No. 1 and the recommendation about sensitising the vendors on this project. Some vendors actually think that they are going to be removed from their markets, that when they have been upgraded they will not be allowed to come back. In the loan agreement, one of the loan conditionalities is that the local governments must make a memorandum of understanding with the vendors so that when the construction of the market is completed, the vendors should be given first priority to go back to their business premises. I think the vendors need to be sensitised and to be given that ray of hope because the vendors are actually praying that the project delays. 

I had a meeting with my vendors in Fort Portal at Mpanga Market. Some of them were actually saying “Honourable, they are going to chase us from our business premises; is there a way of blocking this project?” I said “No, there is no way of blocking this project but we are going to ensure …” - I would like to really request the Minister of Local Government to ensure that the memorandum of understanding between local governments and the vendors be honoured. They have accepted, according to the memorandum of understanding between the vendors and the Ministry of Local Government, that after the construction the vendors will go back to their premises. I would like really to emphasise that.

Lastly, on the issue of ownership of land, it is a very big problem. I think this is a problem almost everywhere; most government land has no titles. We want to appeal to the Minister of Lands - now that the storm of the Land Amendment Bill is over – to help us and make sure we get land titles for all government plots and land. We do not have a land title for Mpanga Market, for instance. I want to thank the local government in my area. They have been trying to secure a land title with a lot of difficulty. In fact, we have been chasing this thing for the last three or four months. We are worried that we may be time barred; now that we are going to pass this loan request today, we might fall out because of time -(Member timed out_)

5.53
MR STEPHEN BAKKA MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to first of all thank the committee for a job well done. I wish to start off by informing the House that I support the motion to approve this loan.

Many members in this House have not gone to the markets for a long time. Maybe 10 years back is the last time they went to the markets. Most of you, for one reason or the other, have not been there. I am a regular buyer of items in the markets and I know the state of our markets in Uganda. I have visited almost all these towns that have been mentioned.

First of all, this House has passed very many loan requests whose names I cannot even remember. This is a loan at the end of the implementation - we shall be able to see what has been done on ground, we shall be able to evaluate and monitor how the work is proceeding and we shall be able to see the fruits as they come when the loan is being implemented. 

Our population is growing day and night. We know for a fact that our population is one of the fastest growing in the world. This means that many of our people are migrating from the villages to the towns because of the factors that you know, and this means that our markets are overcrowded. The original designs of the markets have small corridors and therefore there is congestion in all our markets. You will see this if you move around. A suggestion to renovate and reconstruct these markets with new designs is welcome, and I think it will go a long way in addressing the current congestion in the markets we have.

The other factor that has enabled me to quickly appreciate the loan is the modernisation of agriculture. We have helped our people at the grassroots through NAADS to modernise agriculture at that level and we have helped the exporters who are exporting our agricultural products. What was lacking at the level of production was helping the markets at our local level in Uganda. Therefore, this loan that has come up to help the middle men, I would call them, is welcome and I welcome it.

I would be happy if I went to a market and found a colleague. I have only been finding them in supermarkets. I think after construction of these markets, we shall see more MPs shopping in the markets.

Allow me to raise a few concerns. The first concern is that Government should not send away people from the markets and fail to complete these markets. The committee report has highlighted that because the funds are not enough, the markets might not be completed. It will be very unfortunate if our people are disorganised and then the markets are not completed and then we shall have a lot of complaints that we shall not be able to solve. Enough funds should be resourced to ensure that the markets are built completely such that our people can be settled once and for all.

There is another problem that I have noticed, and it was there in Bugiri recently, and we are still solving it. The town council tried to build the market and they removed the people, but the problem is that the original market vendors lost out. The town council started picking on new market vendors who had the money to pay for the new stalls. I hope this does not happen. Our people are using these stalls to help them go through maintaining their families and their livelihoods. If they are thrown out in favour of the new moneyed market vendors, it will be very unfortunate. I think the implementers should ensure that the original market vendors are taken care of. They should remain with their stalls.

The other concern is, and the committee report has mentioned it: Why are we going in to construct or renovate new markets and markets that have already been renovated? There are some markets that have been renovated but again they have been highlighted for reconstruction. Actually, the committee report was suggesting that they could get other sites such that they do not destroy the structures that have just been renovated. Why are we re-investing in areas that have already been helped when there are districts and markets that have not been looked - (Member timed out_)

5.58
MAJ. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, we have a budget department under the Parliamentary Commission. I think it should, from time to time, give us the loan portfolio performance for various loans for various sectors. There were some colleagues here who were saying that loans are not performing here and there. It is true there are some loans that are underperforming and therefore Government is paying heavy penalties. However, that should not be a reason to stifle loans whose intentions are good.

We need to be careful. Hon. Kassiano from Terego, we need to be extremely careful to appear -(Mr Kyanjo rose_) I have little time, hon. Hussein Kyanjo. No, I do not have time. We need to be extremely careful not to oppose for the sake of politics or for the sake of positions that are obviously in the interests of the majority Ugandans. We need to be extremely careful as MPs. The proceedings here are being televised at least in areas that receive WBS, so it is extremely important that we be careful when we are discussing an issue like markets.

Some of us know this country fairly well; we are not only in our cocoon of our constituencies. We have travelled throughout this country. The situation of markets across the country is that they are pathetic. Markets in the country, whether in the west, central or wherever - the conditions of markets where Ugandans sell foodstuffs, where we do purchase foodstuffs from –(Interjections)- Madam Betty Kamya, I want to make my point. These clarifications just derail me.

Can I say that I am extremely disappointed because this is an area where I expected unanimity of the minority House and the majority House. It is obviously clear that these markets need to be revamped in my view –(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened through this entire presentation on this proposal to borrow money. On both sides of the House, people have said the intentions are good and they support the principle of renovating and construction of the markets. I have not heard anybody say they do not support construction of the markets. The honourable member holding the Floor is now telling us that some people because of their political biases do not support the idea. Is the honourable member in order to mislead this House when the difference, we are saying, is whether we should fund it by borrowing or by other forms? You must draw the distinction. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there have been various views on the Floor of this House. There are those who are saying this is a political programme, it should not be supported; there are those who saying the design is faulty; and there are also those who are saying we should stop borrowing. Therefore, he is in order.

MAJ. GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, I have been listening to some few statements about other means of raising revenue. I am sure if those revenues were there, the revenues would have been utilised to rehabilitate the markets.

On the point hon. Kamya is raising, I agree that resources must be frugally utilised, must be used carefully, more so external resources that we borrow. Frugal utilisation, I agree. However, why can’t we borrow? A country that is poor has to borrow. Where I concur with you is on the utilisation. 

Look at the butcheries in this country, in Kampala - this wonderful city of ours - where we buy meat from. In fact I want to request the Minister of Agriculture or still Local Government to really source for more loans and even rehabilitate, whether it is private or not, some people are talking about the market in Wandegeya and saying that it is Kabaka’s land. Yes, it is Kabaka’s land; so be it! Even if Government spends money on this Kabaka’s land and rehabilitates the market where we buy food from; is Kabaka an enemy? He is not. Even if money is spent to rehabilitate a market that is not on government land but where we are buying food from, I am absolutely fine with it because health conditions in this country need to be factored in seriously. So, hon. Members, I implore the concurrence of all of us - both the majority House and the minority House - to unanimously support this loan request –(Member timed out_) 

6.05
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course you know I support the motion but I rise to make two or three points. First of all, I thank the committee for raising the 12 issues before they concluded that the loan should be approved. These issues are all administrative; you can handle them as you handle the loan. We have all gone to banks to borrow money and we know that by the time you decide to borrow money, you do not have it in your pockets. Therefore, when Government goes to borrow money for a need like this, it means that we do not have that money within our budget. So, I get surprised when people want to oppose this motion on that basis. 

What I have noticed is that the Opposition have developed a new tactic and a new phrase. Most of the members of the Opposition including my colleague, the Shadow Minister of Works and Transport, all start with this phrase: “I rise to support the intention but I do not support that the loan should be approved.” We are not going to develop this country on intentions alone – (Interruption) 

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Obviously, the intention of this loan is very good, like all the intentions of the loans that we have borrowed before. Madam Speaker, you recall that we borrowed money to build 21 bridges in 2005 under the Ministry of Works and Transport, supervised by the “life” Minister of Works and Transport; to date, I do not see a single bridge but the intention of the bridges was very good. 

A year ago, we borrowed money for small bridges and among the small bridges were Komolo, Getom, Ajelek - I pass through these bridges - and each of them was to cost about Shs 1 billion. To date, only one has been painted. Shouldn’t we question that? As Ugandans, shouldn’t we worry about the generations that are coming after us? Where are we taking this country? 

The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is whether we take time to think about the people who are coming after us. Are we not using the name of the masses to borrow money for a few individuals to chew in this country? 

MR NASASIRA: We have built many bridges in Uganda including in the Teso region and in the constituency of the honourable member, and we are still building many more bridges. But bridges have got nothing to do with markets. We must respect the structures of our Parliament; a minister brings a loan request here, the Speaker passes on the loan request to our committee and the committee sits and analyses it. The purpose of having committees in Parliament is that they do all the analysis work for us and when they come here, we quickly finalise with it and move on. This committee –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Works and Transport is without question not only a senior member of this Parliament but a senior minister and legislator therefore. The minister has rightly said that when a proposal comes, it goes through you to the relevant committee but he has deliberately refused to say that when the committee finishes business, it brings it here for discussion. In fact, he would have known that some of us are members of that particular committee. Is he therefore in order to deliberately mislead this House using his clout as an old minister and a senior legislator to sound as if he is the longest serving minister on earth? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I thought you would benefit from long-serving ministers speaking in this House! 

MR NASASIRA: I think that having appreciated my length of stay in Parliament and in that ministry, hon. Kyanjo should not have interrupted me. 

The procedure is that it goes to the committee and all Members of Parliament are free to go to that committee. I am saying this for the spirit of the future business of this House. They go to the committee and analyse it -(Interjection)- I did not go to the committee because we had discussed the loan in Cabinet. So, I knew what they were talking about. 

Let me come to my main point as to why I am trying to convince those opposing this loan on this side, especially the Members of Parliament from Kampala City. I have seen markets here; I have seen a market at Wandegeya, at Busega, Kansanga, Kasubi and Nakulabye. We all travel, and most of the people who are opposing this loan pass through all these areas that I have talked about to come to Kampala. The vendors have turned our roads into markets and we can hardly move and yet when we come here, we complain of traffic jam. We recently finished a nice roundabout connecting the Northern Bypass but the vendors came and invaded it. At Kasubi, they offload Matooke, charcoal, tomatoes right in the middle of the road. Now a loan comes to clear this and get the markets going and then we say, “This needs improvement”, as the committee has said. I want us to respect the conclusion of the committee, those issues which will be handled administratively notwithstanding, that together as Parliament of Uganda we approve this loan.

MS KAMYA: The information I would like to give the minister is that many times we have stood on this side of the House and supported many proposals to borrow money. Sometimes we support the borrowing with concerns and other times without any concerns. We do support loan requests when there is good reason to support them, but we do not support them because they have merely been presented to the Speaker and then taken back to the committee.

MR NASASIRA: I am, therefore, surprised that all of us who use these roads when entering Kampala support the motion but people who represent this town cannot support an idea to clear our roads and organise our markets.

MS ALASO: I am so uncomfortable about the way this debate is proceeding and the insinuations that are being labelled at us as the Opposition. A few minutes ago, I said we are doing everything to capture Jinja; do you really think that people who want to capture the hearts and the minds of the people are that insane that we do not want order in the markets when we want the support of those people? 

We are raising issues for Government to address them. We know that in this House we passed a loan request for the Ministry of Education to build seed schools and the loan was constrained for a long time because of lack of land titles. We should have learnt from the same experience. In the same House, we passed a loan request for Ministry of Public Service to help with Uganda Management Institute. Up to today, that loan has not been used; we are not benefiting and interest is accumulating. 

Only a month ago, the Public Accounts Committee came here with a report on loan performance and they told us how we are doing badly. Most of the loans that we passed as a House have just been drawn up to a point of just 50 percent. The hon. Minister of Works, who even promised on the Floor here that he will take me to see whether there is a hotel in Bwebajja built on the road, has not fulfilled his promise. Is he in order to continue to try to mislead me and mislead the House that we in the Opposition are opposed to these things when he failed to honour his part of the pledge to me as an individual? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the minister’s concern is that when the loan applications are brought here, they are sent to the committee and they are given time and members who are not members of the committee are free to go there and contribute.

MR NASASIRA: First of all, I think one way of capturing Jinja was to portray government as having failed to build the market. Secondly, yes some loans can go bad, but once in a while when we sleep we get nightmares but we have never stopped sleeping every night.

Hon. Alaso, I will take you to this hotel this evening if you are ready. (Laughter)

As I conclude, I want to appeal to both sides of the House that let us support this loan request and those administrative issues will be resolved.

6.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu):  I will be very precise. First, I would like to thank the committee for their report. The information available is that 40 percent of what is produced in Uganda is post harvest waste. Consequently, a loan targeted to improve this situation is a loan we should welcome. When you have a trailer and it is parked, that is your production. When you have an engine and it pulls the trailer that is marketing. Marketing stimulates production so that you can go backwards. The market induces production to respond to the demand. Marketing as a chain in the transformation function is so central. I just do not know why we take so much time on such things. 

What this loan intends to do as the second project is focus on sanitary and physio-sanitary measures, which is a constraint in international marketing and trade. If you do not have measures taken, as is being proposed in this loan, to improve the construction and the cleanliness of what is produced to be marketed, you will be shooting yourself in the foot. The vision of transformation cannot be achieved unless you have a market. The vision of the country, which is transformation of the economy, cannot be achieved unless we address this issue.

Let us be clear; post harvest waste of 40 percent is not only for members of government and it is not waste for only members of the Opposition. It is waste for the whole country and the whole country should support this one.

My final point, which should be addressed, is external debt. It is measured by solvency ratios. We measure it using domestic revenue as a percentage of GDP and we also measure it by total exports as a percentage of GDP. I can confirm to this House that these are the benchmarks which are used internationally in measuring the sustainability of our external debt. Uganda is still performing well. Yes, I can confirm to this House without any fear of contradiction that this is true. What members should be concerned about is the rate of return on borrowed money, and that is really the key. The money you borrow, what return do you get as a result of this borrowing? If the return is greater than the rate at which you are paying these loans, you may as well logically borrow because you are making more money out of the money you borrowed in order to expand and promote the growth of your economy, and that is what is being done.

I have sounded a warning on the Floor of this House before and let me repeat it. As we go to 2011, there is the Pulkol Performance Score Sheet and this is becoming a disease termed “Pulkoliosis”. “Pulkoliosis” is a desire to speak even when you have nothing to say but you want to be recorded on the score sheet as having performed and that leads into filibustering. People would want to take more time in this House. This loan should be approved without any further delay. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On your last point, professor, it is my responsibility to facilitate as much talking as possible.

6.23
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson and members for having presented a report which has got a national feature. This is because the markets which have been proposed for reconstruction are representative of Uganda. 

However, I want to sound this to my brothers and sisters on the ruling side of this House, and I am basing my advice on the contributions of honourables Eng. John Nasasira and Maj. David Gumisiriza. You have directly and indirectly insinuated that the Opposition is all out to oppose any motions for loans. Unfortunately, we are so principled that we are bent to adhering to the English adage that once bitten, twice shy. We are only being advisory and asking you to be cautious and conscious.

Before I go to other issues, two of my members have already drawn your attention to loans that we secured and procured through this House for which Ugandans are suffering in the sense that they are paying the commitment fee for money borrowed and not used. The 21 bridges in north western Uganda and in northern Uganda - My former colleague who was the Government Chief Whip, Eng. John Nasasira, I think these have been -(Mr Nasasira rose_)- please, my time is limited, unless –(Interjection)- Okay, I do not fear.

MR NASASIRA: We have informed our committee and I thought this House, but let me inform the House today about the 21 bridges. As you know, we are designing the Vurra-Arua-Koboko-Oraba road to upgrade it to tarmac. We have finished and in fact it is going for tender in a couple of months’ time to start the tarmacking. We suspended those bridges because they were going to be built on the existing alignment of the road and yet the new alignment was going to follow different routes and sizes, and that is why we withdrew that loan. You are going to have better bridges and a tarmac road on the new project.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I think you are just augmenting my point. The point is, if you knew very well that you were not ready to use this money, why did you go ahead and borrow it? This is because as of now, we have continuously paid the one percent per annum as commitment fees and that is our concern. 

We appreciate the example, which you have given about Arua-Koboko-Oraba road, but that is not the only place where these 21 bridges were to be located. I wish by now you would be saying, of the 21 bridges, we have so far constructed two or five and then I would be satisfied. The fact that you have not constructed any and yet we are paying the commitment fee is our concern.

This loan application is divided into three components. I totally agree and support the first component, which deals with construction of markets. However, I again want to quote hon. Nasasira who came up and said that a bridge has nothing to do with a market. How do you transport the produce that you want to sell in this market? It is on the Hansard and right now you can go and print it. I am quoting you. (Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: I know the Hansard is there. I said that the bridge project has got nothing to do with the market project. I definitely know that to get to the market you must use a road and sometimes some roads have bridges. Is it in order for the acting honourable Leader of the Opposition in Parliament to misquote me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you substantiate what you said?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have nothing to substantiate in the sense that he rightly says that I quoted him rightly. I did not quote him out of context but quoted him verbatim. You can ask for an advance print of the Hansard and prove me wrong.

As I said, there are three components of this loan. The first one deals with the construction of markets, and without any reservation I support the component of the construction of markets. However, there are two other components, which cast a lot of doubt in my mind. 

The second component of this loan, which attracts US $11.48 million, is for capacity building. I have, time and again, said on the Floor of this House that this phrase, “capacity building”, is an encompassing phrase which is subject to abuse by our technocrats. That is where money will disappear and you will not be able to see anything tangible on the ground that you can say, “Yes, this constituted capacity building”. 

I would have been very interested in knowing the ingredients of this capacity building as well as what trainings you are going to go into. Are they comparable to the patriotism clubs? This is because you bring something so vague and put this amount of money yet the committee has made it very clear that the amount of money for construction is not enough. Shouldn’t you have reservations when it comes to issues of capacity building? What are the benchmarks of this capacity building? What are the indicators? Where is it? I was not there and so I want it to be stated here so that we know and I am convinced that this capacity building component is going to be for the benefit of the people.

When you look at this capacity building, there is also the issue of provision of market management training. In my own understanding and conceptualisation, the construction of these markets is comparable to an estate developer who builds his houses and gives them out for rent. I do not think the same estate developer is going to say, “I want to train those who are going to rent my buildings” -(Interjections)- Yes! No, it cannot be different, unless you convince me. More so, right now we are running a decentralised governance system where the centre is not directly involved in service delivery. (Member timed out_) 

6.32
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to state from the onset that we in Masaka are extremely excited about the two markets which have been included in this programme. We have only got concerns. The concerns are stated in the 12 observations, which have been made by the committee. They should be addressed seriously. 

One concern is that the words “vendors’ association” occur about six times in these recommendations but what is the legal status of vendors’ associations? As I was leaving Masaka this afternoon, the vendors came to me with a constitution in Luganda and said, “We have formed an association and this is our constitution. Can you please go through it to see whether it is alright?” Do you understand my concern? Vendors’ associations are not permanent associations; even the membership keeps changing. Unless you give these bodies a legal framework, you are going to get problems. We are talking about vendors’ associations, vis-à-vis these markets. This matter should be handled very carefully. 

The second issue is something I ought to quote directly, and it is from the report, on top of page 13. It says, “Further to note is that government, through this loan, seems to be addressing a problem that should have been addressed five years ago instead of addressing a problem of 30 or more years to come.” This is a serious concern. You are borrowing money to build a market now but for how long will it help you in future? What is the design of this market? How much acreage is it supposed to cover? How is it going to be managed during that period? That is extremely crucial. 

Also, how long will the construction take? When you start constructing this market and move the vendors, as will be the case in Masaka, for how long will they have to wait for the market to be completed so that they can come back? When they come back, on what terms and conditions will they be coming back? How much rent will they be paying? What kind of conditionalities are they supposed to comply with? These issues are not clear in this report. The person who will respond should be able to tell us what is going to happen.

Finally, we have talked about land ownership. This is extremely important because whoever owns the land will own the market and the entire infrastructure. If that is the case, he will then be responsible for managing it. Let me give you an example. In Masaka, the Nyendo Market is on a lease but the municipal council has not been paying the annual rent. The owner of the land now wants to claim his land. Do you want to have a market in that kind of situation? How do you prevent that kind of situation from occurring? Who owns the land? How much is it? Who manages it? These are the issues. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable Members of Parliament.

Almost all the issues that have been raised were raised by the committee and we ably responded. What I do not understand is why the committee is raising similar issues to which we responded to. I do not know, but let –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ahabwe, the committee has a delegated function to this House, so they are reporting so that we can also follow.

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are so many issues that have been raised. The fundamental one is about ownership, especially of land. The other one is how the markets are going to be managed and the other is the status of the vendors today and tomorrow, including their legal status. 

Ownership 

According to the Markets Act, according to the law, ownership of markets is an exclusive domain of local authorities. In this case, it is urban authorities because this loan is supposed to be used to redevelop municipal markets and of course selected markets under Kampala City Council. Therefore, where there is contention over ownership of land or where Kampala City Council or any urban authority does not own the land, we have put in place a technical team that includes Kampala City Council to negotiate. In Buganda, for instance, we are negotiating for a lease for Kampala City Council from the Buganda Land Board, which they are going to get anyway because we are in advanced stages. In order to sort out the issue of disagreements over ownership of land, we are going to use a similar approach in all other urban authorities where that issue is evident. 

Dealing with the Current Vendors 

In a place like Ntinda where they have got some leases and built lock-ups and the lease is still valid, we are negotiating with the vendors so that once we have done the redevelopment, they will be given priority. That is why a memorandum of understanding is going to be signed so that the terms are clear. Whoever had a lock-up and this lock-up has been modernised will retain that lock-up. That is under the new arrangement. A vendor will not lose. We are very careful about this because these are vendors and that is why we are building for them.

The other issue is about the legal status of vendors’ associations. The legal status comes in when the vendors are interested in managing the market but the ownership of the market is in the hands of the urban authority. When priority to manage the market is to be given to the vendors, we encourage them to come together and form an association and that association will help them to register into a legal entity. They can then apply to the local authority to manage the market and be able to pay dues to the local authority and also cater for themselves and their interests. 

Madam Speaker, unless there is any other issue to clarify, I thought that those were the major – (Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The quantum – the US $11 million for capacity building. 

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, from the records we have, I think technical assistance and capacity building component is budgeted for about 900,000; it is not really that much. 

You also know that with these loans studies are done, and they were done throughout all the markets in this country. The issue we found was that these people need to be sensitised, trained and engaged because these are going to be modern markets. I can assure you that without this – and I think somebody pointed it out - under our current Ugandan management skills it may be difficult for these people to manage these markets unless we have trained them effectively to manage the new facilities we are going to put in place. 

It has a bigger array of components; it is not only the structures. We have sanitation facilities, banking facilities, parking facilities and all sorts of modern facilities. So, the component of capacity building is not only justifiable but it is also not big. The money that is going to be allocated to the actual construction is 85 percent of the entire amount that we are requesting for. So, it is really reasonable and I beg you to support this thing, hon. Johnson Malinga.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House approves the loan request as moved by the Minister of Finance.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I indicated yesterday that we have a lot of work and we have very few days left. Even on the Order Paper, there are a number of issues we should have handled today but which we have not done. This subject was important because it touches agriculture, which is close to most of you. So, I am proposing that we meet again in the morning at 11.00 a.m. to deal with a number of these motions especially the members’ business, and then we finish with the government business in the afternoon. So, House adjourned to 11 O’clock tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 6.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 10 December 2009 at 11.00 a.m.)

