Thursday, 3rd December, 1998. 

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

P R A Y E R S

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair).

(The House was called to order).

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, when we adjourned yesterday, we were in the process of giving the opportunity to the Mover of the Motion to wind up; then issues arose as to whether we could not hold on to accommodate the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, whose absence in the House yesterday caused concern.  I am advised that the Minister is available and I will therefore, call upon the Minister to make his comments.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 1998/99

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR & SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS):  Dr. P. Mateke:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, Members of Parliament.  First, I would like to apologise on behalf of my Colleagues.  We were expected to be here but there was uncoordinated movement of some of us.  So, we were busy in some places, but I sincerely apologise for not having been able to come.  It was not intended, it was really accidental, and I thank you very much for having appreciated our problem.

Several issues were raised here on the Floor of the House and it is my intention to respond to some of them.  Hon. Butele yesterday raised the question of Entandikwa.  He said that it seems Entandikwa  is not being felt on the ground, it has not made an impact. I would like to say that this is partly true and partly not true.  When entandikwa was introduced, some people thought that this was a gift from the President - this is how they conceived it.  So, many people who received entandikwa did not pay back the loan.  Then we have had climatic changes in this country, and in most cases, these climatic changes affected the peasants who got this entandikwa. So, their crops were destroyed and they had no capacity to pay back.  However, some peasants who borrowed this money established some firms, small firms in the villages and this money remains in the counties. Some of this money is there, especially where recovery rate is very high.  I will just give two examples - Sheema and Entebbe Municipality to mention a few. Here, the revolving fund is doing very well and we do not have problems with the people who got the money.  But in most cases, the recovery is not encouraging.  So far, the recovery is 55 per cent and 45 per cent of the people who got this entandikwa defaulted. So, I would like to appeal to my Colleagues, Members of Parliament to mobilize their constituents, so that this money is recovered.  We should not wreck this useful programme.  

I would like to inform hon. Members that a good number of our citizens have benefitted from this entandikwa.  The beneficiaries are 39,200 people and these are mostly peasants in villages.  But when we increase - (Interruption)

MR. WANGUBO:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  May I get clarified by the Minister when he asked the Members of Parliament to mobilise their constituents to get back the funds given out as to the machinery his Ministry has put in place to make sure these funds come in, because, when these funds were given out, there were intermediary agencies that were used.  Now, how far have they gone into the recovering of these funds before the MPs can be used?  Thank you.

MR. MUTYABA:   Point of clarification.   Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  May the Minister clarify, when he talks about people who benefited, is he talking in terms of people who actually got the loan or people who have improved their lot by virtue of getting loans? Is he just talking par se of the people who got these loans or the fact that the quality of life of these people has improved as a result of them getting these loans?  And has any kind of assessment, maybe postmortem, been done to understand the benefits which have accrued to these people?

DR. MATEKE:  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, most of us here were elected by the people.  This scheme was started by us here in Parliament, those who were in NRC at that time, and we thought that this scheme, originally, it was meant for Luwero only; then Members of Parliament said no, all the Ugandans need a share of this Entandikwa.  So, this is how it started.  It is supposed to benefit in the long run - it is a revolving fund.(Interjection) 

THE SPEAKER:  Order please.  Let him make his contribution.  If you want to interrupt, you should do so in accordance with the Rules.

DR. MATEKE:  So, in the long run, it is supposed to benefit mostly Ugandans. The real impact cannot be felt by everybody at this material stage in the development of entandikwa. But we believe that in the long run, it will benefit the majority of our people, especially in rural areas, especially if an effort can be made to increase the entandikwa budget.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Point of clarification.  I would like to thank the Minister for giving way for me to seek clarification.  Mr. Speaker, Entandikwa Credit Scheme was introduced way back in 1995 and at that time it was under the Ministry of Finance.  Now, under the restructuring programme, Entandikwa Credit Scheme has been switched to the Ministry of Gender, and at the same time, the Youth Entrepreneur Credit Scheme which should have been under the Ministry of Finance has been switched to this new Ministry.  The clarification I am seeking from the Minister is, does the Ministry have capacity to manage the Entandikwa Credit Scheme - that is one.

Two: what is the Ministry doing about the Youth Entrepreneur Credit Scheme?  Does the Ministry also have the capacity to manage these two schemes?  Otherwise, in my view, they are misplaced, because of lack of capacity by this Ministry to manage.  I seek clarification.  Thank you.

DR. MATEKE:  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, straight away, I would like to say that my Ministry has got the capacity to effectively implement this Entandikwa Scheme.  As a result of restructuring which is Government policy, Entandikwa was transferred from Ministry of Finance to Gender, Labour and Social Development.  Where this Entandikwa is housed, the capacity is there, we have got a Minister in charge with his effective Secretariat.

Regarding the Youth Entrepreneur Scheme, I will come to it.  First I would like to deal with Youth and Women Councils for not being financed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  I am happy Members raised this question when we were presenting the budget of the Ministry, we told the House in no uncertain terms that this Ministry is under funded.  The Parliamentary Committee in charge of my Ministry examined our budget and they agreed with us that we need more money.  If we have really to increase capacity, in this Ministry, we need more money, we need more funding. But the Ministry of Finance arbitrarily reduced our budget. That is why, hon. Members, here when we are trying to defend this Nutrition Motion, you said we do not have the capacity.  I do not see how you can have capacity without adequate financing. So, I appeal to hon. Members, that when we submit the budget of our Ministry next year, you support us, so that more money is voted to this Ministry.  This is a core Ministry, this is a very important Ministry, dealing with people at the grassroots. This is what some people fail to appreciate, and if really, a Ministry is dealing with youth, with women, with workers, with distribution of entandikwa and so on and so forth, this is an important Ministry, but it has to be funded.

One hon. Member raised the question of Youth Councils, that Youth Councils are neglected by my Ministry. The vote of the Youth, we had earmarked Shs. 200 million, entirely for the Youth Councils, but Ministry of Finance arbitrarily reduced this figure to Shs. 19.1 million. 

MISS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE:  Point of clarification. Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister.  He has noted, just like the Committee indeed noted, that Women Councils and Youth Councils are not funded, and therefore, as somebody who works with Women Councils, I know that they are literally redundant. But now, when I look at the report - it is labelled page 13 to do with Ministry of Gender - we see that - that is item 8.1 - for 1998/99 financial year, that much money is allocated and it is to cover the following programmes. The first one there is to establish the National Council for people with disabilities and the elderly. Now, what I am seeking clarification about is what measures have been put in place to ensure that these Councils are not rendered redundant, just like the Youth and the Women Councils?  What is the point of establishing more and more Councils when we know that the few that are there have not been helped at all, and they have not been useful to the people, not because the people are not there, but they have not been helped in terms of funding?   Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. PINTO: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Supplementary to what my hon. Colleague has asked, the Minister earlier on did tell the House that the Ministry has capacity.  That was one breath.  In the second breath he says, it is very inadequately funded.  Which means weakness in capacity.  Where does the Ministry derive its capacity from? 

DR. MATEKE:  Thank you very much, hon. Members, for raising those important questions.  First, I would like to inform the House that we have submitted our supplementary proposals, and when they come here and you support them, then we shall be able to finance Youth and Women Councils. Hon. Pinto says, since we are under funded, what is the source of our capacity?  The capacity is there, there is will, you have got hard working people, you have got six Ministers who can deliver goods and therefore, if you support our budgetary proposals, then we shall be able to satisfy the demands of the Youth and Women Councils.  

Then one hon. Member said that the Ministry has no programme for the Youth.  The Programme is there, all of us know.  First, Youth benefit from entandikwa, and I would like to say that as at July 1997, 11,400 youths benefitted.  Then in addition, they are benefitting from the Youth Entrepreneur Scheme.  Under this scheme, 400,000,000/- shillings was released last Financial Year, and there is another 500,000,000/- shillings going to be released.  And with assistance of the Uganda Manufacturers Association, relevant skills are being imparted to the Youth before these loans are released to them.  So, this Financial Year -(Interruption)

MR. ONGARIA:  Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that we are debating a Ministry which is responsible for a very, very important controversial issue not only in this country, in the whole world - that is Gender sensitivity; is it in order for us to continue debating this very important Ministry when the quorum is not there, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER:  There is no quorum, I suspend the proceedings for 10 minutes.

(The Proceedings were suspended for 10 minutes)

(On resumption_)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, it is unfortunate that even with this opportunity, we have not been able to realise a quorum.  I am still saying that it is unfortunate that in spite of this opportunity, we have not been able to realise a quorum and my preliminary investigation shows that 126 of hon. Members have signed the register, and as you know, the quorum is 90.  Now, where are those others who have signed the book?  Where are they?  I think it is a matter of great concern for us to proceed this way to sign and then go somewhere else.

MRS. MUSUMBA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to give information that the Select Committee on Privatisation is still meeting in the East Committee Room, and they constitute part of the number that has registered.  And I believe there are other Select Committees like Agriculture which are also having meetings.

THE SPEAKER:  My question is, 126 of you have signed the register, the quorum is 90, where are the others who have signed?  Where have they gone?  That is really my question.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Information, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Are you answering my question?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes, I am making an attempt.  Mr. Speaker, I think this problem should be addressed, and it should be addressed rather urgently.  Because Members do sign the register, then some of them go into Committees as it has already been explained. Others may withdraw from the main Chamber and go and have discussions, sometimes with Ministers, sometimes amongst themselves within the precincts of the House.  It is not that when you sign a register you are stamped to your seat on a full time basis.  This is the only Parliament in the world where Members of Parliament will not be allowed to interact amongst themselves during the debate, when in fact they can also carry out Committee work, not only the Standing Committees, but Sessional Committees. And yet the public is meant to understand that Members come here, sign the register and run away, and now we have this image.  I have seen important Parliaments, I have been to the United States Congress and I find Members on the Floor here, in the middle of the Floor, talking amongst themselves while another Member is conducting business.  I described that as indiscipline of the United States Congress.   But in United Kingdom, you will find about four Members in the presence, when the rest of the Members are  in - and I am sure, Mr. Speaker, you have been to these Parliaments.  The entire Commonwealth Parliamentary system allows Parliament to have Committees and these Committees can meet in the morning and in the evening.  Now, this impression of making Parliament look so diabolical and thuggery and thieving is wrong.  I mean, we are very close to 90 Members now from what I can see.  

Secondly, I want to give you more information.  Yesterday, we were sitting here, we have a Parliamentary system where Ministers are Members of Parliament, where Ministers are running sectors, which sectors demand their full time attention.  And if things go wrong in their Ministry, we bring them here and we castigate them, yet at the same time they must find 50 percent of their time to be full time Members.  We have a lot of Ministers, they are not very few. (Mr.Pinto rose_) 

THE SPEAKER:  He was giving information, I will come to you.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I can take it.

MR. PINTO:  Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Precisely, giving information to my hon. Colleague who is holding the Floor, that out of 60 Ministers, currently we can see only 12 in the House.   

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, this is a good and healthy number.  To expect more than that of the Ministers would - first of all, they travel in their work.  I do not think that when Ministers are missing here really they are being useless.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Karuhanga, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that ours, the quorum is fixed by the Constitution.  Whereas in Britain, whereas in the House of Commons, for as long as there is one person in the Chambers, the Speaker is there, you can continue to contribute.  But, the moment the bell is rang for purposes of voting, all of them will come in.  Now, our system is not like that one. So our system is that the quorum must at any time be one third of Members. So, when you are discussing the matter of quorum, it must be within that, within the Constitution and within the Rules of Procedure. We cannot transact any business according to the Rules of procedure without a quorum.

MR. KARUHANGA: You see, Mr. Speaker, that is the point where I say that the matter should be addressed. Because as you may recall, I was a Member of the Rules Committee which drew the current Rules of Parliament which were based on the Constitution.  And even there, this debate of fixing the quorum in the Constitution was a heated one, but Members thought, like in the old days when NRC Members would come in and sit, and there were no committees. That was the system.  Because at that time, we did not have committees. And nobody knew the involvement of what it would mean when we go into a committee system. Now, we are in a committee system, but we are working as if we are in NRC where we had no committees, and therefore, the rule on quorum becomes a problem. And it is high time, realistically speaking, and pragmatically speaking, that the question of quorum and its meaning be re-visited, whether it means a constitutional amendment, a private member's bill on a constitutional amendment, it has to be done.  Because business of Government must continue.  It is very costly to the tax payer to come here - Ministry of Defence now is supposed to be here.  I can see the Secretary for Defence sitting there, the Minister of State for Defence is sitting here. These are people who should be doing some very serious work. Members of Parliament are busy. The other day, we had to withdraw and attend various committees when the House was having no quorum and I could see that.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Karuhanga, are you contributing or you are giving information?

MR. KARUHANGA: I am giving you information.  But it is valid information and I think that the question either through a private member's bill as a constitutional amendment, or through the Leader of Government Business coming in through the Cabinet, the matter should be addressed, and it is the Ministers who are suffering when they waste so much time like this one.  In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, I would like to propose that we have a quorum from what I can see.

THE SPEAKER: Clerks, can you ascertain the number of Members present.

(A count of the Members present was made)

THE SPEAKER: We still do not have a quorum.  I therefore adjourn the House until Tuesday next week.

(The House rose and adjourned until Tuesday, 8th December, 1998 at 2.00 p.m.)
