

Thursday, 7 December1995      

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to Order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX BILL 1995

(Debate continued.)

MR KASAJJA  (Bujenje County, Masindi):  Mr Chairman, I stand to support the Bill establishing VAT in Uganda.  As hon. Members are aware, VAT is a tax which is going to replace Sales Tax and CTL and we are all aware about the problem that has been faced with collecting this tax.  Sales Tax is a single stage tax levied at the manufacturing level on the factory price of goods and imports.  The tax is levied at the time of importation.  Sales tax has been speculative in prices which led to difficulties in its application.

We are going to establish VAT in order to do away with the problems that have been befalling Sales tax and CTL; we want to get a tax which is going to be embracing, which is going to widen the tax base and which is also going to establish what we call sustainability in raising revenue for Government; because of the speculative nature of CTL and Sales tax, it becomes difficult to collect these taxes and to raise the tax base.  

Therefore, sales tax is good, because, it is a consumption tax, it is a tax which if established, first of all, it is going to relieve the direct taxation which has been falling on mostly the industrialists, the manufacturers here and as you are aware, in Uganda we are crying for investments -; so that we get more employment.  Therefore, if we want to get more employment, we have to create a situation whereby the industrialists who have been shouldering the highest - about the 80 per cent paid in Uganda, should be relieved so that whatever they save, goes to establish more enterprises and if we establish more enterprises, more employment is going to be created. 

VAT is a good tax, because, the rate, in most cases for the countries which have been using this tax is normally low.  It is normally low and the collection, normally is self re-enforcing, because, you, yourself who pays the tax, you find that you have the duty to pay this tax, because if you want pay it, if you do not want, you will not pay it; the nature depends on your consumption habits. Therefore, it is not a tax which is not forced on somebody.

Having said that the tax is good, what are the advantages?

One is that, if VAT is introduced in Uganda, it is true that the revenue is going to increase, it is going to increase, because, as I have said, the tax base is going to be bigger than what it has been existing.

VAT, I would like the Members to understand this because, some of them have been saying that this tax is going to cause political instability, is going to cause political problems, but if VAT is well understood by us, as leaders, and we explain to the people we lead, this is going to be the best tax.  But the problem we do not understand it, definitely, we are going to fall in a problem like what befell in Ghana, because, I understand in Ghana, the leaders, like we are here, do not understand the tax.  So, when it started being operated, they could not even explain to the populace.  

So, here, I like how the Uganda Revenue Authority has tackled the introduction and the Ministry of Finance. I want to thank the Minister through Uganda Revenue Authority, the way they have tackled the introduction of this tax because, first of all, they have emphasised the education so that by the time we establish it, people are not going to be ambushed like it was say, in Ghana; because, I understand in Ghana, they introduced the tax after the Budget.  The Budget was read in January, then in March, it was introduced; people had not even understood and on top of that, the chronic conditions prevailing at that time, were not conducive; inflation was high, then on top of that, they were importing most of the food, and if they imported most of the food and the inflation was high and on top of that add the fact that members did not understand, because, the traders had not been explained about how to apply this tax.  Therefore, the situation was exuberated to the extent that there was no  - this tax saved.  But here, the Government has taken step by step and that is why the education had to start early and it had to start up to the time when the Minister introduces formally for it to start operating.  So, let us emphasise understanding it and then educating the public who are going to apply this.

On education, I would like to request the Minister for Finance to facilitate Uganda Revenue Authority with more money; so that this education programme continues, so that by July next year, then everybody who actually should know about the application, the pricing of this VAT has understood and once we do that, then the problem of this tax being inflationary will not be experienced.

This tax is also known for being neutral. It is neutral in that, it is not distortional, it does not discriminate between import and domestic supplies between different sectors and levels of trade and cascading, of this tax is avoided.  Investment in industry and development of exports are encouraged, because, business inputs including capital goods are relieved from the tax and VAT is fully elevated on exports.  What I am saying here is, that the beauty of VAT is unlike sales tax and CTL, is that, once you have paid that tax and that tax was paid, say, on an input, you are not the final consumer; you are bound to be refunded, that is why we are saying there is this tax credit.  As long as you have used it for enhancing the production of the commodity to another stage, because, when we talk of Value Added, what do we mean?   

Value Added is actually the tax which is levied on the extra effort that has been expended on producing a commodity or a service; it is not a tax on a tax, because in some countries like Ghana, what they did was, they were putting a tax upon a tax instead of just levying on the extra value that has accrued on a product, they were even levying on the tax that had been paid earlier.  I will give you an example, if somebody sold say, a good at UShs 100, and then it is sold to may be a producer, then the producer can use it to enhance - the producer has to add the cost of transport, he has to add the profit, that is what we call the return on capital.  So, what is added on the return of capital and then the cost of producing of actually putting in place that commodity is taxed, because you might need to sell at the next stage UShs 120.  So, the value from UShs 100 to UShs 120 the UShs 20 is what is taxed, not the UShs 100, Mr Chairman, because somebody who does not know, will get UShs 120 and he charges it, but it is the extra which is 20.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of clarification.  MrChairman, I want to seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor, in that if I had a commodity which cost UShs 1,000 and I paid VAT of 15 per cent, - let us 20 per cent for ease of calculation, that commodity becomes UShs 1,200 to the wholesaler.  Are you now saying that if I, as a wholesaler, took the product and added on value worth UShs 100 I pay on the extra UShs 100 or the taxable supply is now UShs 1,300?

MR KASAJJA:  If the value is UShs 1000 as he is saying and then, the we said the tax is 20 per cent, then it becomes, UShs 1,200, then UShs 1200 if for example, the original, because normally, you see, for value added, the starting amount is normally taken as the actual value of that product, then you add on the 20 per cent, now the 20 per cent is -(Laughter)- no, Mr Chairman, excuse me, sorry.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

HON. MEMBER: I beg hon. Members, may be not to turn this House into a classroom for the calculation of VAT, but I wanted to explain one thing.  If a wholesaler has bought a commodity at UShs 1,000 and he has paid VAT only for UShs 200,now this commodity is going to be purchased by a retailer.  Now, when the retailer buys this commodity, he has got to obtain, if he is registered retailer, he will have to obtain what they call a VAT Invoice detailing out that the good cost UShs 1,000 and he paid VAT on it for UShs 200.  Now, when it comes to pricing his goods, when the retailer is pricing his goods, they will take the value for UShs 1,000; he will ignore the VAT at this stage and then put on his Value Added, whether it is transport, whether it is his profit, he will add it on to the UShs 1,000 before he levies VAT to be paid by -I think now by the final consumer; that is how it is; I do not know whether it has been understood.
 
MR KASAJJA:  Mr Chairman, I am very grateful for the explanation given by my Colleague, because I was confused by the percentage, because I did not get it clearly.  But the explanation is correct.

Mr Chairman, the other point which I wanted to give about this Value Added is that, it is a tax which is with efficiency; it is a tax which, unlike as I have said, sales tax and CTL, because CTL brings in this cascading of liabilities.  Any moment we bring in cascading, that is paying tax upon tax, then definitely, inefficiency is bound to come up.  So, because there is no cascading - paying tax upon tax, therefore, efficiency is bound to come in the paying of the tax.  Mr Chairman, also VAT - (Interruption) 

AN HON MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Chairman of the Committee for the explanation he has given.  He says if the VAT on a commodity of UShs 1,000 is UShs 200, then you do not have to consider the UShs 200 when you are calculating your Value Added.  Now, if that is the case, then why do we not just determine and say, for this good, whoever handles it, the uniform tax is UShs 200; so they just determine and that ends the story, because, my worry is, if this thing is able to confuse an expert like hon. Kasajja who is a very well qualified economist, -(Laughter)- hon. Kasajja is a very well qualified economist, he is one of those good ones we have in this country, he is the Director of the Uganda Revenue Authority and yet, he can still be confused by this tax, then how about the common man that is going to handle the goods?  This is our worry, Mr Chairman.

MR KASAJJA:  Mr Chairman, I think the hon. Member is not right to say that I was confused; I was not confused; the only thing is that, when he was quoting the percentage, he had not got it right, but since the explanation has been given and I have not disagreed with it, it is not really right to say that it is confusing a man like me, the expert.  It is not, and I think if he is right, I request him to withdraw the statement in good faith.  

I was just talking about the efficiency of this tax and I was saying that because of the removal of cascading, therefore, the efficiency is created.  VAT also provides the opportunity to introduce the modern and efficient tax administration, because, we can use the computer, because, once we know the people who have registered for VAT, it becomes easy to computerise and once you computerise, then it becomes also easy, yes, it becomes easy, because, I know that so and so is having this business, he has made so much profit and this one, in future, can even impinge on other taxes like the profit tax, because once the computerisation had taken root, then the tax collection will also improve.  That is why I am saying that this tax also brings in efficiency.

I would like to talk now on the rate.  Now, what is the rate that should be established for VAT?  Should this rate be included in the Bill that we are going to pass.  My view is that the rate should not be included in the Bill or in the law, because if by bad luck, when this tax is introduced, people have grasped it very well, it might become difficult for the Minister to come and call the Parliament to sit and change the tax.  

So, I want to request that if possible, let us leave the rate out of the law, so that the Minister can use the power to determine it and I want also to suggest that for the rate, we should start with that rate which is neutral on the present prices; that we should just only get a rate which will make the prices not to change, because what we want to do, is just to characterise the people, we want the people to get familiar with this tax, because, if it is law, they have understood it; you see, if we were getting the same amount as we are getting, let us accept that, but as long as the people understand it, then in future, once it has taken root, then the Minister can using the Statutory instrument may be increase the rate or maintain it.  So, my suggestion hon. Members, is that the rate should as low as possible, so that it does not affect the present prices.

Mr Chairman, I want also want to end with the suggestion that when this law - (Interruption) 

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I just wanted the hon. Member to explain to me, how we, as Parliamentarians would feel, if we have a Minister for Finance, who likes to squeeze peoples belts so tightly, that we feel concerned and yet, we give him this licence to do as he pleases throughout the year, to change the rates the way he wants. As a person running a constituency, how would you feel, when would you intervene if you just give away this power to the Minister so easily.

MR KASAJJA: Mr Chairman, I thank hon. Karuhanga for that clarification.  I think in my view, the Ministers or a Minister for Finance is not there to punish the people he represents, I think the Minister would be also happy if he introduces a rate and that rate does not really have far-reaching effects on the consumption, investment and other benefits to the people he represents, because, we are not looking at a Minister’s divorced the rest of the public; he is also representing a constituency.  Therefore, I do not imagine that a Minister will come up and secondly, you know the reason why I want this rate not to be there, is because, if we start with a high rate and we fall into a problem, like befell Ghana, now, what happens?  I would like this rate to be outside, so that the Minister can start with a low rate and what I want Uganda to do, is just to get a rate, to be familiar with the tax only and then later on, the Minister can use the power.

I said I was ending up with a suggestion that when the law has passed through, as I am aware it is going to pass through, because I am saying, I am aware, because, the law in itself, is a straight forward law, because it is technical and it has borrowed some technical expertise from other countries which are also using VAT.  There is nothing new in this VAT, because, what is there, is what you will find in most of the VAT laws.  In fact, if anything, you will find that what the Minister has done is to relate it to the conditions that are prevailing in Uganda; those conditions which are in other laws, which are not related to Uganda have of course, been avoided.  But those conditions which are so conducive to the atmosphere of Uganda have been brought up here and that is why I am saying that this law is straight forward, because of most of the things are technical, like the formula which are here, what are you going to discuss about the formula?  The formula is there just only to tell us in case of a conflict, in a case of a misunderstanding, it is just a reference point; so that there is nobody who will come up and say, but why have I been taxed so much, then, this will be a point of reference for say, may be the Appeals Court or any lawyer who will be handling any tax law. So, I want to suggest that when this law has gone through, all of us should be teachers; all of us should not use this -(interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you going to pay us?

MR KASAJJA: No, Mr Chairman. I want also to suggest that let people not use this law to perpetrate their political interests because, there is nothing really adverse about this law, because, it is just only to streamline the tax collection in Uganda, it is only just to widen the tax base which is in line with the tax reform policy which the Government is following.  Therefore, I want to appeal to the Members, that we should give the support which is actually necessary so that we can collect more revenue, more wages, buy more medicine in the hospitals, build roads, so that you see, the country goes on.  

So, with that, I wish to thank you for giving me this time, at least to be able to talk on this VAT Bill.  With that, I support the Bill strongly.

MR KIWAGAMA (Bunya County, Iganga):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman to give me an opportunity to contribute on this very important Bill.  This Bill is yet another board step taken by NRM Government to the economy of this country and for that matter, I support the Bill very, very strongly.  As earlier addressed from experts, a Special Seminar we had down there, we were told that with this type of tax, we shall not even be able to table the revenue - earn three times as much as we have been collecting.  

For this reason, I support the Bill very strongly, because, if that is the case, it means that Government will be able to pay the living wage which has been promised very easily and without strain and also Government will be able to pay salaries and wages in time and swiftly and also Members allowances promptly.  Again, if this type of tax is going to increase our revenue three times, then, it means our next budget will be balanced and perhaps we shall do away with the donors who are dictating to us.  But I have some reservations - this tax as far as the ordinary person is concerned, and even for Members here, appears to be a very complicated tax and I fear because of its complication, it will cause problems in the community, between the taxpayers and the collectors of taxes.  Now, for this reason, I would urge Government to do more publicity especially in the countryside.  

I have not seen the URA officials in Bunya talking about VAT and yet, the Banya are also going to pay this tax I understand.  The captions and slogans we hear on radio and also the seminars which have been held in Kampala and perhaps in a few other towns, are for town dwellers, but the majority of the people have not heard about this VAT or if they have heard about it, they do not know what it means.  In addition, our people, the majority of traders and businessmen and farmers of course, do not keep records; they do not have the culture of keeping records and books of accounts and yet this tax according to what we have been told is based on records.  

So, for this matter, I foresee complications and problems between the taxpayers and the collectors.  I can imagine a situation where a tax payer will go to a trader to see if he is paying the tax; there will be no records at all of his purchases and his sales and I wonder what the tax collector will do in that case.  Is he going to assess VAT arbitrarily or is he going to let this trader free?

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member, for having given the way and I thought I could keep quiet until we come to reply, but then, since many issues are being raised, the reply may be so comprehensive and laborious.  I will have to take opportunity to make some interventions where it is possible.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that, much as Uganda Revenue Authority might have not gone to Bunya, it has gone to different parts and they are still continuing.  What we have been experiencing that before really something becomes real, it becomes very difficult to sensitise people, they think it is afar and they are not concerned. 

Now that the hon. Member representing Bunya and other areas has now understood that VAT is becoming real, he is going to convey the message and when Uganda Revenue Authority announces that they are coming to that area, it will be in his interest to help us to mobilise people.  So, this is one of the sensitisation and mobilisation which we are embarking on; besides taking up the legal framework.  

As regarding the records, that the traders do not keep records.  For sure, traders keep records, they know how much they spend and they know how much they get out.  You may not see on the paper, but the incentive in the VAT system for them to keep records would be that those who bought certain items which have VAT taxed, they will need to retain this money back.  So, in that case, it will give an incentive for one to know which did he buy and how much was involved so that he can claim.  With VAT, there is an input side and the output side.  So, the trader is interested in the input side, to know how much he has put in as far as the tax’s side and how much he is going to claim - that will create incentive and most important finally, is that, we must promote efficiency and proper management in the businesses.  So, we cannot say, the Ugandans do not keep records and we remain static - no, we must have a start somewhere, so that people keep records and they are efficient and they know what they manage.  

So, I assure the hon. Member, that the community, we shall encourage them to ensure that there is proper management in our businesses; so that the business does not collapse without knowing.  Thank you.

MR KASAJJA:  I appreciate the information given by the Mover -(Interruption) 

HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the Member on the Floor, particularly on getting or calculating a tax for a trader who does not keep any records at all.  The information I want to give is this, that it is simple for the Accountant or both who have knowledge in accountancy to calculate from the memories of the trader - (Laughter) - hold on, he can tell you once he is honest, he can tell you, this one, I bought so much and this one, I bought for so much.  So, you can work backwards to get the record and thereby, assess the taxes in case of no record at all, but what the Minister has said is the true case to follow, but in case of such a mess, there is a way we can salvage this.  I want to assure the Member and the hon. Members.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KIWAGAMA:  Thank you for the information given especially information given by the Minister.  Of course, that is the ideal, what he is saying, but I am telling him in advance, that in the process, there will be problems on the ground, you cannot avoid it and also Members participating and helping in the education, the Minister has not yet appreciated that the Members themselves, are not up with it yet as demonstrated in the simple calculation we have been trying to do here.  

There is also a fear that this tax may end up in high prices and upsetting the inflation rate, especially where - I am not talking about the current Minister, but in future where you have a gluttonous Minister who will want to solve his financial problems with this tax, who will come up with a rate of 30/40 per cent.  That would be a disaster to the economy and would upset the smooth-running of the financial position of the country.

Finally, it is all very well and good to feel that this type of tax will raise revenue for the treasury.  What we know that a lot of money is collected through taxes, but only a fraction reaches the treasury and the little that reaches the treasury is also embezzled by high-ranking officers in Government.  Can the Minister assure us before we sign this Bill into law, that this practice will cease forthwith, so that every penny that is collected, goes into the treasury and gets out and reaches the wanainchi the owners of the money?   I have in mind - (Interruption) 

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  I think the point made by the Member is very important, because, now that there is going to be a refund - yes, to traders and wholesalers and people who have paid the tax in advance and now they have to claim, they will be claiming this money from Government officials.  How long is it going to take by law, before someone puts in his  - and gets back his pay?   I can see problems of money ever coming back to the traders.  First of all, we establish their ignorance into the fact, then we establish the difficulties we face with our public servants.  In the law, have we built in safe guards, that a person who does not get his refund during a particular period can have interest paid on it, and how do we involve the RCs to participate in that?  Thank you.

MR KIWAGAMA: Thank you for the information.  Mr Chairman, I was saying, I have in mind recent ones and in the past few years the monies embezzled and misappropriated by officials in the Ministry of Agriculture and recently, Ministry of Education and yet, these ministries are led by revolutionary sons and daughters of Uganda; this embezzlement going on in front of their noses and nothing really happening, I do not know whether they are aware of what is going on or not. If they are aware, it is a real shame to us.  

So, the Minister should assure us this will stop forthwith and we do not want to hear about it and if anything comes to Government notice, please, take action, interdiction is not enough; arrest these people and take them to court and have the money refunded.  Now, it is no use being here making a law to collect as much money as possible, but his money going into individual pockets.  Mr Chairman, this is really too bad.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I just want to use the opportunity to assure the hon. Member, that actually, we are only going  - where we may have a problem is at the beginning, that these people may not have an account, but once one has established the first funds, then it is going to be recurring, there will be funds from which are deducted.  So, there will be no delay, but even when there is delay, there is opportunity for an interest.  But I will amplify this in the reply in a more calculated manner to alleviate the fears that there is no way the capital may be tied up, except at the first installment, when the tax has just been introduced.  But thereafter, it will be re-occurring, he will have more money - the Government will be having more money from him than what he can get, what he is claiming; - (Interruption) 

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I think I pick the impression that Members think that at the end of each month, they will be expecting a cheque from URA that is not the case.  What is likely to happen is that, whenever a business files a return of the taxes he has collected, as output tax, I am sure he will exercise the right of set off.  In other words, the tax he has already paid on the purchases, will be deducted from the tax due to Revenue Authority and he will pay the difference to them.  It is in very rare cases where the business men will want a cheque, they will only want a cheque only in case he is where after they have imported the goods, or other goods have come in the market and prices are generally depressed and he is forced to sell at depressed prices when the in put tax he has paid is higher than what he is going to collect from the buyers, that is only when he will get the cash cheque or you will get a credit on the account to be carried to the transactions which will attract more tax from the customers; that is all.

MR KIWAGAMA:  Mr Chairman, when the Minister stood up this time to give information, I was thinking that he was going to assure me that they will be no more embezzlement, but he was talking about refunds which was not my question; refund question was set by hon. Karuhanga.  But Mr Chairman, when these remarks - (Interruption) 

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to assure the hon. Member that the Government has already taken steps in this aspect; even in respect of education, for those who have been following some Press Releases, there are some cases which are already to court.  What has been previously difficult, is to establish who really embezzled the money when even the Accountant is already transferred, when the books have not been audited, but now, the Auditor General’s Office has been strengthened, he is up to date, it is easier now to detect where funds have been embezzled and get the culprit before actually he disappears or he is transferred to another institution; I think by such an action, is the best way of assuring that actions being taken in this direction.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I think Members have a right and a point in being worried about the collection of these funds and those funds reaching their destination and the right punitive measures being exercised.  For example, in this very Bill, you will find that when the Minister is talking about corruption and it comes to terms of imprisonment, the Revenue Authority officer who asks for bribes and, therefore, is being corrupt, he is suggesting a term of imprisonment of three years; whereas the trader who tries to corrupt a Revenue Authority officer, is proposing jailing that trader for five years, which is imbalance and it seems Government has a soft spot for its own officers.

MR KIWAGAMA:  In conclusion, Mr Chairman, if is true that this law will bring in more revenue therefore, with the following services to the people, hospitals, roads, will be built, payments will be in time and Government will run the services, will serve the people more easily.  I support the Bill, very much. Thank you very much.

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to first of collect the impression that when this tax is introduced, a lot of money is going to be raised.  I think what is important at the moment, is that, you lay a foundation, then raising more money is as a result of good planning first.  

I would like to thank the Revenue Authority for the work they have done so far, we have been able to collect about 12 per cent taxes of our GDP.  This is great and now, that I have no doubt in supporting this Bill, because, I think they are serious people and they want to help us collect more revenue in future, even if they do not collect immediately.

I would go on straight to the rate.  Yesterday, the Minister was silent about the rate. The rate is very, very important on VAT, because, if many countries at the moment have rates of about from five say, 15, others 10 and for us here, the highest rate of sales tax has been 30 and     has been at 10; there are a lot of rates that lie in the range of 20 and 15. So, to build peoples confidence, Mr Chairman, that there is nothing hidden; so that people are people are mis-educated, it would be good to put this rate on the Bill; so that people know right away from the beginning, there is nothing we are hiding, the economy is stable, if the economy was unstable, I would say, may be things will change tomorrow, then the Minister will have a problem.  But if our shilling is stable and our economy is stable, I have no doubt, and I would request, let us include the rate on the Bill to build peoples confidence.  

You are giving other people, the opponents of the Bill a weapon to decampaign you in future; they might say, these people are hiding the Bill; the Bill is going to be faulty. So, let us put the Bill, so that the rate, - so that we tell them that we have got this rate, this is rate of 10 per cent, it is a simple rate; so that we understand right away from the beginning, we trust each other.  We have got people who go with speculation of traders.  So, I have no doubt with all sincerity and with love of this country, in recommending a rate of 15 per cent; I have reached 15 per cent, I have reached this rate scientifically, that the other rates - the highest rate has been 30; the lowest rate has been 10 and since you are broadening the tax base, you are bringing many people, you are (Interjection)- and since you are bringing in many people to pay tax and you are also closing the loopholes, smuggling will be reduced.  

Therefore, the rate of 15 per cent a rate that could use. Mr Chairman in a country nearby, the rate brought a problem, because, the members of the Finance Committee of Parliament were recommending 10 per cent, then Government promised they would put 15 per cent, then later, it was put at 17.5 and it brought problems If we trust each other, if we do not agree with the 15 per cent, it will be good for us to work and reach at reasonable rate, so that we include it in the Bill; there is no use giving somebody an open cheque.  

The other thing I want to talk on and the most important thing in the rate at the moment, let us not think of making a lot of money at the beginning, collecting a lot of revenue; we should be interested at just breaking even.  If we are now collecting 12 per cent and we move to 13 per cent, it is alright, we shall reach where we want to reach, we do not have to get it overnight, we should be interested in just breaking even, because we are introducing something new to the people, let the people benefit out of it and see that there is something good in it, then later, you may collect more.

Mr Chairman, the threshold, is not I think slow, because if you think of UShs 20 million, first of all, we are going to bring so many traders who do not know how to keep their books and so on; many of them do not know how to keep the books.  So, it should be the people who understand, who know what is happening, so the traders who are reasonable here, and so on, I think 30 million would have been reasonably enough and they can still raise revenue, because, if you put it at UShs 20 you may have to register, I do not know how many people will register in Uganda, you may have to register about 3,000 traders.  Well, it might be 10 or 12,000 traders would be useful, because, they should know what they are doing.  Many people do not know how to keep books and this  - to pay traders at UShs 20 million. When I speak of about 30 million, almost everybody at Kikuubo qualifies, because many of those people are about UShs 30.  So, UShs 20 million I think you are coming low.

I would like to talk about the issue of education. Who should we target in education?  First of all, politicians; people must know the leaders, the RC V, the RDC, those RC IV, all those people must know and Cabinet Ministers, because, I know in a country, where these ministers go and say, VAT is calculated like, this one goes and says, it is calculated like this. So, they contradict themselves and it can bring a problem and if traders do not know, what will be the result; it will be cascading prices, because, instead of charging on the right value of VAT, people are going to charge VAT on VAT and it can be a problem and that is when people will say, they are being charged a lot - the Government is charging a lot of money on them and people should also know the consumers; should know that this money is money which is taken as a revenue by Government.  In a country nearby, they said this money was going to politicians who support Government.  

So, Government is now giving politicians the money, it was not being taken by Government.  So, it is important that the politicians know and then the consumers themselves know. So, there are three groups; the politicians, the traders and also consumers; they must know even to calculate VAT because, there will be traders who are not supposed to charge VAT.  If you are not registered, you are not supposed to charge the VAT, but I can imagine a situation where everybody is going to charge VAT and therefore leads to cascading prices and they say, this is Government policy and since they are not put to defence, people are on armed enough like the politicians, it will be a problem.

Mr Chairman, it is very, very easy to carry massive mis-education than carrying the education, because, one word destroys so many things.

Mr Chairman, the political goodwill.  Yesterday, I was somehow embarrassed.  After we finished a debate on the Electoral Commission, many people left the House; everybody was leaving and this was a very important Bill.  VAT is a very important Bill, because, it is going to affect the life of people where their welfare comes, they are going to be taxed, we must all know.

I would like to touch on the question of refunds.  People must be assured that they get their refunds; the money must be got.  It is good enough; the Bill is stating 30 days. It should happen, if they want to get the money later themselves and transfer on their accounts, that is something else.  But what they are entitled to, it is the money that they have paid.  If their refund is not given, that is the end of the road for VAT; people must get the confidence, they must be given the money.  The moment you gave them their money back, they have the confidence that the system is working and therefore, it is therefore, it is worthwhile supporting.  What about these traders, who are now going to collect money for the Government?  They are collecting money in different places for the Government.  A man is going to leave his shop every day, to bring money to revenue Authority, or sometimes giving the money back.  What are we going to do about those people?  I hope the Minister will see and see that I close my shop; I go to Revenue Authority to take their money, what is being done to me?

I would like also to touch on a thing that might have some problems. There are traders here, who brought goods about five years ago and these type of goods -we could call that ‘sleeping stock’ sometimes, because it can wake anytime and then you can sell.  Now, these goods are in the country; sales tax on these goods has been paid, that must be considered, how are we going to handle such institutions, so that we build confidence in the whole system, because, if you say that those goods, okay, they entered here, we do not know and so on.  Mr Chairman, I would like -(Interruption) 

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, if the goods came into the country before VAT and you qualify to have the thresh-hold to paying VAT, the most logical thing to do, would be to declare those good, having some things accounted for and then be considered for not paying VAT on those particular goods for that particular value in that particular year and it will be easy if you keep all the records.

MR NTIMBA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, there has been quite a lot of affected traders, who for some reason or other, have failed to clear their goods from Nakawa and elsewhere Their representatives have been telling us that when a VAT comes into being, Government should be magnanimous enough to declare an amnesty and say, ‘all those who have failed to clear their outstanding bills be given easy terms, boost their morale and prepare them to really accept the new taxation.  This is what has been too, towards by many people and I thought the hon. Member and the House should know about this.  Thank you.

MS KAZUNGU: Mr Chairman, I thank you very much for giving me this chance to contribute to this Bill.  However, I would like to say that I am a bit reluctant to support the Bill for one reason that yesterday it was very, very difficult for us at the back here to get the words of the Minister.  We tried to strain so much but could not.  When it came to the Chairman of the Committee which handled this Bill, I hope I got him very clear.  The Chairman, while he was explaining, he spelt out the disadvantages of the VAT tax.  

One of the disadvantages that he spelt out was that the rich and the poor shall be given almost an equal tax.  If I got him very clearly, I am not comfortable with such a situation, because if that is true, then it means that the rich will almost go away without paying tax and the poor are going to bear the burden of the whole thing.  They are going to feel the pinch.  Mr Chairman, when it comes to poverty, I believe that it is the women who are poor amongst the poorest.  

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that VAT is a consumption tax and therefore it will be paid according to one’s consumption.  But it gets rich who ever will buy that item where there is that tax. Actually we are changing the system of correction.  So, if you use that item where there is VAT, definitely you have pay depending how you use it.

As in the quarrel regarding the Minister’s speech, I think you can alleviate that by arranging a copy and pass it to him so that we support the Bill.  

MRS KAZUNGU:  I thank the hon. Minister for the information.  But I really do not know whether the poor right now, how are they being taxed?  Because I believe that their tax should be less than for those who are rich.  The explanation of the Minister is only saying that if you are poor then you should not consume because he is saying the taxation is now tied on the rate of consumption.  I want to believe that although you are poor, you may want to consume as much as the rich.  

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the Member on the Floor that actually this tax is based on the units; each unit you consume. If you consume one unit, maybe you pay 10 per cent, when you double, it progresses as you improve on your consumption.  So, if you consume one bar of soap and there is only 20 per cent or UShs 20, you pay UShs 20.  If you consume two, you pay UShs 40.  So, it depends on how much you consume; the quantity.  

MRS KAZUNGU:  But Mr Chairman, the explanation appears to only be affirming - it is not really correcting my fears.  I would like to quote, for example, from this magazine which talks about how S.A.P., these are structural adjustment programmes, have hit the women hardest.  There is a sentence, which reads that SAP has also widened the rift between the rich and the poor, at the lives of the latter, have been severely eroded.  When you say that you are going to be taxed according to how many units you are going use, it is indirectly saying that if you are poor you must continue consuming minimally.  This actually means that the rift between the rich and the poor is going to get wider and wider, and that is my fear.  

So, this is why my first sentence was that I am reluctant to support this Bill until the Minister really assures me that this VAT will not affect especially the women.  This quotation goes on to say, ‘although Ugandan women produce 80 per cent of the country’s food, women in agriculture are not benefiting under the market – SAP.  I am requesting the Minister of Finance to assure me that when he introduces this VAT the lives of the women are going to improve.  That the lives of the women are not going to be confined to the minimal consumption of the units that Members on the Floor were trying give me.  I thank you very much Mr Chairman.

DR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I wish to support this Bill although I have not been totally convinced by our experts that this is really a true tax for the country and for the people of the country.  We have tended to be too technical and I fear that if we remain as technical as we have been, the tax-paying corporation of this country will have to pay in increments.  Mr Chairman, for example, we are told that this tax will free the industrialists.  But these industrialists, although the actual money has been carrying out of his safe, he has not been the payer of the tax.  It is the consumer who all along has born the burden of these taxes.  The Ugandan industrialist at present is just a victim of these taxes.  

So, I believe that really this VAT tax, even the consumer will is actually psychological because we shall get the feeling that the taxes are being spread.  But the real advantage which I see especially for the Treasury is that whereas, the taxes have been based on X-Factory price.  Now, the actual VAT is actually going to be based on the retail price.  The money the Government will finally get are in form of VAT tax. 

Therefore, using that simple argument, I believe that the Government should finally be able to collect more money.  What we were told yesterday by the Chairman of the Committee about smuggling is true, that we may miss in VAT tax, the goods may escape one step, but in the following steps at the whole sale level or at the retail level, this smuggling of goods will end up being taxed and definitely, that should also contribute to revenue for our treasury.  But I am worried by the complexity of this tax resume that if our revenue authority fails to be efficient, then we lose a lot of taxes and supposing very little revenue comes into our treasury and even the so-called economic stability may.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I hope that this will not prejudice my contribution to this important Bill.  But the information I want to give is that I know of the information from one of the URA officials whereby foreigners instead of paying actual taxes, they have swindled so much.  This one individual has been requested to bring some more of his friends who he claims to have swindled more in billions.  So, the information I am giving is that although the Uganda Revenue Authority is collecting more money, on the contrary we are losing a lot.  I stand by what I am saying, and even the Audits which they claim is being done very well is not in the best interest of this country.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.
DR BYARUHANGA: So, Mr Chairman, apart from educating the corporation in readiness for this tax, the Revenue Authority must also recruit capable people and train them to ensure that they handle this VAT collection very efficiently.  Otherwise, we may find ourselves in the worst situation than we are now.  

Now, I am happy to note that this VAT tax has that in-build incentive that will encourage our people to keep accounts.  Many of our businessmen in this country are collapsing just due to the fact that they do not keep what is actually going on in their business.  As long as some money is coming into the cash box, the fellow is happy whereas he may actually be running at a loss.  Now that this in built incentive of refund is there, it means that all these traders that would have qualified to pay VAT must keep accounts.  I believe that this is a very good incentive.  If somebody is an illiterate or is completely unable to keep accounts, let him employ people who are able to write his accounts to do it for him.  Although it is said that we do not have very many qualified accountants in this country, I know that we have very many accounts technicians floating all over this city and in other towns of Uganda who have qualified from our colleges in the country.  

However, the Minister of Finance may find it of some use to encourage or convince the Minister responsible for education that schools, especially even at primary level, adopt syllabuses that at least impart the essentials of accounts to all the school going pupils of this country, because the balance sheet as a tool of capitalism is very essential to a very one of us as we enter this age of economic development.  With those few words, Mr Chairman, I support the Motion.  

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Mr Chairman, I would be very brief because this is not a Bill, the details of which we can discuss here in the general debate and conclude. 

Mr Chairman, I support the Bill.  I would like Members as policy makers to bear this in mind.  First of all, for my information here, which is public information to every Member of Parliament and as Ugandans.  In 1988/89 Financial Year, the Revenue which accrued on account of both sales tax and C.T.L. accounted for between 40 and 45 per cent of our Budget.  Since then, and with reference to the Budget of 1994/95, this Revenue has grown from a total of UShs 18.5b to a total of UShs 155b shillings.  But, nevertheless, at a diminishing rate, because during the 1994/95, the sales tax and CTL contribution to the Budget was less than 35 per cent; between 30 and 35 per cent.  

Therefore, from a purely policy point of view, and economic policy point of view, financial policy of view, revenue generation point of view we were going to be forced even if this tax was not brought here, we were going to be forced nevertheless to bring in either another tax or a multi-taxes in order to improve the diminishing structure of these two taxes.  Therefore, it is important for us to think about the new measures; the innovative measure of revenue in order to match the contributions of those two items to our Budget, which is still going.  So, I support this tax because of VAT problem in the revenue generation on account of sales tax and CTL.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, the Speaker on the Floor has said that it is because we have the law of diminishing returns that we are tempted to introduce this tax.  My understanding of his conviction is that if taxation is on production, then we have reached at all the levels of production in our economic system and therefore, there is no way we can expand this and that is why we are reaching at the diminishing returns.  The clarification I am seeking now is, as the taxes are on production, have we now expanded our production so as to introduce a new system of taxation?

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, the clarification I am seeking from the Member holding is that, how are we going to support this Bill when it becomes into law?  Why are we here, Members, actually if we want to be honest, do not understand this Bill.  You can see, some Members when they are contributing, you really get it that those who are trying to contribute do not fully understand this Bill.  This is what hon. Okia said that the interpretation is different, because the interpretation he gave in not the interpretation hon. Rwakakooko, who is no other person but the Chairman of Economy is giving.  

So, that is the clarification I am seeking; how are we to defend this Bill?  Immediately I move out, I will be asked how I do understand VAT.  I have to explain to the people and that is why I am seeking clarification, Mr Chairman.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Mr Chairman, I would like to start clarifying to the hon. Member.   I think all of us should listen to one another, so that in those areas where we are not up-to-date we learn from each other.  Now, I asked my young Brother a question, if the advantage of bringing this Bill here and its application in the market is that it is going to fight against leakages in the tax collection.  It is not that entirely the taxable capacity of buyers has reached the end, no.  That one we cannot know unless this Bill is being applied.  You have already heard that people smuggle and therefore, they do not pay tax.  They sell the goods to their benefits without the Government collecting revenue.  Once this is in place, even if an importer smuggles, and therefore, does not pay import duty, and does not pay sales tax at the beginning.  Somewhere the buyer who has bought from him, I am sure cannot escape the net.  That is the advantage of this.  But ultimately, the goods will be taxable.  

Now, let me also pinpoint clearly some areas where there is doubt.  I have evidence that once we apply the correct rates, the price to the consumer will fall.  We will raise more revenue.  We will pay less.  We know there is a cost of raising revenue.  That one will also come down because you are combining two taxes into one.  The forms you needed in sales tax and CTL are going to be one set.  I hope that the officials are working out the cost benefit of this so that even if we get more money, we do not end paying more in order to build that money.  

There are some areas of concern.  The computation of taxes, the areas of rendering of returns; the areas which have already been talked about; the netting of against input tax so that whoever has to pay, pays the one who is entitled.  I think that the Minister of Finance has made a provision in this Bill where the money due to you, if you have paid more and the Minister of Finance with URA has not paid within a defined period.  We are going to be entitled to earning the same interest on that money as if you had been given it and it was lying in the Bank.  Now if that is faulted, that is a different matter.  That is a matter to which customers will have a right to raise their issues with an impartial body and I was happy to note that an impartial body has been set up and the Commissioner has been named and that office premises are being sought.  I am sure that once that happens, then the customers or the businessmen have got points of reference when they are aggrieved.  

This tax is supposed to be neutral.  In other words it is not supposed to actually be negative once we impose it at the correct rate.  Because today I am given Figures.  Today, sales tax is being paid; today CTL is being paid.  Now, the Figures are known.  Some are 30, 40; CTL is 15 and so on and so forth.  Now, there is empirical data, I am sure in URA to enable them consistent with our policy; consistent with we are saying that the consumers should not be hurt; consistent with that position for them to work out a rate, that is neutral.  I think we should demand this from the Minister that when we pass this Bill, the rates which should be levied should be neutral.  

In other words, we should not create a price inflation, because that will be harmful straight away and the application of this system will be hampered from day one.  I give you an example, you have been drinking sodas, you have been paying a particular price.  I am not talking about Sheraton; I am talking about in the shops.  Now, if tomorrow after imposing VAT at a rate call it, X, the price of soda goes up; the price of beer goes up.  You are likely to pin the Government for this particular problem, are you not.  You may find that the businessmen who are collecting may also have taken the opportunity because it is money making to say we are not responsible.  It is a Government’s rate.  So, therefore, are strategic parties involved in this tax.  They are the Government, through the Cabinet Minister who has brought this Bill, the Legislature here, which will give it final approval and you cannot subsequently say that you do not know.  

Three - The URA who are going to implement it.  Those are the most important strategic to this Bill.  Therefore, you must come out clear and together so that there is no excuse by any businessman to use this Bill to be able to hike the price to his advantage.  

MR KARUHANGA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I want the Speaker on the Floor who is also doubling as Chairman of our Committee of the Economy, who has done a wonderful job in educating some of us who are not as clear as he is, to clarify a little bit more to the House about the appointment of the Commissioner for VAT, when the Law is not yet passed.  Secondly, when he is a known lawyer who is advising tax defaulters and who has got his client, how he has got this law, whether it is not in our right to make sure that the person who becomes a Commissioner for VAT goes through a competition for the job so that he is able to do the job instead of just being hand picked from some voters and now office is created for him.  Supposing we say we do not want this Law?  So, what I want is clarification from the Chairman of the Economy.  Thank you.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Mr Chairman, the Commissioner was not employed or appointment specifically for this.  We have already passed Law including the tax Law.  In fact this position should have been filled long ago.  But the Ministry was avoiding it because I think the URA, the Commissioner General there was a prosecutor and the judge at the same time, and we insisted that this tribunal and the Chairman therefore, must come in place so that they can take other complaints about taxes generally to him.  It is not specifically for this.  It is a general tax appeals tribunal.  

So, I would like to conclude by adding on what my Colleagues have already said here.  The question of education to ask the leaders the incomes of general sensitization, in terms of what funds accrue to these two items which will be merged into one which will enable us here to pass legislation to excuse programmes of Government.  In terms education to the businessmen; in terms of how they should not cheat the public.  How they should charge VAT properly; how they should render returns to URA and where they should go in case they have claims which are not settled.  That education must be there by URA whom I am sure we shall facilitate through the Budget provision to be able to reach everywhere.  Then the general consumer.  

It seems here Mr Chairman, the consumers have not developed the system of fighting for their rights.  I do not pick it.  I used to see a column in the Monitor News Paper about consumers’ complaints.  I think we should go beyond that because consumers must fight against a wrong price; they must fight against a wrong commodity; they must fight against poor quality and so on.  I think once we sensitize them, they will point out to us and Members of Parliament are very good Policy of Reference where traders are over charging under the pretext of this Law.  Otherwise, this is a Law to support and I would not like to hesitate, if the Minister, having been given sufficient indication about weak areas, he comes up with amendments so that they change this Bill to positive one.  I support the Bill, Mr Chairman.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we come to the end of today’s session.  We adjourn until Tuesday, next week at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.05 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 December 1995)


