Wednesday, 5th December 2001

The Parliament met at 2.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

MOTION ON THE STATE OF AFFAIRS 
OF KAMPALA CITY

Mr. Daniel OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I thought you had communication from the Chair, but if not, may I ask for your guidance? For planning purposes, I wonder whether it would be possible today or at on a later date to inform us when we are going for recess, and when we are likely to come back. This will help us to look at how we are going to spend our Christmas holiday, and to plan what to do during that period with ourselves and our families and to see when to come back. I would be most grateful if you could indicate this at an appropriate time. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, thank you. Actually, the Clerk has sent notice to the Business Committee, which is responsible for programming the business of the House, to decide when to go for Christmas recess. Most likely Christmas recess will be next week, but this will have to be confirmed by the Business Committee. When the meeting takes place, I will communicate this to you so that we can plan; not only your Christmas but also, I think even Idd El Fitir is coming very soon and the New Year. In due course, you will be informed.

Mr. Issa KIKUNGWE: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am seeking guidance. As we talk now, there are a lot of problems in the Police Stations in Kampala.

THE SPEAKER: Police Stations?

MR.KIKUNGWE: Yes! The Army is slowly, but steadily taking over the operations.

THE SPEAKER: The operations?

MR.KIKUNGWE: Yes! Some people are deposited at the Police Stations without statements being taken from them. They are only picked from the stations to go to CMI for torturing, brought back and deposited there. Two days later, they come and pick them, take them to the torture chambers, like that. I do not know what we are going to do.  There are no records pertaining to such suspects, no statements taken from them, I do not know what you can say about that kind of situation.

THE SPEAKER: That is a valid point you have raised. Unfortunately, the handicap we have currently is - because when you say Police Station, that falls under the portfolio of Ministry of Internal Affairs. When you talk of the Army taking control, that falls under the portfolio of Minister of Defence. But as I see here, we neither have the Minister of Internal Affairs or the Minister of Defence. But the point has been taken, and maybe when any of the two appears, we may have to raise it so that we get a proper answer. 

It will be unfair for me to ask the ministers present to deal with such a situation where they may not have any information. Unless you think the ministers are in position to answer. But it will not be fair for me to ask them to deal with such an issue. Attorney General, are you in position to answer?

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Francis Ayume): Mr. Speaker, I have just walked in; I have no background as to what the issue at hand is. 

THE SPEAKER: This is about what is happening. According to hon. Kikungwe, Member Kyadondo South, people are being dumped at police stations by the Army, and then from there everyday they are taken, tortured and brought back. I thought that was a matter for Ministry of Internal Affairs, who is in charge of Police, or the Minister of Defence but if you are in position to enlighten us on that, please we will be obliged.

MR.AYUME: Mr. Speaker, I must confess that I am hearing about this for the first time. So I am not in a position to assist in this regard. But I would imagine that if the hon. Member has that information, there are appropriate people he could make a Report to who would then deal with the matter. If he is not satisfied with the manner in which the people he has made a report to have dealt with the matter, then maybe the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs will be able to assist.

Mr.Tom BAGALANA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The issue of ‘safe houses’ has come to this august House for - I think, this is the third time, but Government has not come up to clarify the legality of these ‘safe houses’. So I think it is prudent at this time, notwithstanding the torture, at least to clear the mind of Ugandans. What are these ‘safe houses’? And could the Attorney General tell us their legality? We have the Police and we have prisons; I do not see why we should go back to the Obote times of ‘safe houses’. So, I would like to request the Attorney General to tell the nation now why this issue of ‘safe houses’ is continuously coming to Parliament.  

We had the issue of Mohammedan women looking for their husbands around 1997. This issue came up in the 6th Parliament, and it is now coming up in the 7th Parliament again. We want to know; where is the country is going?  Could the Attorney General clarify the legality? If it is not constitutional, we declare ourselves against ‘safe houses’. Thank you.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, Before the Attorney General answers, can I also contribute very briefly? This issue of ‘safe houses’ and the role of military intelligence are a subject of a Motion, which is pending before this House. I intend to move it at an appropriate time, most likely early next year, when we have a firm documentation on what is going on. But what surprised me is that when this Motion was publicised, the Defence Committee was lured by the Military Intelligence to tour their offices in Kampala after they had cleaned it up. And they said, ‘look around, do you see any prisoners here?’ And so they came with their report and said there are no ‘safe houses’ and that nobody is being detained.  

In view of the information we have received, I have one suggestion to make. That before the State machinery moves to take corrective measures to hide the evidence in the police stations – because they are going to do it; they are going to tell policemen not to talk; they are going to ensure that the prisoners we are talking of are taken somewhere else.  

So, I propose that we have a Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which deal with human rights matters, and, Mr. Speaker, I think it is incumbent upon this House, to ask this Committee to move quickly - even this afternoon - with the hon. Brother who brought this information up, and go to these police stations before the State moves to hide evidence. And I think they should do this as an emergency.

The second one is that – I do not know why people in this House and the country are surprised about the ‘militarisation’ of the Police?  When a whole Major General or a military person was appointed Inspector General of Police, I was a lonely voice to oppose such appointment; People clapped, others were very happy that for the first time their son has become a Major General, and he is appointed Inspector General of Police!  I was shocked, Mr. Speaker! We were surprised that a military person was appointed Inspector General of Police!  

This House and the country should be disappointed that the Police is being militarized.  Would you be surprised, Mr. Speaker, if today we are not satisfied with the Chief Medical Officer, who is a doctor and the President says, ‘I am appointing a veterinary person to be the Chief Medical Officer because I do not see any doctor who can be the Chief Medical Officer?  This is what has happened!  

We have brought in a military person to take charge of the Police, and we should not be disappointed!  It was the Appointment’s Committee of the House, which appointed a military person to be in charge of the Police, and we should be ready for the consequences.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

Mr. Michael MABIKKE: Mr. Speaker, just a short one before the Attorney General responds.  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

Mr. Speaker, I have got useful information, perhaps the Committee hon. Atubo is talking about could utilize in their research.  I have got a case in my own constituency of a young man called Sulait Igga, who was arrested two months or three months back.  We did look for him in all police stations and we had failed to locate him, until recently, about a week ago, we had to locate him in Kira Road Police Station, and our findings revealed that the young man was arrested at the close of the Presidential Elections this year.   

The Men of CMI detained him at Kira Road Police Post, and while there, he underwent inhumane treatment and torture.  This is a young man who had grown a little bit of a potbelly, and while he was being tortured, instead of being caned on the buttocks, he was being caned on the stomach. And to this day, the young man still has got wounds and scars for this kind of treatment. Now all this is being done at the police post just round the corner here in Kampala. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the matter being raised is a very serious matter.  It is a matter worth our attention, and I think as Parliament and as people’s representatives, we must take action against this kind of grievance being raised.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can we have the Learned Attorney General to respond to this, maybe, then we can conclude?

MR. AYUME:  Mr. Speaker, the issue of what has been commonly known as ‘safe houses’ had been handled, in my view, I thought, conclusively when it was raised in this very House during the last Parliament, and I think, the conclusion then was that there were no more ‘safe houses’.  

With regards to the legality of ‘safe houses’, if they existed or if they exist at all, the legal position obviously is that those are not gazette detention centers, and if there are Government operatives detaining people in those places described as ‘safe houses’, then they are doing it illegally. And my appeal would be that those colleagues who have this concrete information should make it available – even to me, although I am not the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs nor the Minister responsible for the intelligence Operatives. If you do make this information available to me, I am prepared to take it up with the Minister responsible.

This also applies to the report about someone that was arrested as long ago as before the conclusion of the presidential election, and detained in Kira Police Station until recently.  Indeed torture, both under the Constitution and the Law is not allowed, and I think this also should form part of the report, so that the matter can be investigated.  Thank you.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking guidance again on the procedure of the House.  However, I would like to proceed with my question with your guidance.  

Mr. Speaker, I get concerned when we raise issues in this House, especially, with the motion and Resolution of Parliament, and nothing seems to happen. I also appreciate the opportunity you have given us during the communication from the Chair, to air our views from constituencies.  We get frustrated; we move motions, resolutions and nothing seems to happen.  In other words, the Executive to whom we are forwarding our concerns is really rendering this House toothless by taking away our powers. 

Mr. Speaker, this is my question for your guidance: A Resolution of Parliament seems to have no effect at all!  Mr. Speaker, we have never, in the last few months, or maybe since this Seventh Parliament started, had a petition presented by a Member of Parliament on behalf of his people, expressing concern on a matter pertaining to his or her constituency.  I do not know the procedure to handle that particular aspect, notwithstanding, Rule 24 of the Rules of Procedure.    

The reason why I am asking for your guidance, Mr. Speaker, is because this morning as I was coming to Parliament, I was stopped by these people who are camping in front of the President’s Office saying, ‘we want to talk to the Speaker’.  I said; ‘the Speaker is a busy person’.  They said; ‘we want to talk to Members of Parliament’.  I said; ‘you have got a Member of Parliament’.  They said, ‘can we present a petition’?  I said, ‘why do you want to present a petition?’  

No sooner had I finished that, Mr. Speaker -(Interjection)- I am asking for guidance from the Chair.  Mr. Speaker, no sooner had I finished with the Luwero people than I got also a petition by honourable colleague Michael Mabikke! I said “to what effect?”  He said, “I have got a petition here I would like to present to the honourable House”. 

So, Mr. Speaker, what will be the procedure of presentation of a petition to this honourable House?  I am seeking your guidance.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: First of all, when you started making your contribution, you started with motions and resolutions, which are made by the House.  Resolutions are in two types: There are resolutions that are compelling, and therefore, they have to be respected; that is, they have to be carried out in their entirety. For instance, if the Government wants to have a loan, it is necessary that you pass a resolution supporting that loan. That is mandatory.  

Other resolutions that you pass do not have that effect.  They are only advisory.  They are advisory in that you advise by the resolution to the Executive or to any other body to note your concern. Therefore that one, I cannot say they must be effected because somebody may say ‘okay, I have noted the advise but as far as I am concerned, this is what I am doing’, if he is doing it properly.  So, you have to know, when you pass a resolution, whether it is compelling or it is recommending. If it is recommending, it is a recommendation.

Now, it is not true that since this Parliament started, or even the other Parliament, we have not received any petition.  There have been petitions.  Recently, there was a petition on Butamira Forest Reserve, and I think an appropriate body is handling this particular petition.  Surprisingly, as I was leaving for Arusha, I saw in a Newspaper one honourable Member complaining that he had presented a petition to the Speaker and it has never been dealt with. It was unfortunate because he was entirely lying.  

Somebody was swinging lies in the sense that, he had a petition which he took to the Clerk and when the Clerk notified me in the presence of that Member, I directed the Clerk to put it on the Order Paper, and the hon. Member told me he was going to South Africa.  I only saw that Member a day before I left for Arusha, complaining that he had been to the Speaker so many times and the Speaker was frustrating him.  That was a lie! And in any case –(Interruption)- well in the first place I have not mentioned him – (Laughter). 

In any case, if a person has a complaint to make about the procedures of the House, you do not do it in newspapers; you do it on the floor of the House and we get an answer because the Speaker will not answer newspapers! But I think you have to be honest on matters you move, and must explain to the people for whom you are moving, the effect of what you are trying to do. 

This particular petition has not been presented because the Member said he was going to South Africa, and it is not the function of the Speaker to arrange business of the House.  The Business and Welfare Committee does the function of arranging the business of the House.  When the Business and Welfare Committee sat to consider the business to be handled by the House, a report was made to the Business and Welfare Committee that the Member concerned with that particular petition had flown to South Africa. I do not know whether the Business and Welfare Committee could have arranged a business for a person who was out of the country! But actually, petitions have been brought before the House and will be brought.  

But the question is, what is the effect of a petition? The person who wants to bring a petition must be in position to explain its effect because as far as I am concerned, I have to follow the Rules of Procedure, and I will handle it in that way.  I cannot give strength to a petition the strength that is not being provided by the Law.  I think I stop here.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, with your permission can I accept any information?  

THE SPEAKER: Please.

Prof. George KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With the previous statement you have made, you have deliberately used strong words to the effect that a honourable Member of this House told a lie and to none other than the third most important person in our country.  The honourable President of Parliament! I think, Mr. Speaker, this House should view with extreme seriousness the manner in which hon. Members of this House conduct business, more so when they are dealing with the Speaker of the House.  

Had this taken place in this Chamber, this person would have been called upon to publicly apologize.  However, Sir, I still think that in order for this Parliament to continue to be an honourable House, we must demand of Members to be honourable Members -(Applause). And one of the things they must not do is to tell lies!  That is not playing about with power and privileges of this House. Therefore, Sir, with your indulgence, I seek your advice.  Is it not proper for this honourable Member to be named – (Applause)- and he is asked to apologise to his fellow Members?  Mr. Speaker, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think what I have said is that I read in the papers, and I said I do not answer through papers.  I preside over the House and my answers are in the House. And if you have any complaint to make, you make it in the House because I will not reply to you using the Press – (Applause).  But I have said that as far as that matter is concerned, it was totally lies and somebody is a darling of lies, and I will end there.  Proceed with another item.

Mr. Ken LUKYAMUZI: Motion, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Rule 42.

THE SPEAKER: Have you seen me to tell me the urgency of it? Because that is what it says.  I know the rule.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  It is arising from this debate.

Dr. James NSABA BUTURO (Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr. Speaker, permit me to start by thanking you for giving me this time to bring this motion before the House.  Never in my life, Mr. Speaker, had I received the kind of opposition that when a matter of importance to the nation is brought to the House, that some people come forward and oppose for selfish reasons. I am delighted, Sir, that you have given me this time and opportunity for honourable members to take part in a debate on this very important Motion. I appreciate your wise leadership in this regard.

Pursuant to Rule 39 of the Rules of Procedure, I beg to move the following Motion for a Resolution of Parliament: 

“WHEREAS this august House recognises that Kampala City is the capital city of Uganda;

AND NOTING with great concern that there are signs of breakdown of law and order in areas that are under the control of both the central Government and Kampala City Council, the concerned local authority, illustrated by among others the existence of a large number of hawkers and street vendors culminating into the blocking of the streets;  

CONCERNED THAT the state of infrastructure, especially the roads, is primitive, deplorable, shocking and deteriorating by the day, and many outlying streets and roads are unlit thus proving danger to travelers and city dwellers.  

AWARE THAT environmental concerns are not reflected in the planning and management of the city and waste management is not considered a priority, given that heaps of uncollected garbage are piling up everywhere in the city; 

COGNISANT OF the fact that traffic laws are violated with impunity, and the effectiveness of Traffic Police is not felt or seen, culminating into unregulated and chaotic traffic flow that is dangerous to human life and property; 

AND WHEREAS street children and young people generally are proving to be a menace to both the city dwellers and users of streets in Kampala City; 

AND COMMITTED to making Kampala City the pride of Uganda and the envy of other world capitals on all fronts;  

NOW THEREFORE, we the Members of Parliament do hereby resolve that the Government, as a matter urgency, do the following: 

1. Examine the operations of Kampala City Council in order to identify the existing bottlenecks and the ways through which central government support can be strengthened. 

2. Take immediate measures to make Kampala City a clean and properly managed city. 
 
3. Ensure that the central Government together with the Kampala City Council designs a workable plan of action aiming at both the improvement and modernisation of Kampala City.
  
4. Prepare a draft law to regulate the management of Kampala City as the capital city of Uganda.  

Mr. Speaker, hon. Bakaluba Mukasa will second this Motion.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Can you now proceed with your Motion, Dr. Buturo, it has been seconded.

DR. BUTURO: Mr. Speaker, at the present rate, if nothing is done, the city of Kampala will soon have the dubious distinction of qualifying as the biggest slum-cum-capital city of an independent country in Africa. Yet, Kampala City is the financial, commercial, political and administrative centre of Uganda. It is the only place in Uganda where all of us can reside without a finger being pointed at us by those who wish to promote a divided and sectarian Uganda.  

Kampala City is the flag-bearer of our country to the outside world. Given its position as the country’s economic, administrative and demographic centre, and the critical impact that its performance has on the wider Ugandan community, the situation of Kampala City deserves focused attention on its own right from this august House.  

In this respect, both its physical state and management are of utmost significance to all of us. This is why I believe it is the duty of the hon. Members to articulate every concern that may lead to having a capital city that is truly modern; one that is the pride of every Ugandan, the envy of the other world capital cities, and one that matches other international standards.  

Today, the city of Kampala is synonymous with the following: 

-	Poor and deteriorating infrastructure.
-	Rapidly growing and unplanned for population
-	Chaotic and unregulated traffic flow.
-	Poor drainage system often leading to flooding.
-	Ugly and ragged pavements.
-	Heaps of uncollected garbage, especially in the outskirts of the city.
-	Few passable roads and connections such as flyers.
-	Potholed roads.
-	Growing numbers of street children. 
-	Dirty streets littered with plastic bags, all types of paper, overgrown grass, etc. 
-	Distressing housing standards.

I will restrict my contribution to several areas, namely, the state of the existing infrastructure, management of Kampala City, the impact of migration upon the city, environmental concerns and investments. I will leave the other areas for hon. Members to articulate more ably.  

Transport and its management play key roles in the economic and social development of a capital city. For this reason, Kampala City needs a well-designed basic infrastructure network. Currently, the lack of passable roads and connections leads to congestion and excessive demand in some parts of the city.  

The city also needs proper management of the traffic system. This entails having in place low-cost improvements such as computerised signal systems and turning restrictions and pedestrian crosswalks. 

In the coming decades, more population and economic growth will occur in Kampala City more than elsewhere in Uganda.  In the context of the ongoing rapid urbanisation accompanied by pervasive globalisation, the challenges that the managers of Kampala City Council face are likely to increase in both scope and complexity.

Kampala City is witnessing a continuing influx of people from the countryside. This has implications for the city such as the solid waste generated going uncollected and piling up on streets and in drains because of the city’s limited capacity. Hon. Members need to be informed that the sewerage system in Kampala has not been upgraded for very many years. It is a potential atom bomb, unless it is upgraded to accommodate the rapid population growth. 

To this end, the city managers should give more attention to those environmental threats to human health that are a negative externality that impinges on the life chances of all of us.
 
A city that is modern is good for business.  Our Government is working round the clock to attract investors from within and without Uganda. Its efforts will remain in vain if available amenities and infrastructure within Kampala City are as sub-standard as they are now. This is because potential investors, both local and international, find conducting business in the city an unattractive proposition.  

In a world of increased competitiveness and complexity, Kampala City has to be attractive to business as a way of generating income and employment opportunities to provide a good livelihood for its inhabitants and to generate enough resources to finance infrastructure and social needs. In this regard, both good governance and management of the city are prerequisites for competitiveness and livability.

Nowadays traffic rules are no longer recognised. Instead, they are violated with impunity. There is no orderly flow of traffic. Traffic Police are rarely seen. When they are seen, their role on the street is largely ineffectual. The impression created by foreign visitors to Uganda is often that the Law of the Jungle reigns on the streets of Kampala City. 

This state of affairs is both unacceptable and shameful. While we are striving to attain higher standards of living, our own actions often negate the ideal we want to attain for our people. Most Kampala City suburbs are characterised by poor planning in building arrangements.  

Talking of planning, Kampala City contrasts sharply with Entebbe Municipality. As one enters Kampala City from Entebbe International Airport, one may wonder whether Uganda’s towns are uniformly planned, especially as one drives along the green gardens and air conditioned atmosphere of Entebbe Municipality, while looking at the abundant waters of Lake Victoria. But when one approaches the settlements of Katwe, Mengo and Kisenyi, one may wonder whether Kampala City has physical planners or not. If Kampala City is to attract more international and local investments, it must seek to be competitive. 

To become competitive so as to attract investments as well as international bodies, the City must improve its image and infrastructure, instead of having a crumbling road system, cracks that are becoming potholes and heaps of garbage that adorn it.  

We are living in an age of globalisation, in which increasingly rapid and intense flows of capital, labour and technology circulate relentlessly around the world, creating new productive social and institutional structures. Cities have been caught up by these changes in many significant ways. It is such changes that have led to some cities becoming powerful engines of growth in their countries.  Kampala City should be enabled to become a significant facilitator of growth in Uganda.  

This Motion urges both the Central Government and Kampala City Council to ensure that Kampala City joins the ranks of other modern cities. We want a city that is a true reflection of the modern times we live in. Responsibility for the situation faced by the city is attributed by various parties to many factors.  

Given this diverse prognosis, I propose that in order to get to the bottom of the problems facing Kampala City, this August House, after debate of this Motion, undertake a proper analysis of the various causes and their relative importance. I further propose that the House appoint a Select Committee to be nominated by you, Mr. Speaker, for the consideration of the issues that this debate will generate. The Committee nominated would, at an appropriate time, report to this August House and Government for subsequent action. I beg to move.

Rev. Peter BAKALUBA MUKASA (Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the Motion.  First of all, I would like to thank the Mover of the Motion. Even if you stay far away from Kampala, but still when you come to Kampala, you can appreciate when it is not in a good condition. You can notice that our city is not very clean. We have the leadership in the city. At one time this leadership will have to go but our city will remain.  

What do we need to do? We need to combine efforts. That is why we are calling upon Government to come in to support Kampala City Council by maybe facilitating it and giving it more resources so that Kampala City can be improved on.  

A number of issues have been raised why the Mover of the Motion has come in to present his point. We can see the poor drainage system in our city, even if it is being worked on. I think Government needs to come in to speed up this work so that our city can improve. 

We can see heaps of uncollected garbage, especially in the outskirts of the city; there are few passable roads and flyovers, potholed roads, growing numbers of street children and dirty streets littered with plastic bags and all types of paper and overgrown grass and many other things which all need our attention. That is why I have stood to support this Motion, and I call upon hon. Members to give us their support.  Thank you very much.

Mr. Aggrey AWORI (Samia Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to support this Motion. I support this Motion with qualifications. In other words, I am not supporting it entirely. There are certain areas, which I am going to emphasise, others that I will duplicate and others I will add or amend in the Motion.  

This city is suffering from what the Mover of the Motion is saying for the following reasons: there is no implementation of plans. The city is not lacking the plans as such; there are plans that have been ignored either through corruption or deliberately. I will give an example. 

The New Naguru, as they call it, formerly designated for the East African Community was properly planned. It had a central sewerage system, it had roads demarcated; it had everything in place for a modern suburbia. To my horror, when this Government took over, a number of people who came from the bush needed accommodation. This accommodation caused problems and it was done under the then Office of the Prime Minister. There was so-called allocation and reallocation of plots, and the new owners of the plots totally disregarded the plan that was in place. They just chopped it up and the sewerage system was blocked, or even cut centrally so that there would be one place where the sewerage would have been emptied. 

In this metropolis of ours, there are only two areas where you can have proper sewerage. That is the Old Nakasero and the Old Kololo.  When you look at the so-called modern areas where most of us the elite and semi elite, the rich and the aspiring and the crooks and the low live, Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I want to inform hon. Aggrey Awori that although traditionally the sewerage in Nakasero and Kololo is good, Ntinda has also got a very good sewerage system.  We have a treatment plant actually.

MR. AWORI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. colleague from the Front Bench for telling us about Ntinda, I am sure he is talking about the Ministerial Estates, where the ministers are supposed to live. I know that is where the system works, the rest of Ntinda, I am very familiar with. It used to be my one time constituency, nothing is happening.  

Mr. Speaker, if you look at the Tank Hill, it is the biggest modern slum you can ever think of. You find every home in Tank Hill has got a septic tank.  To my horror, Mr. Speaker, you will find that even Ntinda, the hon. colleague is talking about, there are so-called quarters for the workers at the back of the mansion, and most of them have pit latrines. I could even take the hon. Minister now and show him a home, which is owned by a highly placed person in Bank of Uganda, without naming him. He has a pit latrine for his workers at the back of the house. It shows lack our commitment to plan. 

The worst offenders, what the hon. Mover of the motion is talking about, are people I do not want to mention, the Front Bench as landlords. If I was to challenge them to tell us where their properties are, you will find that they have not followed the proper town planning system. 

Mr. Speaker, I jump to another area which the hon. Mover of the motion did not mention, this is the question of strategic planning in terms of security.  Mr. Speaker, thank God to date we do not have a Taliban in the neighborhood. If we had a Taliban, this town would burn to ashes.  Look at the fuel storage; for the last 18 years we have not moved the fuel storage from Namuwongo and other adjoining areas.  If somebody were to throw there a grenade, God forbid, what would happen to Kampala City? 

Mr. Speaker, last but not least, in terms of traffic, Mr. Speaker, we are supposed to have the greater Ring Road so that the traffic from Jinja going to –(Mrs. Bbumba Syda rose_)

MRS. BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank the hon. colleague for giving way. Government is currently negotiating for the extension of the pipeline, whose terminal is going to be outside Kampala. And once that happens, the depots in Industrial area are going to be removed. This information is available, and the hon. Colleague, maybe by oversight, is aware of this since the pipeline is going to pass through his constituency.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you are giving information. Then wind up hon. Aggrey Awori.

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I thought I would give way to my hon. colleague here, since he is the Member from the central Kampala, to supplement my information, but he can come on his own later. 

Mr. Speaker, last but not least, the question of the Outer Ring Road out of the City. Normally we have what they call the Outer Ring Road so that the heavy traffic coming in and transiting to other parts of the country do not pass through the center of the city. I do not know what  –(Mr. John Nasasira rose_)

MR. NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Awori. I just wanted to give you information, in case you might have missed out the recent developments of the Outer Ring Road, which has undergone a public inquiry for about six months. I think you might be aware, but if you are not, Government is starting on the northern by-pass as part of the Outer Ring Road, and this northern by-pass is starting from Busega and ending up near Mandela Stadium. 

It is going to pick traffic from Masaka, Mityana, Busunju, Bombo and Jinja, and this is the main traffic that feeds Kampala City.  So, Government is really taking action to de-congest the city. I do not want to mention other details, like the transport master plan and so on. Maybe I will do that later.  But for the Outer Ring Road starting with the northern by-pass, it’s expected to start construction towards the end of next year.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I have to wind up but lastly, the management of the city itself. It is a fact, I do not have to say it and I have no regret of saying it, but politically, we multi-partists control the city. Now, the second part of it is that the management belongs to the Movement and that is why we have failed, that is the all problem –(Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING (Capt. Edward Babu): First and foremost, let me start right from the onset to thank the Mover, but at the same time, I want to take this opportunity to request, Mr. Speaker, that the Mover helps us to separate issues which he has all quoted in his motion. 

One, he talked about security, for example. This would fall under the Police, and this in our Parliament is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs and, therefore, the Committee of Internal Affairs.  

When he talked about KCC, it falls under a Committee of Local Government and that Committee of Local Government has all the right to invite Kampala City Council, to inform them on how far they have moved on some of the issues that he has mentioned.  I will give you an example –(Ms.Alice Alaso rose on a point of information_) let me finish then –(Interruption)

MS.ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Minister for giving way. I would like to inform the holder of the Floor that actually, yesterday the Committee on Local Government, of which I am a Member, invited KCC and we had useful interaction with them. We found out a number of things, and it was prayed that the motion should have been stayed, but I think there was a mishap somewhere and somehow things did not work out.  We had the town Clerk with us; we had the Mayor; we had the technical team and a good number of people came and we wanted to interact with them further.  That is the bit of information, thank you.

Dr. Phillip BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and I thank my colleague for giving way. As a matter of supplementing the information that has just been given to us by hon. Member, the issues that have been raised in this motion are concerning very many sectors: Ministry of Works, Ministry of Water, Lands, Natural Resources, Health, Ministry of Local Government, Gender, Labour, so we felt, 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry, together with the Sessional Committee on Local Government, since we started discussing the Policy Statement on Ministry of Local Government, all these matters have been brought to the attention of the Sessional Committee on Local Government. And because they were very many, we did away with the budget process first, and arranged for the Committee to interact specifically with Kampala City Council, because we felt KCC is a high stake area with many stakeholders. 

So, we felt that Kampala City Council, the political and technical heads should present to the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. And already, as I talk now, arrangements are being made for the Kampala City Council officials to present all these outstanding issues as they have been totally raised in this resolution to the Committee of this House.

The Committees of this House have just been chosen hardly three months ago, and the first three months were for handling the budget.  I think the Committee is just beginning to settle down and start its work.  I would therefore wish to supplement the information given that the Ministry of Local Government, together with the Committee, is making the necessary arrangements to address all these issues that have been raised. And it would only be fair that the Committee that has just been put in place handles this issue very comprehensively.  

Secondly, the problems that have been raised are very many and far ranging, and they require time.  If we are going for a Select Committee, for how long is a Select Committee -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Minister, is this a contribution or what?

DR.BYARUHANGA: No, I was just giving information- (Laughter). 

THE SPEAKER: Because I do not think I will give you time to contribute.

DR.BYARUHANGA: So, I was just giving that information.  I thank you very much.

CAPT.BABU:  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, before I came here, I went to KCC that is why I came a bit late and the KCC informed me that they had been before the Committee on Local Government and introduced a booklet to the Committee which gave them the problems that KCC is facing. And this is “The KCC Dilemma”.  

This booklet entitled “The KCC Dilemma” gives the background of KCC problems: The administration problems, the engineering problems, the road network problems, the drainage, solid waste management; it includes street lighting, traffic management problems, the planning of land, management of street children, council revenue and the way forward. And they wanted to bring this to the Committee of Parliament and ask them if they could also help so that Central Government - this being a capital city - would come in and help the council.  

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I am laying this book on the Table so that the relevant Committee could take this KCC dilemma and help City Council to manage this city.

The main problems of Kampala City Council - I was once a City Councilor there and when I first went there in 1989, they did not have any salary to pay even the workers.  As we talk now, they pay their salaries and they remain with some money to carry out some of the requirements of service delivery. And as we talk, there are certain things that have been done.  

This morning they were sitting, Mr. Speaker, and were discussing the Transport Master Plan of Kampala which, as they say, came out in 1969 but nothing was done; came out in 1972, nothing was done; and we had one in ‘94 but we did not have enough funds to carry it out. There is a new one, “The Urban Development Plan of Kampala” which has just come out and it is on the table, and will be discussed. Our Committee on Local Government will get all these studies so that they can assess the problems of Kampala City Council.  

I would like, Mr. Speaker, to appeal to the honourable Member who moved this motion, who was once a DC of Kampala, to try and understand the problems of Kampala. He was once a DC in a certain Government - (Interruption). Mr. Speaker, I would like him to understand that from the time we had decentralisation, there has been a problem of resource collection and revenue in most of our Local Governments. But that is beginning to improve and the programmes that will be given to our committee will improve. 

Therefore, I would like to end, Mr. Speaker, by requesting the hon. Member to take this motion, and if possible, give it to the relevant Sessional Committee. Our rule 143 clearly states that the Sessional Committee shall have the following functions:

a) To examine and comment on policy matters affecting the Ministry covered by them;

b) To initiate, evaluate action programmes of those Ministries and to make appropriate recommendations on them;

c) To examine critically, Bills brought before the House before they are debated;

d) To examine critically, Government Recurrent and Capital Budget Estimates, and to make recommendations on them for the general debate in the House;

e) To monitor the performance of the Ministries; and,

f) To ensure Government compliance.

I think if the Committee on Local Government examines all the facts, we will have a better basis for this debate, and I can assure you, if the motion is then brought after we have received all the studies that have been done, I will be the first one to support him.  Mr. Speaker, I therefore request the honourable Member to take this motion to the Committee concerned.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is it that you do not support the motion?  I want to know, do you support the motion or you do not support it?

CAPT.BABU:  No, I do not support the motion as it has been brought to this plenary chamber.  I am saying that if there is any complaints or anything to do with City Council, it should go through our Committee concerned with this sector, and then they should study it a little bit more carefully, but not through the plenary. I therefore move the motion, Sir, that this matter be referred to the relevant Committee to be studied a little bit further.  Thank you.

HON. MEMBERS:  Seconded, seconded

MR.MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, I think hon. Members should have an opportunity. The Committee may benefit from the views generated from the House and take them into account when handling this matter with all fairness.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you heard a motion by hon. Dr. Nsaba Buturo, which was supported by honourable Member for Mukono North. Now, the honourable Minister and Member for Kampala Central is moving a motion that let it be sent to the relevant Sessional Committee.  But the motion by the hon. Member was that we have a Select Committee.  Now, is it really that you are opposed to a Select Committee and you want the matter to be considered by the relevant Sessional Committee?  

HON. MEMBERS:  Yes!

THE SPEAKER: Then debate the motion in those terms.  So, the motion has been amended, let us see how it proceeds as we debate the amendment.

Mr. Micheal MABIKKE (Makindye East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand to second the Motion by hon. Francis Babu, that this matter be referred to the Sessional Committee on Local Government.  

The Motion by hon. Nsaba Buturo is a very good Motion, and it raises pertinent concerns that are everyone’s concerns anyway. And I know that this Motion could have come from no better person than a former District Commissioner under the Obote II regime -(Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, do we have to get personal when debating this Motion?

MR.MABIKKE: Mr. Speaker that is a compliment. The fact is that Kampala has been on a downward trend, just like many aspects of the economy, and just like many aspects in Uganda. For 20 years, Kampala City Council has been experiencing the very problems our Government is experiencing.  

In 1998, concerned by the kind of trend in Kampala, Kampala City Council embarked - and this is for the information of hon. Members who may not be privy to this kind of information - on a recovery plan, just like the Movement Government did embark on an economic recovery plan in 1987.  

What did the plan comprise? The plan was called the strategic framework for reform. The strategic framework for reform recognised that Kampala City Council had been a regulator and a deliverer of services, and it was imperative that it moves away from that role to become a regulator and basically a supervisor. 

In the same plan, Kampala City Council was supposed to start contracting out and privatising many services that it had embarked on previously.  

Thirdly, in the same framework for reform, Kampala City Council began divesting unproductive assets. In the same framework, Kampala also began putting in place systems of sound financial management.  

What has the problem in Kampala been? There have been basically three problems in Kampala. The first problem, like in Uganda, has been patronage. The second problem has been political interference - (Interjections)- Mr. Speaker, please protect me from the overzealous Movement guys - (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.  

MR.MABIKKE: Mr. Speaker, allow me to expound. The third problem has been that the central Government has failed to meet its obligations to Kampala. As you may be well aware –(Interjections)- Mr. Speaker, can you protect me from the hon. Minister in charge of the Presidency?

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MR. SITENDA SEBALU: I would like to inform my hon. Friend about the failure of the central Government to assist the city council. I had a chance, yesterday, to listen to His Worship the Mayor on Central Broadcasting Service. He was saying that the central Government gives Kampala City Council only 150 million shillings to tarmac roads. And it is estimated that to tarmac one kilometre of a road, you need 300 million shillings. So, if the central Government is giving 150 million shillings per year, sincerely that is peanuts!

MR.NASASIRA: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member’s information, even if he heard it from one FM radio station, I think was not entirely correct. First of all, Kampala City Council, even with the support of central Government, is supposed to raise its funds for tarmacking its roads. 

What the central Government passes on as conditional grants to districts is for maintenance of roads. Kampala City Council was not even a beneficiary of conditional grants. It is only two years ago that the central Government brought Kampala City Council on board, and it is now contributing conditional grants for road maintenance and not for tarmacking roads.

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Mabikke that in the area of physical planning, land, sewerage and water, the central Government has done its part. The physical plan, the structural plan under which we are developing Kampala today was only approved in 1994, and it is still current and modern up to the year 2005.  

Secondly, in the area of water, we have got capacity to supply all the residents of Kampala with water. But the problem is that a number of us cannot afford connecting ourselves to the main. This is why we are putting standby taps. And I went a long way, at the onset of the second rains this year, to command National Water and Sewerage Corporation, outside their corporate plan, to reconnect all residents in Kampala who had been turned off, so that we avert dangers of environmental public health hazards.  

Also on sewerage, sewerage connection is ten times as expensive as that of water. If 40 per cent of the residents have failed to connect themselves to the water mains, how about the sewerage connection! The problem is far greater than what hon. James Nsaba Buturo really sees. 

In the Ministry of Water, Lands, and Environment we have got a strategic plan for delivering water and sewerage services in Kampala and the whole country. This plan has got a very ambitious investment structure, which we are discussing with Kampala City Council. If the Mover was patient enough, he would have consulted the sector departments so that we come out with a good package for our city. 

And it is on this note, as I give this information to hon. Mabikke, that I support the amendment that this matter rather be handled by a Sessional Committee of the House, where we all shall come to give our complements on what we are doing to make our city a modern one.

MR. MABIKKE:  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up honourable Mabikke!

MR. MABIKKE:  Mr. Speaker, by way of winding up, I think you must have a limit on the number of Members giving information - (Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable Member, the Rule is that for clarification and information, it is the Member on the Floor that really permits the information.

MR. MABIKKE:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. My argument is; the time for apportioning blame over who has done what in Kampala or who is contributing to the nation, I think, is over.  We must collectively find a solution to the mess in Kampala.  

Mr. Speaker, as I have told this House before, KCC has systematically embarked on its programme for reform, but this programme, as I said, has been faced with the problem of Political interference.  I can give you an example: KCC has been contracting out services, but it is very unfortunate that today, in order for one to win a tender in Owino, to run Taxi Park, you must come with a chit from above.  KCC has had a problem of hawkers and you all remember, Mr. Speaker -(Mr. Steven Bamawanga rose-)

MR. BAMWANGA: Mr. Speaker, I need a clarification from hon. Mabikke, that for anybody to win a contract in City Council, you must come with a chit from ‘above’.  I thought that the managers of City Council are very independent people, in the name of the Mayor Sebaana Kizito, who is a multi-partist. Who is ‘above’ Sebaana Kizito in the City Council to give those chits?  We need a clarification by naming those people -(Laughter). 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, is it your suggestion that the Tender Board acts on advice of other people?

MR. MABIKKE:  Mr. Speaker, I want to state that it is the order of the day in Uganda and everywhere that -(Mrs. Maria Matembe rose on a point of order_)

MRS. MATEMBE: Mr. Speaker, the City Council is an independent Local Government that manages its affairs; it is autonomous - (Interruption). It is has a clearly elected leadership and self-appointed administrators.  Now, hon. Mabikke is saying that for them to give tenders, one has to come with notes from ‘above’, and ‘above’ means people outside the City Council.  Is he in order to continue contributing on that matter without substantiating those ‘people from above’? 

Mr. Speaker, I thought he would say that one of the problems is corruption in the City Council, which he didn’t.  Now, who is ‘from above’? Can he substantiate and then help me with all these names, so that I can follow them (Laughter)?  Yes, so that they do not interfere with the City Council!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I think this was raised on a point of order. I think she is saying that by your contribution, you are really imputing that the Members of the City Tender Board are not acting independently?  She is saying, can you substantiate; because if you can substantiate you will be in order? 

MR. MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, honourable Matembe is a lawyer and she knows that one word in Law may mean so much. ‘Above’ may mean even from God -(Laughter).  But Mr. Speaker, if you may allow me to wind up my submission -(Mr. Mike Mukula rose_)

CAPT. MUKULA:  Mr. Speaker, I am just seeking clarification from the honourable -(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable Mabikke, there is a Point of Order raised by the honourable Minister, and I am constrained to make a ruling on it.  But before I make a ruling on it, I must also give you opportunity. Maybe you can substantiate.  If you can substantiate, then you will be in order.  Now, if you cannot substantiate, because I think the argument here is that, by your contribution you are really saying that members of the Tender Board whose names are known are corrupt and incompetent.  So now I think she is saying that it is not because the chits are coming from above, but the Tender Board itself is corrupt.  Can you substantiate so that I make a Ruling?

MR. MABIKKE:  Mr. Speaker, it is public information that Kampala City Council has had problems in management of the taxi-park and some names have been mentioned -(Laughter)- the recent wrangle involving the Ministry of Local Government and Kampala City Council over City Square deal is evidence enough to show that somebody outside Kampala City Council is interfering in the work of KCC.  

Mr. Speaker, to further substantiate on the political interference in Kampala City Council, you are well aware that before the presidential elections, Kampala City Council embarked on a clean up of the city; they removed all city vendors and hawkers.  It was a directive from State House through the famous, Major Kakooza Mutale, who returned hawkers on the streets – (interjection).  At this juncture, I am not going to take any information.  

Mr. Speaker, just recently, I took a casual walk through the Kampala City Park, and if today you took a walk down to the Kampala City Park -(Mr. Gilbert Bukenya rose on a point of order_)

THE SPEAKER: On what?

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Is it in order -(Interruptions)- yes, but this is also an order.  Is it in order, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. Member holding the Floor, imputes that there was a directive from State House for vendors to come back to the streets of Kampala, when the hon. Member knows very well that the Mayor of KCC, even before the election of the President, had a whole street called Wilson Lane where he has perpetually put vendors on a full time basis?  They will not get them out of the street but they get our vendors out of the street.  Probably he is acting as ADC of the Mayor.  Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, really, I do not know where this argument is going because the point of order was raised by hon. Matembe that the honourable Member on the floor made a statement to the effect that the Tender Board is acting on instructions of the people above.  I do not know what he meant by ‘above’, and therefore he was asked to substantiate.  So, what the Member has done is to say the reasons why he said so.  Whether that is true or not, I really do not know but he is giving that information as a basis of having said so.  We now need to investigate whether the information, which he has given the House, is correct or not but as far as he is concerned, those are the facts that he has used to make that conclusion.
 
MR. MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your guidance and ruling.  

Mr. Speaker, as a way of summary - I have seen hon. Bukenya here is very excited.  I would like to say that I was walking down to the Taxi Park a few weeks back - because sometimes I use public means.  The Taxi Park is right now a mess; hawkers have nearly taken charge. But as I was walking up the streets, I recognized, to my surprise, one very prominent Minister in this Government, and he was busy holding a meeting. I do not want to mention the name, but he was busy holding a meeting with hawkers, and when I looked closer, I just realized it was none other than the hon. Minister in Charge of the Presidency -  (Laughter and Prof. Bukenya rose)

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Members, I do not see –(Interruption)

MR. MABIKKE:  Mr. Speaker, please protect me. 

THE SPEAKER: I am going to protect you but I do not see really an end to this debate.  First of all, the hon. Member of Parliament, you see, sometimes uses public means. I do not know whether I will rule out a Minister using also public means and conversing with hawkers.  So, where are we going to end?  I think we should end this matter.

MR. MABIKKE: Mr. Speaker, it is true that I use public means but this hon. Minister had parked his official Government car, a Prado, whose numbers I cannot give right now, but when I asked him what he was doing among the ‘seyas’ – there is the term ‘seyas’ and ‘bamen’ in Kampala – he said: “You know, Mabikke, these days I am much more popular than you among the ‘seyas’ and the ‘bamen’”. The ‘seyas’ are the ordinary hawkers, street vendors and the common people in Kampala.

Now, Mr. Speaker, by way of winding up this debate, I only mentioned this example to show the extent of external political interference in the affairs of Kampala City Council -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is time really.

MR. MABIKKE: But as a way forward for Kampala, Government must meet its obligations because Kampala City is a special case in Uganda, and therefore it needs the urgent attention of Central Government. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, political interference in Kampala City affairs must cease forthwith.  

Lastly, I would like to support the motion by hon. Babu that this matter be referred to the Sessional Committee on Local Government, other than appointing a Select Committee on the same.  Thank you very much.

Dr. Yafesi OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the mover of this motion despite the undercurrent that has provoked all these reactions.

I recall that at a forum, the vice-chairperson of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service had insisted that this motion should be brought to the Floor.  I am now surprised and it must be obvious that he was scared from supporting this issue further. And this is very unfortunate, Mr. Speaker!

The subject we are discussing is very serious. As a former Chief Planner of this country, I am surprised that people who have been in this House since the NRC, and have never brought a special motion or asked a Committee of Parliament which deals with the local authorities and Kampala City Council in particular, should now appear to be very active and pretend that they know how to handle this matter better, and lay papers which they have been keeping on their head sides, at this time.  

I am glad and very appreciative of the reactions, which this motion has provoked, and the attention now being focussed on Kampala.  To me, it is now immaterial whether it is referred to a Select Committee or the Committee on the Local Government, to discuss specifically the development and the affairs of Kampala City Council. It is now immaterial! 

This overture has produced a concerto whose music we should all be able to enjoy when it is put on the proper stage. The City Council is the capital city of this country; it is a prime city. As a former Chief Planner, I feel it is the saddest episode of this country - and this is the second or third time I am making this statement in this House - that planning has been neglected completely.  

We have been here asking for the National Planning Authority, and somebody is coming here with isolated, disintegrated plans, all concerned with the City Council. All of them will end nowhere unless we have a central coordinating authority which will look into the implementations of plans lying elsewhere in their co-ordination and integration.  

We have been told there is a plan for water, sewerage, for a market here, a car park there and everybody is uttering them. When will these plans be considered as the comprehensive long-term development plan of Kampala City Council?  

This city has been properly planned. The 1969 Water and Sewerage Study, which produced the National Water and Sewerage Corporation was based on Kampala, Jinja and Entebbe. There was a No-Control Transportation Study, which also covered Jinja and Kampala, and whose northern and southern by-pass is now being talked of by the Minister responsible for Works and Housing. I am glad that at least there is something being done to implement the No- Control Transportation Study. But can you imagine that it is being implemented after other studies?  Mere studies of a study have taken almost five years!  

So, when we talk about our capital city, we should be more serious rather than being suspicious of the intention of this Motion. Some people think this Motion was a Motion brought for a vote of no confidence in the present administration of the City Council. 

Some people think somebody who is not a representative of the people of this City should not have brought this Motion. That is their prerogative. Some of them have been here for the last 15 years and this prerogative has never been displayed! 

I am glad and I really praise the Mover of this Motion, despite his weaknesses and the undercurrents. But now that it has provoked a stage where this House can refer this matter for detailed and coordinated discussion in the appropriate Committee, I support that move.  This is because I was concerned that this Motion as it is would not give the best treatment to the handling of the development and the affairs of Kampala City Council and Kampala district.  

In that regard, therefore, I support the move by hon. Babu that this matter be referred. And I appeal to the Mover of the Motion that if his spirit was to support the development of this city, then let us support the proposal that it should be referred to the Committee for appropriate measures, and more comprehensive and detailed way of handling of the Motion -(Applause).  

As for all those political undertones about what previous Governments did to this City Council, I want to inform all those enthusiastic critics of the Obote Government that I was the Chief Planner. In 1972, we prepared a Structure plan, a Transportation Plan, and a National Water and Sewerage Corporation Plan. At that time, the City Council constructed the Nile Avenue, Hospitals and Dispensary, Kitante Primary School and all sorts of things; it could do that. What has City Council done since this Government came into power -(Applause and Laughter)- apart from patching roads? Yes, these are facts so let us take it!  

It is very easy for people to be so parochial that they are even blind to what they see.  The only great thing that has taken place is that the roads, which were constructed in those days, have been rehabilitated. I think we are experts at rehabilitation. We deserve to be praised for that!  

For further information, the City Council is now undertaking a study for re-preparation of the Drainage Master Plan. The Ministry of Works is about to commission a further study on the Transportation Plan.  These are very useful approaches, but in the long run, there must be a concerted effort by this Government, by any Government of this country, to treat Kampala City Council as a special development area, which cannot be left to the City Authority alone. This is the beginning of that approach, and I am a great advocate of this approach to the development of the Capital City.  

There are people who are already now thinking of a new Capital City. I was approached when I was a Chief Planner that we should have a capital city. I refused; I am not a supporter of that. I know that we can still develop this city in the interest of this country within the present area. All capital city programmes have never got successful. Take Abuja, Dodoma, Brazil and so on. A country whose capital development budget is 99 per cent financed by borrowing can never think of a new capital city. So we might as well concentrate on what we have now and do it properly.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

Mrs. Margaret ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you Mr. Speaker. While I thank hon. Dr. Nsaba Buturo for his Motion, I want to support the Amendment by hon. Babu. I want to say from the onset - (Laughter and Applause)- I thank the House for the applause. 

While Dr. Okulo Epak very eloquently said that the hon. Members who represent Kampala in Parliament, in NRC, in the 6th Parliament may not have brought a Motion on this Floor, I want to remind him of the many efforts we have made, even in the 6th Parliament, which enabled Kampala City Council to contain the problem of flooding. KCC was able to get funding and is currently working on the great drainage channel.  

I want also to mention that we have had a Caucus of Kampala through which we were able to write to you about our indicative needs under the new Budget Act. I think the letter is on your Table, and the Clerk of this House has a copy. We stated that Kampala City Council needs a new law. 

What is really one of the basic limiting problems of Kampala City Council is the fact that it is treated as a district, it is not treated as a city and as a capital. And in that circumstance, it gets grants as any other district.  

It does not get even the rights that other cities do get, for instance, on taxation or revenue collection. It is the only city I have seen and visited, where there is no service tax collected or chargeable in all these service areas like hotels and any other place. And this is the prerogative of Government, and Government has not given this City Council this prerogative.  

We have demanded to have the Local Government Act amended, so that Kampala City Council gets its own separate law to deal with the problems of the city. 

I want to add that Kampala City Council has a modernisation plan. I also had the benefit of being a Councilor of City Council, and I had an opportunity to be part of that development plan which eventually developed into a modernisation plan.  It had a request of having a metropolitan policy. This request was presented during the constitution-making process.  What became of it?  Still, it was relegated and thrown overboard, and we think that without having a separate Law for the city, we shall not make much headway.  So, that is why I want to support this move.  

When this thing is taken back to the Committee, the very Committee will be able to see this deeper and analyse the effect or the progress of decentralisation, it will be able to analyse whether City Council has performed better under the decentralisation or worse.  In my own view, I think it has retrogressed, it has gone down and down.

Mr. Speaker, I want to also add that this problem of revenue which City Council is continuously talking about - I do not have the figures of the recently approved budget, but I know for sure that City Council would have collected a lot of revenue from Ground Rent, despite its inefficiencies. But you know very well that between 1974/75 and 1987/89, when most of the properties of this city were under Custodian Board, all the Ground Rent was never paid.  Government should have the obligation to pay this Ground Rent but has it paid it?  

Kampala City Council has such a demand; it would wish to go out and light the streets but these needs liberalised the policy of street lighting.  Kampala City Council has the obligation to pay for the street lighting but what goes on?  It pays for this street lighting at the commercial rate!  What is there up to now?  So, this whole problem is very complex. That is why I am supporting the idea of taking it back to the Committee of Local Government. Let it analyse it deeper and deeper and let a solution be found.

About this unplanned or planned city, hon. Okulo Epak says it is planned, then Dr. Buturo Nsaba says it’s very unplanned. I want to put a question again, when we were discussing the Constitution, the issue of freehold in the city was brought, and it was fully supported on the Floor of the Constituent Assembly that in the city we should have freehold.  What is the implication of freehold in a City?  

Right now there are developments; you go around Simon Road area, those plots are so small to carry on any building of any magnificent structure with parking and other facilities, but because it is under a freehold arrangement, City Council can not repossess these plots currently.  Since it cannot repossess them, it is only that person who can either sell it off or whatever it is.  This is a very big problem.  We are now moving into another decade or era, and we are having – (Mr. Baguma Isoke rose_) – let me be informed.

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: Thank you Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Zziwa for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, there is a difference between land ownership and land management.  The landowner is not the one who plans how that land will be managed. 

We have got the Town and Country Planning Law of this country, which obliges landowners to conform to the planning schemes of those areas. Even if, for example, Buganda Land Board has got the majority of the land within the City, the land owners under Buganda Land Board have got to conform to the structure where the road passes; where a petrol station will be placed; where a cemetery will be placed and so on and so forth.  

It is not true that a landowner dictates what kind of development takes place in a particular area. It is the Town and the Country Planning Law, which governs physical development in every part of this country.  Therefore, the land tenure which is in any area doesn’t affect development, rather it is the Local Government which must enforce the Laws of physical planning, so that landowners conform to the planning schemes as approved by the Town and Country Planning Board. 

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Minister you have cleared this point.  Actually, I have also heard people complaining about freehold in the city, and therefore that it should be abolished.  

Maybe those who are saying this have not internalised the provisions of Clause 237(7) of the Constitution that reads: “Parliament shall make Laws to enable urban authorities to enforce and to implement planning and development”.  So, it cannot be an excuse that because we have a freehold system, therefore we cannot do planning. The Constitution permits the urban authority to control the planning, and therefore they can prevent you from putting a structure here, if it does not conform to the planning of the city.

DR. OKULO EPAK: For further information, actually there is a provision in the Land Act, which says that all land in urban areas will be developed according to the plans, and according to the Town and Country Planning Board.  So really, it is immaterial whose land it is, and even in London which is developed, the entire London is freehold to her Majesty the Queen. So, most urban settlements are freehold.  

Public land really has lost its utility in the long run. If all the land became leased, you would have the same problem that the ownership would not belong to the controlling authority anymore.  I think the emphasis is on planning, the implementation of the plan and the enforcement of the plan. That is where the city authorities are weak! 

MRS. ZZIWA: I thank you for the information.  What I can say, of course, is that there is a glaring challenge, and I specifically brought that example on Simon Road, where there is that MTN building. You can look at it; it is a new building that MTN is renting for its Head offices. For instance, if the owner of that plot were the owner of three other plots adjacent to it, that very structure would have fitted better. It would have fitted better if it had about three other structures adjacent to it. But the fact that the owner of this very small plot could not have access even to the next one, and at times Government is not there to assist in the negotiation and in influencing, you find that we are going to have these tiny plots which are not commensurate with development in the 21st or 22nd Century.  This is what I want to bring forward.  

I want also to add, maybe as I wrap up, that all of us as people of Uganda should improve on our responsiveness with regard to Kampala as our city. At the moment, 75 percent of hon. Members of Parliament in this very great Seventh Parliament reside in Kampala. 

So, I would really challenge many of them to pay their graduated tax, which is the basic tax, in Kampala - (interjection). That is not a challenge to be responded to, but it is a challenge for them to check themselves.  When I raise that, everybody would like to jump on me, but I am really saying it because I know all of them would like to pay tax where their constituencies are, and this is one of the relatively highest paid set of population.

THE SPEAKER: For instance, I pay two graduated taxes, in Kampala and in my area in Masaka. I do certainly pay two.

MRS. ZZIWA: I salute you, Mr. Speaker, and I would urge others to do the same. But in the same vein, I would like to say that the Members or people who reside in Kampala should take the responsibility of looking at the city also as part of their city–(Interjections)- I can substantiate because I am being attacked.  

I beg for two minutes. I want to conclude by saying that the challenges of Kampala are structural, legal, and also managerial. And I want to say that when the Committee is dealing with these problems, it should look critically into the management of Kampala City Council. Even though the resources Kampala City Council has are not adequate, what it has should be utilized optimally. I think there is gross mis-management in terms of the resources that the council has.  

Under the structural improvement of Kampala, we need a law.  Let us have this law in place. Let us not hide behind and say that under this new Local Governments Act, Kampala City Council can be a city, a district and an urban authority.  You cannot equate Kampala, for instance, to Tororo Municipality. It would not be fair. This is the city for Uganda. Let us have a city as a city, and let us have contributions coming from Government in that regard.

Finally, I want to also call upon the Government to review the policy of segregating the utilities, and it condenses the arrangement which once was there; the arrangement of managing these utilities as a city, together. I think that will reduce the problems, which now are being looked at like water, electricity and so on. I want to call upon the committee to look at this issue critically. I want to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: From this side, let us end with the hon. Member from Soroti Municipality. Let him give his experience, and then we move to this other side because only three people have contributed on this side.

Capt. Mike MUKULA (Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like first of all to thank the Mover of the Motion, hon. Buturo, and all the Members who have been able to effectively contribute to this Motion.  

I have been a chairman of LC I. I have risen from chairman LC I in Kampala District, Nakawa Division, to a position of being a vice-chairman in Nakawa Division, to the position of a councilor in Kampala City Council. I have also been a chairman of Uganda Importers, Exporters and Traders Association for five years –(Interjection)- Mr. Speaker, I wish to be protected from hon. Awori.  

To get to the point and be serious about the matters, it is important that hon. Members get to understand that this Motion, which has been brought here, I am very sure has been brought in good spirit. And as hon. Okulo Epak has been able to articulate, I think we need to go by that spirit, and not by political emotions. We are planning for this country, we are articulating for this country, and we would like to look at the vision of this country.  

It is important that we understand very clearly that this city that we are talking about was initially planned for 100,000 people. This was the first plan in 1951, and it was implemented in 1956. You would also wish to note that there has been the Greater Kampala Plan of 1968. Then you would also want to know that in 1972, there was a Kampala Master Plan. In 1994, we had a structural plan, which was then put in place in the city here, and most of the plans, including the 1994 plan, have not been implemented.  

The increase of the population has been 2900 percent, from the original plan of the city. That is 2900 percent in terms of the population growth. I also want you to understand that the initial plan of this city was drawn to cater for 50,000 vehicles by 1969. Today, when you look at the number of vehicles in this city, they have increased tremendously.  

I want us to understand and appreciate the capacity of the city council. What capacity does Kampala City Council have to meet these challenges? That is what the concern of this House should be. 

I am more concerned, first of all, about the area of garbage. I would like hon. Members to understand that most people in this city consume a lot of Matooke. When you look at the number of vehicles that come from the West every morning, and then you look at the number of vehicles that Kampala City Council has to empty this garbage, they are not equal. 

I would also want you to understand that as we talk now, - and this is a health concern - the residents in this great city of ours use kaveera. Poor sanitation is the issue. It is very unfortunate, but if you went round to most parts of this city, you would be shocked! And that is why it is important that we understand that this Motion is brought in good spirit.  

I would also want you to get to understand, if you went to Ggaba, where the fish-landing port is, where hon. Mabikke comes from, you would be shocked to see the way our fish, which is being brought to this town, is being handled. You would be shocked; you would hardly touch any single fish that is being brought to this place!  

I also want you to understand that this city of ours, Kampala City, does not have a single cemetery for the –(Interruption).

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, I am aware that Government is doing everything possible to ensure that fish is caught in the most efficient and most hygienic manner. And it is because of this that the fish ban, which had been slapped on Uganda, was removed. Is it in order for the hon. Minister, and the Minister of Health of all people, to allege that the fish, which is now being caught in Uganda, is being done in the most unhygienic manner? Is he in order? Is he de-campaigning the market?  

THE SPEAKER: Well, what you have stated, in as far as Government is concerned, is a general statement about Government policy. But I think from the contribution of the Member, he is talking about a specific place where he has been and he thinks that it does not measure up.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for that wise ruling, and I think my Colleague might have misunderstood me. I want you to understand that the landing sites for our fish that is being used for consumption and for export purposes meet the international standards and the EU standards. I want that to be clear. I was talking about a specific point.  

It is against this background that I would want us to appreciate, as hon. Aggrey Awori did state earlier on, that the city here is being controlled by certain groups that have certain political thinking, but it is important that you also note that we are now moving towards the local government elections. No wonder I can see that there is a charged reaction by some quarters of our Colleagues here!  

But needless to say, I would like to very seriously urge the House, while seconding hon. Babu’s Motion, to accept that this matter be referred to the Local Government Sessional Committee, so that a more elaborate, a more clear and scientific document or paper is brought before this House. We can then be able to address the issues pertaining and obtaining in this city. It is important that all of us collectively rise to ensure that we have a city that can be able to meet the aspirations and the vision that this country has.  

On many occasions, His Excellency the President has complained about the state of affairs in this city, and it is important that one hon. Colleague has brought this Motion. I would like to urge hon. Members to agree that the Committee takes this matter very seriously, brings it before this House, so that we can be able to exhaustively debate this matter for the good of this Kampala City of ours.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know we have a Motion by hon. Nsaba Buturo. He wanted to refer this matter to a Select Committee, but then there was an amendment by hon. Babu, on the same Motion, to refer the matter to the appropriate Committee of Parliament. This means that either way, whether through a Select Committee or to through a Sessional Committee, we have to debate this matter again.  This is my understanding.  So, I think we should not have a very extensive debate. 

But let me give opportunity to Members on my left, then we can pronounce ourselves on the two Motions. Since hon. Byenkya was named as having seconded this Motion, I will give her an opportunity to say something.

Mrs. Beatrice BYENKYA (Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your kind consideration. I happen to be the chairperson of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government.  

I should say on the onset that the Motion by my Colleague, Nsaba Buturo, is a very good one. And when we did meet with KCC yesterday, they were also in agreement that it is a very good one. But after the interaction we had with them, there were some issues that did not really fall under KCC.  The interfacing was good, but we required more time. Therefore, I did approach my Colleague after the meeting.  But on coming to the House, I saw that the Motion had been tabled for yesterday instead of tomorrow as earlier on scheduled.  

I did tell him what the Committee had decided, that we stay this Motion for some time until more interaction takes place, but he went ahead and said it should be tabled. As a chairperson, I am glad that the job is coming to me, because as a leader of my Committee, I can say we are a very serious Committee. We have the capacity to handle it, and it shall be expedited well and in the way you wish us to.  

The KCC matter did come to the Committee of Local Government. I happened to have been a Member of the Committee of Local Government and Public Service in the Sixth Parliament, and it did come to us in the middle of 2000.  They came to us with their various problems and their various aspects. 

Why did they come to us at such a time?  They said that their operations were being handicapped by the Local Governments Act. The way everything is being arranged is being handicapped by the Local Governments Act. And as I talk now, KCC is preparing a Bill, which will make KCC a capital city. The Local Governments Act makes KCC a district and yet we the onlookers expect it to behave and operate as a capital city, two things that cannot tally.  Therefore, a Bill is on the way. 

On interaction with them, we saw it fit to give them more time and more interactions with the Committee. But then, as all those arrangements are taking place, what does Government do or what does KCC do to address some of the problems that are there?  

Therefore, I do not have much to say. I also recommend that the motion does come to our Committee. It will still be Dr. Nsaba Buturo’s motion. It will really help us to bring Kampala City to a truly modern capital city as we wish it. Therefore, I implore Members to support the motion brought by hon. Capt. Francis Babu. I have already assured you of how serious my Committee is, and everything shall be fine. We shall handle the matter accordingly.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Since you have been hearing many threats of hunger strikes from honourable Member for Lubaga South, I think he should say something about it.
  
Mr. KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Much obliged, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion in its totality as moved by Dr. Nsaba Buturo and as amended by hon. Babu –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, you have only five minutes.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Yes, Mr. Speaker. I think time has come for us to call a spade a spade. 

My impression of this motion is as follows: I support the view that both KCC and the Central Government have ignored the image of Kampala. So much so that many of us are wondering whether the Government is serious enough to live to see a city of history, a city of commerce languish the way it is languishing. 

I represent one of the constituencies in Kampala and those of you who have moved on the road called Wankulukuku will be surprised to spot one area called Lake Lukyamuzi –(Laughter). The road is in Kampala, and surrounding it are so many factories, companies contributing a lot towards Uganda Revenue Authority. At one time I nearly commanded those people not to pay any taxes but I had reservations. 

So, for a motion to be brought in good faith in the way it has been brought up, carries a lot of my support because I am one of the victims of circumstances over road repairs in Kampala.  And mark you, I am a multi-partist, but I have come up to call a spade a spade because I am also terrorized within my own empire –(Laughter).

Mr. Speaker, I am going to confine myself on the dynamics of environmental concerns as articulated by the mover of the motion.  I do agree with the mover of the motion but issues related to plastic bags littering everywhere are a shame!  The Government of Uganda is responsible for not having acted over the menace of Kaveera. Since the Sixth Parliament, we have been promised a White Paper to come up and address the scenario of Kaveera, but up to the Seventh Parliament, there is no response.  I feel like taking over the Ministry in charge of the Environment so that I do something about this –(Laughter). 

The other point of concern is related to poor and deteriorating infrastructure. It is a shame that the Government of Uganda would go to the extent of attracting a housing scheme in Namuwongo, which is not associated to the sustainable sewerage system.  As we speak now, so many houses in the estate depend on septic tanks. What sort of planning is that, carried out by the entire Central Government? Why do you apportion blame on KCC?  The blame should first go to the Central Government. It should know what it is doing. The program attracted does not measure up to the international standards, then how do you plan the city and develop the city? 

I do not agree that what we have is autonomy in Kampala; we lack that autonomy in serious sensation. We require a Federo system so that the District of Kampala is within a state, given the powers to act sustainably and independently.  But as we speak now, what if the City Council resolves to do something? The hon. Minister in charge of Local Government will come up and intercept it because he still has the powers!

Finally, in regard to planning, I feel like shading tears over planning in Kampala. In Kampala, for example, everywhere there is space there must be a house.  I took trouble to fight for the protection of the Golf Course and I was nearly killed by certain elements. I want to warn the Central Government and KCC that not all about development is about construction. 

THE SPEAKER: Time is up for you unfortunately –(Interruption)

Mr. Emmanuel DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Lukyamuzi for giving way. The information I want to give to hon. Members of the House is that what is happening in Kampala could be an eye opener, which should make the House and the relevant Committee to find out whether our authorities, Municipalities, Town Councils and cities are able to manage their own affairs without the intervention of the Central Government.  What we are talking about Kampala right now, if you went to Masaka Municipality, the situation is not any better; if you went to Mbale Municipality the situation is not any better, and if you went to Jinja and Tororo the situation is even worse! 

So, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, when this matter is finally before the relevant Committee, the issue should be expanded to address whether our authorities are able to manage their own affairs without the intervention of Central Government.  I thank you very much.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: So, finally, Mr. Speaker, the point I wanted to articulate is that we require an appropriate Law, which will ensure that KCC operates independently.  As I speak now, the Central Government is interfering in every development plan of Kampala.  A case in point is the space where there is a five star hotel germinating. The City Square is also threatened on the imagination of the Central Government vis-a-vis other forces.  I thank you.

MR. JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want first of all to thank hon. Nsaba Buturo for having introduced this motion. Secondly, I would like to support the motion that the Committee on Local Government studies this matter. 

Mr. Speaker, I have heard Members, especially those from Kampala, advocating for a Law for Kampala.  We heard it from hon. Babu, we heard it from hon. Zziwa and we have just heard it from hon. Lukyamuzi.  I do not think that Kampala City Council lacks Laws; the biggest problem with Kampala City Council, and maybe with other urban authorities, is the total failure, ineffectiveness of these authorities in implementing the Laws that are there.  

If you go round Kampala, you will find that people are constructing walls in road reserves when all the Kampala people are looking.  If you go to a road called Golf Course road, there is somebody who squeezed a house in a plot, which I am sure was not intended to have a house. And what he did was to build a wall around this house so high - and by the way, it covers more than half of the road reserve! Do they need a Law to tell them that people do not build in road reserves? They do not!  

Mr. Speaker, we have been told that buildings exceeding three storeys must have lifts. Today you see buildings upon buildings, upon buildings. There is Crane Bank, and there are old buildings where you see storeys going up and down. They get the authority to do this from Kampala City Council.  Do they need a Law to tell them that there is already an existing Law which requires you to have a lift if you are going to build beyond three storeys? They do not need a Law! 

We have a Law prohibiting people to construct on wetlands. If you go round Kampala area, you find factories, you find residential houses, you find schools, you find latrines, and you find all sorts of things being constructed on reserves. Do they need a Law to say that it is wrong to build on wetlands? The law is already in the books! Do they have to guard the so-called Kampala Act? They do not have that one. There are failures in implementing what the laws are saying at the present time.

Hon. Zziwa mentioned this building, which was squeezed on a very small plot. It is not the only building. There are many buildings in that area, including the headquarters of UNDP. I understand in certain parts of Kampala you cannot build below a certain height, but because of the corruption residing in the officials of Kampala, they give permission to people to construct buildings totally in violation of the building laws. Do they need a Kampala Act even to implement that one?  They do not!

The list of violations of the existing laws by Kampala City Council is so long that honestly, I hope that when this Committee comes to look at what is going on in Kampala City, they will also look at the management of Kampala City. Probably we need an overhaul of the entire management of our beloved capital, Kampala. I think this is very important.  

For us, disabled people, we are very concerned about certain things that happen in Kampala. One of them, the pavements, are so broken. Manholes are gaping, and yet a blind person should ordinarily be able to move around the town with his white cane. But because these manholes are all over the place and are broken, we have accidents of people falling into these holes.

When you go round the shopping areas of Kampala, you find that the hawkers have occupied every single space on the pavements and on the streets, and a disabled person who wants to do shopping has a problem. There is no space for him to move around and exercise his rights to go and carry out commercial activities and shop in the centre.  They do not need the Kampala Act to enforce this!  

I would like to support the idea of having this Committee to look specifically at Kampala, and maybe other urban authorities, but I think the most important thing they should look at is the way Kampala City Council is being so poorly managed because of corruption. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, since we have said that this matter will come again after either a Select Committee or the Sessional Committee has considered it in details, I think it is really time to pronounce ourselves on the Motion. We have the original Motion, but then we have a Motion amending the original Motion. 

We start with hon. Babu’s Motion, which is to the effect that we refer this matter to the appropriate Committee to study it in detail, make a report, and see how we proceed. So, we start with that. I will put the question to hon. Babu’s Motion amending hon. Nsaba-Buturo’s Motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, it means that this matter raised by hon. Nsaba Buturo and Rev. Bakaluba will be considered by the appropriate Committee, and they will give a report here, which we shall debate. This is the decision of the House. 

This brings us to the end of today’s Business.  House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 6th December, 2001 at 2.00 p.m.)
