Wednesday, 7 December 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

Oaths were administered to:

1.	Hon. Slyvester Wanjusi Wasieba
2.	Hon. Janat Mukwaya
3.	Hon. Kezimbira Muyingo Lawrence
4.	Hon. Kasujja Aziz
5.	Hon. Owiny Dollo
6.	Hon. Lagada Beatrice

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members I wish to welcome you back from your short recess which I hope you have used fruitfully in mobilizing the population and explain to the masses a difference between Federal and Decentralisation. (Laughter) We are meeting to consider some serious business and I urge you to devote your time to the business before the House so that we do not again experience problems of lack of quorum or walking out has, has been the fashion in another forum somewhere else.  (Laughter) As you will notice there some changes in your sitting arrangement with some hon. Members exchanging their Seats, I wish to congratulate those who have been elevated to the Front Benches and appeal to those who have gone a step or two backwards not to lose hope and continue to serve the Council as diligently has they have always been. I once again welcome you all. I thank you. (Applause)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE MINISTER OF CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman and hon. Members I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Constituent Assembly Amendment No.2 Statute 1994 be Read the First Time.

MOTION

THE MINISTER OF CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to move a Motion under Rule No.85 and Rule 55(2) for the suspension of Rule No.55 Sub-Rule (1) which required the elapse of 14 days before a Bill is Read a Second Time so that this Bill can be Read a Second Time today.  Mr Chairman, in support of this Motion I want to advance the following reasons; Mr Chairman this is a very -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: It is already seconded by hon. Kanyeihamba.  Move ahead.

MR KAVUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I have two reasons in support of this Motion, the first one is, that the Bill before us is a matter that calls for agent consideration and disposal by this hon. House the situation being that unless this Bill is passed into Law by Monday the 11th of this month the life span of the Constituent Assembly shall have expired and it will therefore, be illegal for that Assembly to continue doing any work.  

I am aware of the requirement of the 14 days but since this is a very, very, short I think it is a two section Bill a very clear Bill I foresee no problem and I do not think we shall take any hon. Member by surprise because of the size of the Bill and the matters considered there in are very well known by all Members.  I beg to move Mr Chairman.  I am asking your permission, Sir, that the Bill be Read the Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS

SECOND READING
THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY AMENDMENT NO.2 BILL 1994



THE MINISTER OF CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma) Mr Chairman, the Bill now before this august House -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. Proceed.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, the object of this short Bill is to mend the Constituent Assembly Statute 1994 so as to empower the Minister responsible for Constitution Affairs to extend the life of the Constituent Assembly whenever it becomes necessary for the maximum period of six months after the expression in December of the current necessary since it has become very clear that the CA cannot by any means complete by the assignment this hon. House gave to it of debating and promulgate a constitution within the few days that remain to the expiry of it’s life span which is on the 11th of this month.  

The maximum period of 6 months of extension being introduced is being introduced from December 1994 by the amendment will not include any period when the Assembly is officially on recess.  With your permission, Sir, I will make the following remarks, Members of this august Assembly hon. Members will recall that when we sat here and passed the Constituent Assembly Statute sometime back, we did not have the benefit of any Constitution Making and the debating of such an important document. (Applause) 

I am aware studies were conclusively carried out by the people who were entrusted with this work and the Ghanaian experience was thoroughly studied and it was used as the experience that would help us to frame our law and make provision for deliberations of the CA 

Unfortunately, as we all know hon. Members know experiences in Ghana and those of us in Uganda are not exactly the same.  So, I think we had that disadvantage of having no experience to go by, and we did not have even guidance as to what laws of procedure are going to be applied - I know the statute applied the rules of the NRC but soon after the convening of the CA It was deemed appropriate to alter those rules accordance with the statute so as to accommodate the requirement of handling thee business of the CA But because we did not have that experience either it was not easy to determine with any degree of procession as to what time would be required to complete the assignment. 

Originally the programme of work was to include four main Sessions, there was to be a preliminary then there was to be a general debate Session then the would be a consideration stage Session, and the fourth Session would be the consideration enactment and promulgation of the Constitution Session. All these were supposed to be completed within the 7 months that had been provided by the Law.  

When it came to actual working it provided that maybe, the Assembly - the time that had been allocated to the Assembly was not commiserate with the task that was assign to it.  

There were also other problems some of them logistical so that again time was not in putting in place the necessary logistics so as to facilitate the smooth handling of the business of the Constituent Assembly.  I will inform hon. Members that it had been anticipated that probably one of the rooms in this building would be repaired and could be in place with all the necessary facilities by the time the CA starts, but somehow that did not happen and a decision had to be taken rather at a late state that the Assembly would initially sit at the Conference Centre, but even then the Conference Centre did not have all the required logistics. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR KAVUMA: So, Mr Chairman, again time was lost in trying to put together and the sitting arrangements that were required for the Constituent Assembly to continue with its work.  When we sat here and debated the Constituent Assembly Statute, where was a hope that during the time which the CA would be working the legislative programme of our country will be a little bit on the lower side so that probably there would be a lot of time to be spent in the CA while the House here was probably on the recess. This became very important because as Members will recall 102 hon. Members of this House are also Members of the Constituent Assembly, if the two Houses were to meet concurrently, there would be a problem of quorum and actually this happened for sometime.  

So, it became necessary since duty requires, national obligations required that NRC continues with its busy legislative programme we had at the CA to adjust so that we lost the afternoons of Tuesday, Wednesdays, and Thursday when the NRCs Meetings which had been hoped that they would be utilised by the Constituent Assembly so that constituted another problem which was to be reflected in the inability by the CA to complete its work.  

There were other problems like sitting arrangement at the Conference Centre.  The Conference Centre being a business undertaking we found that certain bookings had been made earlier which could not be rescheduled some of these Conferences are International and the rest of it, so that at times we find there is no sufficient room for all the various committees of the Assembly to meet and this resulted into some committees working for two mornings in a week again reflecting - on the ability by the Assembly to complete its work in the anticipated time. 

Even when the work of the Constituent Assembly started there was a lot of hope that many of the issues to be debated were go to b very non-controversial but the situation on the ground had proved that almost all matters in the draft are potentially controversial and as a result more time has been required to debate these salaries so that consensus images and a decision reached after a thorough treatment of whatever chapters and clauses are put and enshrined the draft.  There had been non-contentious business the assumption was that we should be able to move very fast and complete the assignment in a shorter period than we must now handle and exercise into.  (Interruption) 

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of order. 

THE CHAIRMAN: He is out of order. Proceed, please.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, as a result of what we have briefly stated above the following situation now obtains the Constitution draft has a total of 20 chapters together with 4 schedules, it was hoped by that within the first three months all these chapters will have gone at least through the considerations stage which we said was the second stage but as of now very few days to be expiry of the life span of the Assembly only about 50 per cent of the work has gone through that stage and another 50 still lies in balance of course there other stages to accomplished.  

So, hon. Members this is the magnitude of the problem we have and this is why it has become necessary that wee come to the august House which has the authority to grant extension to the Constituent Assembly to adjust the provision of the Constituent Assembly Statute so that more time is granted to the Constituent Assembly to accomplish the job assigned to it.  

How have we come to this figure of 6 month, wee have taken into account the procedural requirements as stated by the rules of procedure governing the proceeding of the CA We have also considered the possibility of the Assembly voting on a matter that could turn out to bee contentious and the rules require at least a break of 7 days. 

We have also considered that now than at the beginning of the work of the Constituent Assembly the Assembly has gained some experience and it is possible to move a little faster than it used.  I am saying this because, when we go through the amount of work remaining it would appear to be slightly more than what has been so far completed but we are hoping that because of the gained experience and the interaction between the Members and the anticipated improvements on the methods of work these six months will be good enough for the Constituent Assembly to complete its work. 

We are requesting the National Resistance Council that the days that the Constituent Assembly may be on recess should now not be computed within the time that is stipulated by the law to determine the life span of the Constituent Assembly. We are doing so - arising from the problems I have analyzed above a total of close to six weeks was lost but because the law did not specifically provide that time spend on recess would not be computed as part of the life span of the Assembly those six weeks could not be utilized.  

I want to briefly say that, measures have been taken to ensure I talked approving the methods of work, measures have been taken to make sure that the Assembly now move with a faster speed than it has been doing.  For instance, a deadline has been set for all the committees handling various subjects of the Constitution Draft to complete their work by the 31st January 1995.  

Negotiations are also underway I am reliably informed between the Constituent Assembly authorities and the authorities at this end to see whether when we have problems of room facilities for accommodation for meetings we can use some of the committee rooms attached to this complex here.  

But all in all really, I also see the requirement of these six months to be a very big challenge to Members of the Constituent Assembly to know that a deadline has been set and it must be made so, even if it will require Members to sit for a longer hours or even to utilize the time that is normally left for Saturdays and Sundays, they will have no alternative but exactly to do that.  I would like to have the - I am not a soldier but if you are to be fighting and you decide to attack an enemy and you want to benefit from the couple of darkness by all means you must move before day break, but if the day breaks and you have not achieved your purpose or you are just arriving definitely the reception from the enemy could be very different.  

So, I am saying, I think by authorizing this as I will plead for this House to do, the NRC will be saying now you must do whatever you must in order to achieve the deadline I would not be a party to seeing anybody from Government that we have had to move this Bill with a lot of reluctance because we would have wanted that everything was completed and then the deadline is made so that by January 26th, 1995 everything is set for a desired transfer of power under the new constitution from one state leaders of Uganda to another state that will have been elected under the new constitution.  Mr Chairman, that because we cannot abdicate our responsibility, it is necessary that we seek this permission from this hon. House to grant this extension, so that everything is done to ensure that there would be orderly transfer of power under a new Constitution to avoid any power vacuum or even any confusion that may arise.  

I did not take to much time with the Bill itself because I find, it is really very precise, with two amendments just to effect - an amendment just to effectively provided for six months for the CA and to count the days of recess outside the period that is stipulated in law as the life span of the Constituent Assembly.  I beg to move, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, open for discussion. 

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA (Rubanda County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr Chairman, I stand to support this Bill for the extension of the CA In doing so beside the points made by the hon. Minister with reasons why this has become necessary, I want to see the following I think the analysis of the work we have done so far and the technicalities of making the Constitution which we have confronted have meant that when we pass the Constituent Assembly Statute some time ago we underestimated the time necessary for making the new Constitution for the country like Uganda. 

I want to assure the hon. Members of the House that the CA in its various meetings and in select committees have been earnestly serious in doing its work.  But I want to give an indication of the enormity of the work they have to deal with, I happen to be luckily that I was elected the chairman of the Legal and Drafting Committee and in that role our committee which consisted of 16 Members we have had to deal with a number of amendments proposed on each article in the draft constitution.  

I want to assure you that a number of them we have had to give sometime with as many as over hundred proposed amendments and proposed by something like may be 50 or 60 Members of the CA And that is how it should be, because these Members do represent constituencies, they represent different interests including different political spectrum of Uganda and it would be expected of them to advance to those views representing their constituencies and various political movements to the base of their ability and to be given the time in which to make that proposals.  I believe that the extension of the CA for another six months will go a long way to enable the CA to complete its work.  But, my limited experience in constitution making would indicate that I do not want to be as - as the Minister himself, but that after those six months we shall eventually finish and I am inviting a question that maybe, the government may have to consider extending the NRC itself in order to make sure that should any other extension be required we may have to come back here rather than do anything else.  But that is a different matter, but I am sure that at one time or another Government will have to address this particular question. 

The reason I am saying that, Sir, is that there are certain provisions in the Draft Constitution and the amendment we are passing which will require enactment and consideration by Parliament and -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from experience of Constitution making, hon. Kanyeihamba is aware that when an issue involves both the Constitution and a statutory enactment the constitutional issue supersedes the Parliamentary enactment. Therefore, I am seeking for clarification as to how he can advise us that we first amend a statutory enactment before we amend a Constitutional problem. (Applause) 

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, in response to that question by an hon. Member I want to repeat what the Minister for Constitutional Affairs has said, that the life span of the CA comes to an end next week I think on the 11th, of December.  On the other hand the Parliament or the NRC life does not expire until the 26th of January, 1995, therefore, there is a lot of life in the NRC.  (Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  To continue with it’s normal business of legislating and making sure that this country is properly and fairly governed.  That is why I said, that the question whether or not the NRC should be considered for extension.  At the moment, I think it is imperative for this country and for this NRC to make sure that the process of constitution making are not interrupted by anything else, I think we would be misunderstood not only by our own people but the world at large, if this process were to be stopped because the questions as what, or what not happened to the legislature was to the paramount in this matter.  

As I have said, there is no problem for concern at the moment and I sure this matter can be discussed with Members here after or within this debate.  What I am trying to do, Sir, is to justify why it is absolutely necessary that we extend the CA I think that it is important to know that apart from the procedural problems that the hon. Minister pointed out we have had a problem of logistics in the sense that as I have said for lack of rooms it has been necessary for example for some committee to be suspended while others continue with work. Similarly the business of Uganda and its relationship with other countries have not stopped, we have had international conferences and seminars which have had to sue the conference centre consequently on those occasions few committees have met and transacted the business than had been anticipated.  

So, for all these reasons, and for the reasons very ably advanced by the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, I beg this House not to prolong this issue but really to extend the CA so the process of making our new constitution should go on. This experience is new to Uganda, we have never before had this kind of process that is why I said at the beginning we have grossly under-estimated the kind of work that we had.  Looking at other countries which have made constitutions through Constituent Assemblies like ours or even through Parliament the period which have been computerised has extended between one year in some cases two years and, therefore, it would have been a sort of miracle if we had finished this constitution in only seven months. Therefore, I beg Members to feel that their conscious is clear and their judgement is correct when they accept the Bill proposed by the Minister that we extend the CA and, therefore, do not interrupt the processes of making for new Constitution which would be promulgated.  I thank you Mr Chairman. 

MRS NKURUKENDA (Women Representative Masindi): Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill, but before I support the Bill, I would like to ask for your indulgence so that I can make a statement it is a congratulation message to Her Excellency, Dr Speciosa Kazibwe. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  

We, the women Members of the NRC on our own behalf and on behalf of the entire women population of Uganda and their husbands protect me, Mr Chairman. (Laughter) We wish to register our pro-found thanks and appreciation to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for appointing one of us in the person of Her Excellency Dr Speciosa Kazibwe to the High Office of the Vice President as the first woman Vice President not only in Uganda but the entire Continent of Africa. (Applause)

We wish to congratulate her on her great achievement in recognition of her outstanding leadership qualities her appointment to this office signifies a realization that women can perform as well as men if not better.  This is also a challenge to all the women politician both in this House and outside to work hard towards this emancipation of women.  We wish to pledge our solidarity with our newly appointed first women Vice President and assure her that we shall give support in her new assignment, we wish her well and success. (Applause) I am doing this on behalf of the Ugandan Women Parliamentary group.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

Back to the Bill, allow me to make a few general comments.  This House is aware of the importance of a Constitution which will stand test time and in that vein I would like to support the extension with few cushions already. We have heard the Minister saying that he will not need any more than exactly six months to give us a constitution which I have described just now.  

Now, I just hope that this time factor has been thoroughly worked out this time.  Because, we cannot afford to make mistakes again, we need time because the constitution which we are making does not measure, what I mean to say, it is better we give enough time to the making of this Constitution rather than rush it and not do a good job. 

So, I would like to cushion the Minister in charge that maybe, it would be better for him this time to ask for more time which he thinks will be enough rather than come back as hon. Kanyeihamba is suggesting to ask for another extension. Because, I am very much aware the population will not accept that kind of thing, they will not appreciate another extension so we better get the timing right this time, time which is enough to do a good job and have it done.  So, with those few words I beg to support.  Thank you.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI (Lira Municipality, Lira): Mr Chairman, I bag to oppose the Motion on the following grounds, Mr Chairman I was not impressed with the reasons advanced by the Mover the hon. Minister responsible for Constitution when he said, that they could not move faster because at the beginning there was no proper place, we are not taking into consideration the time that there was no proper place for meeting we are taking into consideration the time that they have been in that House.  The minimum that this House gave to that House was four months, the maximum that this House gave to that House was seven months, it annoys me, seeing that the first few months from the time these people were engaged in this very difficult task was spent on other businesses. (Applause) 

As we know they are delegates and they are delegates, the second was taken considering what they should eat while they are in that House. (Laughter) The third was taken walking out, signing and walking out.  It is - the other time we were here people were asking for extension.  Some people here said we needed first of all to go and consult before we consider any form of extension.  My question to this hon. Delegates as they want to be called is whether they have gone and they have consulted and those people have told them that, yes, go back to the House and ask them to extend your life span. (Laughter)  

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, for a very long time -(Interruption)
MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Point of information. Thank you Mr Chairman. I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that as far as I am concerned I have told the people whom I represent that it will not be possible to finish the constitution in the time given and they have told me that what they want is a good document regardless of time taken. (Applause) 

Therefore, and I have asked some other Members my colleagues in the Assembly who have also said the same, therefore, I see the point is that are we going to make a constitution which is suitable for Uganda for now and for the future or are we going to count time spent on it.  Mr Chairman, thank you.

MRS KIRYAMPAWO:  Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the entire House that NRC did not ask for the extension but we were requested to extend by Government but we did not ask CA is asking for extension.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I was partly convinced by the first information given, distortion of the second information; because it is this House that legislates and it is therefore, not to be left to the executive arm of government, it is Parliament that extends its life.  

So, I would like always when I speak here I am very open, first of all, if I may recall, Paul in his second letter to the Thessalonians Chapter 3, verse 10, it is saying that; “he who does not work should not eat.”  Why are these people signing and no elaborating but getting allowances, they are not working but eating from that House.  So, Mr Chairman -(interruption)

MRS KALEMA:  Point of order.  Thank you Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member who is a man of God in order to make such a blank statement and generalise saying very, very few people are involved in this kind of promise.  It is only a few Members. (Laughter and Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MRS KALEMA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I continue to inform the hon. Member  -(Interjections) Sorry, is the hon. Member in order to make such a wrong statement, when h very well know that, Members involve and these people are season people. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, hon. Members.  Hon. Members, I do not really know what has happened to you; because have changed completely. I am surprised! (Laughter) Hon. Members, let us move slowly, please.

MR ONGORA ATWAI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for your protection.  Still in the Bill. It is stated that, we extend by six months, not counting the time when these people are on recess.  Suppose they went on recess for six months? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order.  Continue hon. Reverend, please.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Here, it is throughout the law that we are trying to make, into what we would call, conditional law.  A law must be acting, it must be something which is definite; which can guide people.  And in this case, if we remember the history of the American Constitution, we are told and we read that, they did that work in four months, with a break of some ten days.  And here we re, asking for extra time and also hiding other areas in the Bill.  I would like the hon. Paulino Marwas.  When he said that, in a constitution, the lifetime of this Parliament expires on the 25th of January.  And it would therefore be proper, if the first work done was to adjust that one which is being circulated just now. (Applause) So that, after we have deliberated on this, then we would determine.  Because if I were opposed into saying that, we extend, as from this one, I can only extend it to January 23rd, so that, they do not go beyond.  But if these ones are adjusted -(Laughter) but if these were given, Mr Chairman, I would want to see -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, please.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: I would like us to resolve, and polish our language unlike what I read here, which is a cutting from The New Vision, that we do a lot of rubber stamping here in this House.  This uttering is made by non other than the very people who were asking us to rubber stamp.  With this, I wish to sit with this serious suggestion that, this Bill be withdrawn and this one looked first, then I will have time to support. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR MAGEZI (Jinja Municipality):  Thank you, very much Mr Chairman.  I will start my remarks by congratulating Her Excellency Dr Specioza Kazibwe Wandira upon her election to that high office, and indeed to all our Colleagues, former Backbenchers and former Members of the CA who have been elected to these high offices.  I assure you all, you look so attracting together for the good of our mother Uganda. (Applause) 

I will add that, even those who have had their places taken over, we thank you for the good work done and we are with you in the struggle to improve Uganda.  (Applause) 

Turning to the business of today, I have a few observations to make.  The first one being that, we have mad a few mistakes within the National Resistance Movement Government.  As a pillar of government, pillar in the National Resistance Council, I cannot fail to recognise that, our performance has been evident to show areas of lacking.  

Timing can cause crisis, and right now, I think we re in a crisis.  Hardly, three weeks ago, we went on recess.  There was this very serious matter which was known by the Leader of Government Business, by the government itself.  It was apparent that, there was no way the CA. could have finished its work with the time it was given.  Nothing was done until four days, five days before the expiry of this period.  You cannot stop completely, that may be there was a hidden agenda. Because there is nothing speculative about this extension.  In fact to me, irrespective that I am a Member of CA, I see that, there is need for this extension.  But it should be difficult to explain, because they will say, but why have they rushed to this matter?  What did you put before?  Is it not really Legal Notice No.1 which first? How can we extend the life of the CA irrespective of Legal Notice No.1, unless we are going to succumb to the acquisition that, we are indeed rubber stamp, so as to automatically assume we are going to extend the life of the Government of the Republic of Uganda.  You know what happened when we heard that extension, in 1989; it took a lot of debate, reasons were advanced, goals were set, what we expected to achieve.  And the reasons for the extension was developed.  Still people keep on complaining that people were being manoeuvred.  

There is a feeling in the country side that we want to entrench ourselves - persons in the administration of this country, irrespective of free and fair elections.  And, therefore, to try and counteract that, on one hand, and yet we get this sort of thing pumped in.  I agree, we cannot determine the recess in the CA, because we ourselves here, we passed the Statute.  Which means that, whenever there is a point of contention in the CA, they must go for recess.  

Now, nobody knows how many contentious issues they will be in the CA.  So, we cannot determine the recess which will arise out of contentious issues in the CA.  Consequently, we are leaving it open ended and I cannot see the Minister guaranteeing that, within six months the constitution will be there.  Because he does not know how many contentious issues there will be.  Consequently, I think we need to first of all, realistically look at Legal Notice No.1, and say; by how much do you think we can extend the life of government? Then we look at, what do we need in place? One of them, we must have a new constitution. That is, I think number one.  When the new constitution is promulgated, we must have the Electoral Commission which is to prepare for the election.  Updating the register, and the rest of it.  Also, we have to decide on some matters like the method of election of some pressure groups, interest groups will bring to the new constitution.  These are matters, which have got to be looked at after the constitution has been put in place.  Because nobody will know how many Women Representatives we shall have, and how are they going to be elected? Until the Constitution has actually been passed and it is law.  

So, even after the Constitution has been passed, there is a period, which has got to be taken.  And you are going to have elections in this country without a government in place.  So, the new government can only takeover. Therefore, the Interim Administration can only end after the general elections; in 1995 if they will take place in that time.  I would add, hon. Members; that notwithstanding the shortcomings of the CA, the repercussions of not granting this extension are unimaginable.

And by the 11th if the CA is not extended, there will be no CA. Even if you pass the law on the 12th, there will be no CA. So, we must go back and have fresh elections for CA. (Laughter) I do not see any solution.  So, I think, much as there is this position, our hands are really tied.  And for lack of better works, I can only say, that we have no alternative, but to extend the life of the CA. However, my point of what comes first, is legitimate.  And I would like the Minister responsible for Constitutional Affairs to even highlight to the country assuming the extension when it is moved as we expect for six months; how much money is going to be revolved? Because we will even need, I think, Supplementary Estimates and this was not budgeted for.  And people are anxious to know.  

In my concluding remark, I will say this; that we need to re-visit the Order Paper.  And I would urge the Minister, to let us put the horse before the cat.  Let us get Legal Notice No.1 which is the constitution issue amended, and we follow up immediately; even if it means working on Saturday and Sunday, to pass the Constituent Assembly Amendment.  I thank you very much Mr Chairman. (Applause)

MR WAPAKHABULO (Mbale Municipality): Thank you Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to make  contribution to the debate on this Bill.  I do so, in my capacity as Member of the NRC for Mbale Municipality.  But, of course, by virtue of my other appropriations, I must be reasonably knowledgeable or sufficiently knowledgeable to be able to assist in some areas if I may to clarify a point here or there, given that; the minister has ably presented the Bill to the House. There has been in my view a concern as to what comes first.  Whether we should proceed by way of extending or considering the extension of the life of this House and the government, or we should proceed first and foremost as we are doing now with the consideration of the request to extend the life of the CA.  

My understanding, is this that, the National Resistance Movement as one of its commitments, as we all know it, was that, wee shall as Ugandans be given an opportunity to sit together and develop a process of governance that is acceptable to all of us.  That process, took the form as I understand it of a dialogue by all the people of Uganda, through various institutions that were established.  First and foremost, by the statute that established the Odoki Commission. The Odoki Commission as you know, recommended and the government did accept that, the people of Uganda prefer that we have a newly elected body rather than this body, to receive, consider, approve and promulgate the constitution for the people of Uganda.  

That dialogue never stopped there.  That dialogue continued through the process on campaign.  And this House did accept that recommendation and created a mechanism through the Statute No.6.  Creating a mechanism as a basis for the dialogue of the people of Uganda to continue beyond Odoki.  That dialogue continued by way of elections, by way of meetings of the candidates, because all the people of Uganda could not come together, 17 million of them, to discuss the constitution.  

In that Statute, this House therefore, did say, when the people of Uganda had decided on the people who should discuss the constitutional process, then those people, should carry out that task within a specified time.  Therefore, time was a creature of this House given to the representatives of the people of Uganda, by Statute No.6.  It is, therefore, a mandate that was given to them, to be done in a maximum of 7 months.  These people have been meeting and doing exactly that.  And what they are doing, it has come back to you in this House to say, sometime back, you gave us a mandate by Statute No.6.  We have tried to discharge that mandate; w are sorry, we are not in a position to complete within that time.  Could you as the people who determined that, give it to us.  It was not written in that statute that, the delegates will go and consult before they come here.  They are coming to the creature of that body to demand more time.  

It is in this respect that, we have this Bill.  This Bill is a request by the people who were given a mandate within a specified time and they are coming and they are saying, sorry, we cannot finish within that specified time. That may impact because of other constitutional arrangement to other matters. Invariably, the Statute expected that, we should do so in 7 months.  Because we are supposed to have had elections long ago.  Had we had elections on time, the question of the 25th of January and seeking the extension which would not have arisen of the NRC and the NRM Government.  But because of Financial and other reasons we delayed to put in place, thee body you have given a mandate; with thee fact that, they have not finished in time in having consequential repercussions.  

There are repercussions constitutionally and these repercussions very serious for the future development of this country. I do not think therefore, the two are inevitably tied that, we must first pass a Bill to amend Notice, No.1, to extend the life of this body, before you can consider a request to be received by a body you set up.  This is a request made to you as people who set up.  You are the creators of the CA. and therefore, in my view  -(Interruption)

MR MUKASA MUDRIKAT: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member and Minister holding the Floor that, the logic behind approving the extension the other way round, is to avoid an embarrassment and indeed a presumption that, when wee reach that stage, it will be automatically accepted. Supposing it is not accepted? It will create a gap; that the CA will be in continuity without a government and without this House. And who will pass its work. That is the logic behind it? Otherwise, if we accept this amendment first, it is another way of accepting the allegations that this House is a rubber-stamping organised institution.  That it will automatically in any case, approve the other extensions.

MR WAPAKABULO:  He does not follow, Sir.  The extension, this is a request.  It is not tied to any other request.  (Laughter) Sir, it is within the mandate of this House, under our constitutional arrangement to make provision for the good governance of this country.  I do not expect that, this body can say, there shall be no government in Uganda.  The truth of the matter is, that come the 25th of January, 1995.  The Constituent Assembly will not have finished and put a question in place.  Now whether when that time comes, the NRC when considering that fact, chooses to extend the period of the NRC and the Government, that is a different matter.  If they choose in their plenary power to say that, there shall be no government as we know today, but we shall have a common decision by this Assembly to be governing the country itself. They can make that prohibition by amending the constitution.  So, we do not of necessity say, that the mere passing of this Bill. Therefore, means that there will be an automatic extension of NRC.  That will be considered in a deliberate choice of the NRC, what Constitution arrangement should be in place, until the constitution comes in place.  They may choose to extend the life of the NRC, or they may choose to make other arrangements known to constitutional law, as to how shall be governed in Uganda from now - even by decree, from now, until the time, when thee constitution is in place.  So, you cannot say that, we have automatically determined the mode of governance of Uganda between now until that time, merely because we have approved this. (Interruption)

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information. Thank you Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman, section 19, sub-section (3) of the CA Statute, states that, the Constitution will be promulgated  in the presence of the President and the Members of NRC. Automatically, if we extend the Constituent Assembly, definitely we shall have given a lieu way to the extension of the NRC and the present Government.  The information I want to give is that, we should not labour this point of leaving this Bill and thinking of extending the NRC.  In any case, Parliament is there to deal with the situations and laws at appropriate times when that time comes for the extension of the NRC.  That will be the time to do it.  Let us go ahead with this particular Bill. Thank you.

MR WAPAKABULO: I thank hon. Luyombya for his very effective and able assistance in  elucidating this matter and I am much obliged.  But Sir, having said that, therefore, I would say that we can look at this question as a mere request.  The House can grant or mere not grant.  But in any granting as it has been said, can lead to very serious consequences.  But the question as to what happens after 25th can be a question within the plenary power of this House and whatever arrangements do not necessarily have to be of the type that took place in 1989. Then having said that, I can now talk a little bit, as someone who has been privileged to be the chief manager of the process that has given a rise to this, to this request.  The Minister did point out Sir, that we have in our analysis of work, given ourselves four main stages.  The preliminary, the consideration, re-consideration, enactment and promulgation.  I would like to say that, when we started in May, it became very clear to me a number of things became very clear to me, as chairman and I was glad to be elected.  First and foremost, there was a big air of suspicions among all these Ugandan who had come together following the elections, for obvious historical reasons and political pluralisation.  

Secondly, there was also evidence of lack of knowledge and experience in handling matters of this nature.  But also, we were faced with a situation where we start ticking the very first meeting we hold regardless of the methods of work we had adopted.  I think it was assumed that, when the CA comes together, they will start by reading like we do with our Bills here Clause 1, Clause 2, Clause 3 and go on and so forth until we finish.  That was not the case.  The situation arrived, we found there where many members did not know the political views of others. (Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am seeking clarification both from the Mover of the Bill and the Member on the Floor. There is really no problem regarding whether we should extend the life of CA. But the problem I see is, which comes first? The Constitution as finally agreed on with be promulgated by the Assembly and this House.  

Supposed the House which is going to come 25th January and the government as well, then who will, which NRC will promulgate a constitution? Which one? They, therefore, spend extension of CA as to be done within its framework of the existence of the NRC at that time. (Applause) 

Even tomorrow, we can bring this Bill.  But let us have this first, a constitutional matter on which this other one depends. Otherwise, we are going to be in problems after 25th if as hon. Katetagira said, the NRC does not extend itself.  What will happen? Let us be really logistical and do things one at a time.

CAPT. BABU: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  From the information we are receiving, I am getting a feeling that, the rumour that has been circulating including some of the News Papers that, the CA will eventually become the Interim Parliament. (Laughter)  

Let me try to bring this point up because it is in the back of our minds.  And I think we have to be fair, and this House which you respect so much, that this is not true.  That actually this House still has the powers to choose any mode of extension that they feel is correct.  That they should not base so much this unfortunate picture which has been painted, that even tomorrow if this House so wishes, they can call for the Bill to extend the life of NRM and NRC.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR KAZORA:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am a bit perplexed because may be some of you have not received this Bill.  We have a Bill which also states how to extend the life of the NRC; it is here.  Here some Members are really making a distinction without a difference.  Because how can you table two Bills at the same time?  Mr Chairman, the hon. Kanyomozi apparently does not know the law. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR WAPAKHABULO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am sorry I have been - I am so grateful for the various pieces of information and clarification sought.  But let me say, Sir, that if we were to follow the procedure being suggested, it would have been very difficult for us in the CA to say, you government of the National Resistance Movement and the NRC extend yourself so that you may extend our life.  Because for us we are asking for the extension, because you gave us a mandate and we have not finished it within that time.  And we are saying, you consider our request as such.  It began this way, we have a process. We began with a sub-committee of what we call a business committee.  We have a standing committee which I chair called a Business Committee. The sub-committee went into programming to see whether we can be on time.  They came back to the business committee to say, sorry we are not in a position to finish.  I had to call a business committee, to consider the report of the sub-committee. They agreed unanimously.  And on that business committee there is a member from each district plus each of the constituencies in that House.  Then from there, I had to go to the plenary to say, you are here Members of CA. But the business committee has found after analysis that, we cannot finish.  They said, pass this message through the Minister concerned, to interact with the bodies concerned in the Government of Uganda, to pass this message that, we shall not be in a position to complete and ask that we be given more time to do a good job and finish.  That was our mandate. Now, we could not in that request say that, now you minister, go to NRC to extend NRC and the Government of Uganda, so that you  may also consider our extension.  We had to come logically.  And this is what the Minister has done. (Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I understand that, this request from the CA was channeled through Government and Government is the one bringing it to us.  And I also understand that, we have been given this paper which has not been tabled.  The majority of us feel and why I am seeking clarification it is the role of government to see the sequence of things.  Given that, there is a problem with this one which has not been tabled, I would like the Chairman of the CA, in his duo role as a constitutional lawyers, to tell us what would take president? Which would come first.  And if he cannot in his wisdom advice his colleagues to help us to get through the problem, I am seeking clarification so that we know sequentially what step we should be taking; majority of us feel are of the view, that, may be although it is not.  A good number of us are of the view that although it is not necessary he will not have requested this. Why can we not deal with this one first, and then go on and deal with the other one? Is there any problem with that?

THE CHAIRMAN: Wee are getting the answer.  Order, please.  Hon. Kanyomozi, wait for the answer, please.

MR WAPAKABULO:  Thank you Sir.  The Minister when presenting made it very clear that, under the Statute we have now, the Constituent Assembly the life expires on the 11th of this month.  If we do not, there will be no meetings of the CA We know that, under the present constitutional arrangements, the life of the NRM and the NRC is January the 25 - 26th.  Therefore, in terms of sequence, we should begin with that, which will expire first. (Laughter) 

Because, given that there is a situation which is as follows: by extending the life of the CA, the NRC does not exhaust its power to determine what constitutional arrangements can be replaced even tomorrow. Tomorrow you can choose even to abolish the CA. When they bring the Bill, to extend the life of NRC, you can say, we hereby amend it and repeal the provisions relating to CA, and we shall continue for another 5 years, if you so wish. (Laughter) So that the mere act of passing this one, does not by itself deny the NRC its plenary constitutional power to determine the nature of governance in Uganda, even from tomorrow. And in fact, you can pass this one today, amend and abolish it tomorrow. The only thing is that, the people of Uganda will wonder whether you are really being sensible.  That is the only thing. (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, there is also a further point which I thought would buttress the hon. Member’s point on the Floor.  The fact that the CA is really a sub-committee; is a committee set up by this House.  It is a creature of our Parliament.  It is therefore, our child.  Now, the life of our child is expiring on the 9th, of December.  The life of the father is going on and -(Interjection) I beg your pardon. 

The life of the father and mother in view of one person is going on until the 25th of January.  Now, you ask, whom do we extend first.  Obviously, you can say, we can extend you up to 25th of January.  So, therefore, if you reason like that, the extension of this Bill comes first, automatically. And then, it will be in the cause of discussing your other matters that you want to extend, that can come second. So, you cannot say that, we first discuss the life of the father, before you extend the life of the child who is about to die.  

Secondly, for another reason, the other reason is also political and common sense for the House.  It would look self-seeking for us to say that, when the issues of CA came to the House.  Members of Parliament said no, no! Let us first talk about our own what? Affairs. It would be self-seeking and it would be dangerous for us political. Therefore, for me I would be very ashamed to buy that type of reasoning, where my neighbour here says she goes with the majority. 

Lastly, it would be even more shaming for us to delay the extension of the CA, and concentrate on the extension of the Movement - of thee NRC in law.  Because then, we would be discussing a Legal Notice which is what Marwas has said from the beginning.  Therefore, we have to discuss the little law that we have, that is within our power, and then when time comes, we can then sit on the big law about the constitutional Amendment, which is amendment on the Legal Notice. Thank you.

MR WAPAKHABULO:  I think I should be given a chance.  I have been so much interrupted that, even my trend of thought might be distorted, Sir.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification.  This Bill seeks to extend the CA beyond the expiry of the current House, the NRC of the current Interim Administration which was extended.  My clarification is this, have we now changed the procedures, to presume what the outcome of the Bill that has just brought this afternoon, that will be in January.  I am seeking clarification because according to the presenter of the Bill, the assumption is that this House will have the power to go beyond what it constitutionally is supposed to be assigned as a date.  Because six months goes beyond.  From today, if we passed it today, are we in control of after 25th?

MR KAVUMA:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  The small clarification I want to give is this.  Hon. Members of this House, this Bill is a normal legislative document - a normal Bill, like those we have been handling for all these years. Hon. Members you very well know that, we have been passing laws which are going to exist twenty - thirty years; even after w have you know, we have gone away.  So, there is nothing contradictory, there is nothing unconstitutional about debating a Bill we think should be debated to take charge of the prevailing circumstances, we shall leave it to go on. But if the constitutional amendment affects it, necessarily as far as this Bill will be affected, it will have to follow suit of the provisions of the constitution. So, we are really on course if Members have this fear like hon. Rwakakooko.  I want to appeal to them to consider the expediency we must now invoke in order to arrest a situation which is going to cause catastrophe, if we do not extend the CA by Monday.  That is my only prayer, Mr Chairman.

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Supplementary information. Thank you Mr Chairman.  I want to give a supplementary information to say that, this argument of NRC life ending in January and therefore should not extend the CA life beyond January does not hold water.  Because the same NRC had just passed the budget which went beyond. (Laughter) 

The decision of the NRC at that time to pass the Bill was in the past and that is why that decision actually went beyond.  Now, the budget itself will be even extending beyond January.  Why did you not say that, because our life ends in January, therefore, we are not going to extend. This is it.  So, I think we should eat our own words.  

Another information, even up to now, some decrees were passed in 70s, they are still being used. You do not say, because these decrees were passed by that government in 70s therefore, you do not recognise it.  I think we should realistic.

MRS MPANGA:  Point of information.  I think what we are not seeing is the time frame.  I wanted to inform the last Informer, when he says, we passed a Budget that goes beyond the life of this, we know.  But what we are saying, this Bill extends CA for six months.  And it is a fact that, on the 26th, this House ends. What we do not want to see is a vacuum when there will be no government.  I am entitled to my own thinking. You people may think differently, but I am trying to inform you why we are thinking like that.  We are saying, we should.  And if you look at the next Bill that is given to us, that is not tabled, it is also perpetuating it indefinitely without a time frame.  It is the time frame that is the question.  It is not the extension.  This is why we say, if we give a time frame to the extension of NRC, discuss Legal Notice No.1, then we shall easily find a time when we can easily finish the constitution and have everything done in order.

MR WAPAKABULO: Thank you Mr Chairman. Let me make my comment and then maybe, I could also touch on the point which has been raised by the hon. Member just leaving the Floor.  The Point, Sir, I was making was that, and I think we should not labour it further.  The mere fact that, we have extended CA. does not deny the NRC its plenary power to decide what form of governance should be in place between 25th, until the new constitution is in place.  And I refer on the point until the constitution is in place, and I will come to that. But the point I was making earlier , Sir, was that I wanted to re-assure the House that, within the 7 months that we were given, we were able to transact a lot of business, but our main problem was that, there came a group of Ugandans who did not know each other, who were not as experienced in handling matters that, we were doing; 284 of them.  So, what did we do? In the programme that we set out, we began by carrying out what we called a general debate Sir, is that, at the end of the day, many Members found out that even those whom they had suspected were their ideological -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Take your Seat, please, proceed, please.

MR WAPAKHABULO: In this respect, I can give the example of hon. Atwoma from Chwa, who did not know that, the late Semaala from Ssese, was of the same political views as his.  It is only after we were in the general debate that, people began finding level.  In fact, to give the best example, when we suggested as management that, we should go straight into committees, there was a lot of hostility.  But when we began working, and following the general debate, the very people who were hostile to the idea of committees began clamouring for them, across the entire political.  So that, at the end of the day, we came back to the idea and now we are working through committees.  The thing we could not do in May, we were able to do it in August. And then, our people began getting more experienced.  So, now what we have done Sir, that when we are asking for six months, we know that, the time should be enough for our purpose.  Because we shall no longer need the two months we used for the general debate; two, we shall not have to -(Interruption) 

MR PINTO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. The information I would like to give the hon. speaker on the Floor is that, we and everybody here as I have heard, is not in dispute of the extension of the CA. It is the sequence of the Bills. And I can hear thee hon. Member belabouring the reason why the CA has taken more than 7 months.  Is it possible to request the Mover to give word as a matter of comfort to this House that, tomorrow on the Order Paper, the Bill that, has so far arrived and has not been tabled; will be tabled so that, subsequently, we will discuss the extension of the NRC. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Hon. Wanendeya, please, wait.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I have no problem whatsoever in assuring the hon. Members that when this Bill was published, the intention was not to hoodwink this House. I intend to read this Bill with your permission, Mr Chairman, tomorrow when it is properly placed on the Order Paper.  Tomorrow it would have the first reading.  I can make that undertaking on behalf of Government.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of Procedure. Mr Chairman, I would like to move on a point of Procedure and make life easy for the House to move.  Because we aree really kind of misunderstanding each other for nothing.  In our rules, presenting a Bill for the First Reading is a question of formality and it does not matter. And even during any cause of the debate, the Minister can say, if he is ready with a Bill.  Even when Member is going to have the Bill, the Minister himself can pronounce the Bill and it will be found in the pigeonhole.  But now, we already have the Bill. 

It is a question of allowing the Minister to say, present for the First Reading.  And then tomorrow he comes and he can continue with that.  You can present ten bills in one day, or twenty if you have them; even in the middle of the Debate.  So, I do not see any problem .

THE CHAIRMAN:  There is no problem, so far.

MR WAPAKABULO:  Mr Chairman, in terms of Parliamentary Procedure, all that, if the Minister is satisfied, and if it is the wish of the House, nothing prevents so much of the Standing Orders of this House being suspended as would prevent the presentation and reading the First Time of this Bill to be presented and read the First Time.  But it is really up to this House and the Minister.  But that is the wish of this House really, for me I would urge my Colleague that, we move a Motion, we table it, it is read the First Time, but we continue with this one. (Interjection) Yes, that would only be the sequence.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Hon. Members, can we listen to one Member who is on the Floor?

MR WAPAKABULO:  Sir, the Minister is consulting, but for me I can continue with my remarks as I said.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, please, take your Seat everybody. What is happening?  You have overstayed.

MR WAPAKABULO:  I have not overstayed, Sir. (Laughter and Interruption)

MR NEKYON:  Point of information. Sir, I would like to inform the Minister responsible for this Bill that, if he wants to solve this problem, he should go to night and get a book called the Animal Farm by George Orwell and read carefully the debate between animals.  Because the sins are now repeated here very clearly as to which animal should be killed first.  Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, it is obvious that the House has lost sense of direction. (Interjection) Yes, the House has lost sense of direction and we are not moving.  It is a fact.  I, therefore, would like to move that the House adjourns for 15 minutes so that the Mover of the Motion can consult the Leader of the Government Business so that we can be directed on how to proceed further.  I beg to move Mr Chairman.

MR WAPAKHABULO: Hon. Members for me I am making my contribution on the Motion and I would like to appeal to my Colleagues not to contribute inside and among themselves. When their time comes, I will definitely sit down and wait until we next debate again.  The points I was making were that I wanted to assure the House that the institution you put in place together with the people of Uganda is lacking.  I said we had initial problems, and we have overcome them.  In terms of time-frame, I said, that the time like the one we lost during recess or the one we lost because we went to general debate, will not be lost again so that when you quantum the six months.  In my view, the time would be sufficient and I can assure you we will complete and we would prefer to complete in a shorter time than the six months.  There have been problems, some of them administrative like financial, like sitting place. Those we have attended to.  But there are problems which I would call internal weaknesses and we have addressed them and I would like to report this way for the benefit of the Members.  For instance, there was a question of some Members who walked out of select committee five. (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman. Is it in order for the holder of the Floor to continue contributing to this Bill when the majority of the Members here are saying that we should get the other Bill first?

THE CHAIRMAN: Take your Seat, please.

MR WAPAKABULO: Mr Chairman, what is done is we have addressed issues which I am referring to as internal weaknesses like coming late or lack of quorum.  The Minister did make a reference to another point.  But let me quickly summarise this. (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Point of order. Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  Is the hon. Member who is at the same time the Chairman of the CA after having been sent by the delegates to seek permission from here in order just to stay on permanently until we give the permission?  Is he in order to overstay on the Floor? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: He is quite in order.

MR WAPAKHABULO:  Sir, I would like to say two, three or four things so that I wind up.  One; we have addressed the question of lateness. I have written and the chairman of our discipline committee hon. Moses Ali is having a meeting of his committee to address those internal weaknesses particularly relating to attendance, to ensure that there will be no further such weaknesses.  

We have also as it was mentioned, decided that those committees which do not complete their work by the 31st January and hand them in will be required to work on week-ends or at night because the plenary session will be held both in the morning and in the afternoons. Given these measures we have taken, I am confident that the period of six months would be more than adequate.  In fact, the law Sir, is quite clear.  It says, that the CA is required to consider, enact and promulgate.  After we have approved like we do with our bills here, the draft constitution, then we shall hold a session for promulgation.  The law requires that promulgation must be done within two months utmost from the date when the constitution is enacted.  

In other words, there is no chance of us just sitting there with a constitution because we want NRM to continue.  We are required and have a feeling of not more than two months from the date of enactment to bring that constitution into force by method of promulgation.  Having brought into force, it will depend on what that constitution says with regard to the period from the time it has come into force until there is another President or until there is another Parliament.  In other words, the transitory provisions relating to the transition will make provisions one, for who will be the President of Uganda from the date it comes into force until there is an election of a new President of Uganda.  Two; who will be the legislature of Uganda from the day the Constitution comes into force until a new Parliament will be elected.  Now, that will depend on the provision in the new Constitution when it comes into force.  

Of course, there are many Members from here who are Members of that Body.  They will invariably influence what happens but what is important is that this House has got the power to decide what happens from the 25th until the day when the new constitution comes into force and then the transit provisions or transitional provisions then will fill the gap and therefore, there will be no time when there should be no Government in Uganda.  It is only the NRC that can decide either tomorrow or thereafter that there should be no Government in Uganda.  But in my view, the wisdom of this House will not lead them to say that there should be no government.  Therefore, I have no fear that you pass this bill to give that body you set up increased mandate or time to finish their work.  Meanwhile you consider within your own wisdom what arrangements should be in place from the 25th of January, 1995.  Thank you very much, Sir, for giving me this chance.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: And with that, we have come to the end of this Session. We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. 

(The Council rose at 5.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8 December 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)







