Thursday, 6 December 2007

(Parliament met at 2.29 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and I want to remind you that yesterday, we were dealing with our rules and according to our rules, our proceedings on any given day are supposed to commence at 2.00 p.m. but this has not been possible. We always try to adjust to a quarter to, but it does not work. I appeal to you that at least we should start at 2.30 p.m. even though our rules say 2.00 p.m. But I appeal to you, let us not go beyond 2.30 p.m.

Honourable members, there is an announcement I received from the Parliamentary Anglican Chaplaincy. It is to the effect that our Members of the Anglican community should come and receive His Grace the Archbishop, Henry Orombi, at a Christmas Holy Communion on Tuesday, 11 December 2007 at 5.30 p.m. in the Parliamentary Members’ Lounge. Please, I appeal to you to turn up in big numbers to welcome His Grace the Archbishop.

2.33
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I have known such arrangements being made with religious leaders but my recommendation is that, they should liaise with you so that we do not lose the necessary quorum. If we are to meet him at 5.30 p.m. we may still be here at that time. So, I want to recommend that if you so think, I can direct hon. Adolf Mwesige to inform all the religious leaders who intend to have these meetings, so that the hour is convenient for Parliament.  

THE SPEAKER: I quite appreciate that, but this is a chaplaincy for Parliament and I quite appreciate the fact that Christmas does not come every day and therefore, for this one, I will allow it. We should definitely sacrifice some time once a year so that we welcome His Grace the Archbishop. But in the future, we can agree on the chaplaincy. Otherwise, you should leave it; I will be able to handle it.  

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Following the concerns that were raised by hon. Kubeketerya about the dispute between Mayuge Sugar Mill and Kakira Sugar Works, we did undertake to investigate the matter and in particular, to search for the court order in respect of that case, interpret it and come and brief Parliament on the way forward.

I wish to report that I have communicated to the Registrar of the High Court of Jinja, and that the court order is now ready. It was signed this morning, but I have not been able to retrieve it from Jinja. It should be on my desk tomorrow and I undertake to come back to the House on Tuesday next week. I beg to report, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I was not in the House as I was attending the budget conference. I was informed that a question was raised by hon. Odit, asking whether the price of cotton has already been announced by the ministry. Secondly, that I had ordered for the arrest of a one, Mr Oryang, who is the General Manager of Lango Co-operative Union.  

I would like, Mr Speaker, on the first question, to state that we have announced the price of conventional cotton at Shs 600 and I am sorry if my colleague hon. Odit did not know. He should have first asked me before bringing a question to the Floor. We have announced it and this price is known to the ginners and to the farmers of conventional cotton –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, throughout the Seventh Parliament, I chaired the Agricultural Committee and this information used to be presented to the committee and we would also inform the House. It was not my practice to go to the minister’s office to find out how much the indicative price was. After realising that the time for announcement had already passed by one month, that was the very reason that I definitely had to come and bring the issue to the attention of Government through the House. Thank you very much.  It is not that I do not know the procedure.

MR ONEK: Thank you, hon. Odit. We have announced the price at Shs 600 for conventional cotton.

For organic cotton, there are areas in Northern Uganda where organic cotton is grown. We recommended that the price go up by 30 percent above conventional cotton, which would amount to about Shs 800 per kilogramme of cotton. This is what I would like the House to know.

The second issue raised by hon. Odit was that, I ordered the arrest of a one Oryang, who is the General Manager of Lango Co-operative Union. I would like to inform my colleagues that that statement is totally false. I could not have just ordered the arrest of Mr Oryang. Yesterday, I was with Mr Oryang in a meeting where we were discussing the cotton business at the cotton development organization head office. This is the first time I am hearing that I had ordered for his arrest. 

However, the facts on the ground are that the cotton traders of Lango Co-operative Union operate under a statute. In this statute, we have cotton zones where cotton ginners operate from and any ginner, who goes to other ginners’ operational ground, will be stopped. This practice or the sanctioning of such illegal movement by other ginners is controlled by the Uganda Cotton Development Organisation and not the minister because this is the body that regulates and manages the cotton business. 

So, it is not true that I could have ordered the arrest of Mr Oryang. In any way, if Mr Oryang is threatened because he moved to some areas in the cotton zones where he is not allowed to operate, then most probably the cotton development organisation can help him in solving that issue. So, if there is anybody who acted illegally, the law can be applied. That is the information that I thought the House should hear. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, the minister should have done research before giving his submission. Otherwise, for him to come and claim that the General Manager of Lango Co-operative Union was not arrested and that those claims are false, is not true. I think that is a matter –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think what he has said is that, himself as a minister, he did not order any arrest of Oryang –(Interruption)  

MR ODIT: That is what I am contesting, Mr Speaker. I think if we are to shorten this debate, I propose that this matter be subjected to a committee to investigate it because it is much bigger than what the minister is claiming. I am saying this because there was an instruction by the minister, which led to the arrest of this gentleman on the 10th before being released on police bond. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Member, what you are telling us is what the minister has already said. But as far as he is concerned, he has never given such instructions. Anyway, it can be investigated to establish the circumstances that led to the arrest of that person. The Police who arrested him might have been instructed by a higher office or something like that. Otherwise, he is telling you that he did not give any instructions.

MR ODIT: Would I therefore, Mr Speaker, be wrong to interpret that you will use your Office to cause an investigation into the circumstances under which there are serious battles in Lango relating to the cotton industry?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall look into that with the help of the appropriate committee of Parliament. Yes, Hon. Banyenzaki.

2.43
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You will recall that yesterday, there was a commitment that a motion for a resolution of Parliament to manage the accountability for CHOGM funds be tabled today, but I do not see it on the Order Paper. So, I am requesting that we fit it within the Order Paper so that we are able to debate it following yesterday’s commitment. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Because it is a commitment, I suggest that you circulate copies of your motion. We shall deal with it on Tuesday.

MR BANYENZAKI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

2.44
MS JACQUELINE KYATUHEIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance and it is to do with the Ebola epidemic. I received a call from the Secretary, Social Services of Kanungu District and subsequently got confirmation from the District Medical Officer, Kanungu District that there is a case of Ebola in that district. The victim is a young man of about 22 years and he is admitted in Kihihi Health Centre IV. 

Mr Speaker, it is now about a week when we got the information about the Ebola out break and every other day that passes, this epidemic continues to spread to other areas. That portrays that there is something wrong somewhere. I feel that we are not doing enough in ensuring that Ebola does not continue spreading to other areas. My sense is that, if we do not do enough, we are going to have lots of problems. I am saying this because already health personnel are very scared and do not know what to do. I know that something is being done, but because of what has happened to their colleagues, they feel that Government is not doing enough to help out on the situation. 

Mr Speaker, I am calling upon Government to come to our rescue by giving us a hand and making sure that this epidemic does not continue spreading. I am saying this because if this epidemic started from Bundibugyo, it spread to Fort Portal or Kabarole and now it is in Kanungu, then it means that it could as well spread to all the other parts of the country and containing it might become a serious problem in future. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.46
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Mr Speaker, since Tuesday, this matter has been coming up and some Members have been calling for radical steps. We agreed that the best way out is to cause extensive public awareness and also to take measures that can see limited movements in those areas. The other one is to declare that place or region a no-go area. Isn’t it appropriate at this point in time that we request the Leader of Government Business to come forward and give us the government position or a declaration as to what steps and measures Government is taking for it is now turning into a national disaster?  

If we keep quiet about it, Mr Speaker, we are only postponing the predicament. Therefore, isn’t it proper and right that the Leader of Government Business liaises with the responsible sectors of Government to declare the western region a disaster area and thereby take up measures to restrict movements and other accompanying measures? 

Other than that, Mr Speaker, I will be inclined that if not the Head of State could intervene in such matters; the rest of Government is not rising up to the challenge. Can I throw the challenge now to the government to come up and guide this country in such a situation? I thank you.

2.48
DR CHRIS ASIIMWE (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): I wish to add my voice to that of my colleagues on the Ebola outbreak. On Tuesday we heard from the hon. Member of Parliament and Minister of State for Health, hon. Otaala that Government is doing its best to control the epidemic. However, I have been receiving calls since then from Bundibugyo, my constituency, that not even a single health facility in Ntoroko County has received protective gear. 

I called the DDHS last night and the district task force chairperson, the RDC; they only said the protective gear was available in only two health facilities, that is, Kikyo where the outbreak first occurred and Bundibugyo Hospital. The rest of the health facilities in the district do not have protective gear and the health workers are not willing to touch any patient. So, what we are being told by the government is not really being effected on the ground.

Secondly, these health facilities, including hospitals, do not have essential drugs. This is a call to the National Medical Stores, which is given the responsibility by Government to distribute essential drugs, to make sure that drugs are delivered to these health facilities. Not even drugs for Malaria and common diseases we face in these areas are available as we talk; and no health worker is willing to touch a patient whether it is cough, Malaria or Ebola they have, without any protective gear. It is high time something is done in those areas, not only Bundibugyo but all the districts neighbouring Bundibugyo District. Thank you.

2.50
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, under the Constitution you do not declare a state of disaster. Under Article 110 we declare a state of emergency and this occurs when His Excellency the President chairs Cabinet and when it is essential, then we declare a state of emergency as we did last time. 

Tomorrow I am chairing Cabinet and we shall consider all these issues. The Ministry of Health will be there, in particular Dr. Otaala will be there because his colleagues have gone abroad; and obviously we shall continue to take appropriate action. I want to inform you that this is a virus. It is a very complicated virus, it is a strain which can be handled but it is a difficult one. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the hon. Prime Minister; I know they are going to have the meetings but is Government going to be briefed intermittently on the situation on the ground? Because it is not only Ebola, we have got other epidemics, as I understand there is the Plague; there is Meningitis and now even Cholera. So it is as if we are now being bedeviled by all these attacks. Are we going to be briefed on what is on the ground because already Members are complaining that even the little that we are supposed to get is not reaching them? Is that also on the programme that Parliament is briefed on the steps being taken and how the situation is on the ground?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, there are certain things that can still be done without declaration of a state of emergency, for example, restricting the movement of the population. People are still moving; people are still calling for fundraisings in this particular region. Can the government come out clearly and guide the nation?

MRS MUGISA: Mr Speaker, this morning a reverend called me and told me he is opening up a church on Sunday; we have been fundraising for it and that we should go and gather. Yet where he is calling us to go is exactly where this Ebola came from; the people who died in Kabarole are actually in his area. I told him that, “I think by now you should know that public gatherings have been banned”. He said, “No, I have not heard about it”. I think we need to sensitise people to avoid public gatherings because he said he has a mini fundraising as we enter our new church. I said, “No, it cannot happen, at least for me I will not come”. People do not know what to do. This is a religious leader who does not know that public gatherings have been banned especially in those places where there is already Ebola. Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, all points made have been internalised and I shall chair Cabinet accordingly. I thank you.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.55
MR OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to make a statement relating to matters of my personal security. I make this statement under rule 41 of our Rules of Procedure. 

The Electoral Commission declared me the winner of the Chua parliamentary seat on the 24th February 2006. Immediately that declaration was made, my supporters and I started receiving reports that some people in Chua County were saying that I will not serve and finish my five year term in the Eighth Parliament. Indeed some reports even went further to say that I would not reach the swearing in day in May 2006. I tried to brush aside these reports as pains of losing an election on the part of my opponent. However, the reports persisted and became widespread forcing my constituency chairperson to convene a meeting to discuss the matter. The meeting ended up advising me on how to take care of my personal security. I also went on a radio talk show to address the same issue.

While coming to Kampala after that election, my supporters insisted that I should travel in a convoy of at least two vehicles just in case there was any planned act of sabotage along the way. I was sworn in and I started doing my Parliamentary work normally until towards the end of September this year when some incidents started occurring. For security reasons and for quality service, my car has been maintained and serviced by the Cooper Motors Corporation, Uganda Ltd CMC), the company which sold me the car 11 years ago. 

On 18 September 2007, I took the vehicle to the same company for normal service and some minor repairs. It was collected the same day in the evening by my driver who told me the vehicle was fine. However, when I drove the car a few days later, I found the steering system pulling the car to the left. I took the car back to the company on September 24th with a specific request that the steering system be checked. Again my driver collected the car the same day after it was road tested. He informed me the car was fine. 

We traveled to Arua on September 30th to attend a burial and arrived without any problem. The burial took place in Terego County on October 1st. In the morning of October 7th as we prepared to travel back to Kampala, my driver reported to me that the steering system was making some noise. I went and checked myself; there was a terrible noise as one turned the steering wheel. My proposal was that we look for a mechanic in Arua to check the vehicle first. 

My driver advised that we should drive slowly and bring the car back to Kampala instead of trusting it with a local mechanic who might put us in deeper trouble. My colleagues traveling with me in the same car also supported the stand of my driver that since we were traveling in a convoy of two cars we should drive back slowly. We traveled from Arua up to Nakasongola with out any problem. However, about ten kilometres from Migyera, where the road was extremely bad, the steering wheel gave way and the car ended up in the bush by the road side.

Fortunately for us, there was no drainage trench along the road side, nor were there big trees where the car entered the bush. While making calls to various places in Kampala for rescue, we sent the other car to go and look for a mechanic in Migyera. Two young men were brought, they opened the bonnet and tightened some loose nuts, fastening the steering rod to the steering box, which was about to fall off. The car was then reversed back to the road and we continued our journey to Kampala.

The steering system is still as good as it was fixed that day. On 20th October, Mr Speaker, I attended a fundraising for Church of Uganda, Lango Diocese at Boro Boro in Lira. The fundraising was a very successful occasion presided over by the Deputy Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga. After the fundraising, I proceeded to Kitgum where I stayed until Saturday, October the 27th. 

While in Kitgum, I normally pack my car at the police station, which is only six plots away from my place of aboard at night. This time round, after two nights a policeman on duty reportedly told my driver that my car was no longer safe at the police station, giving reason that they did not have adequate manpower, that there were only two policemen on duty at night who locked themselves up in office and would not know if anything bad were to happen to my car outside. He reportedly advised that I should find an alternative place to park the vehicle. I was upset by this report from the policeman as reported to me by my driver. I had packed my car at this police station for about 20 years without any complaint from anywhere. I wondered to myself if safety could not be found at a police station, then where else?

I wanted to sort the matter out with the District Police Commander but he was this way in Kampala and I left Kitgum before he returned. 
 
I returned to Kampala on the 27th of October. On the 29th I decided to put new tyres on my car first thing in the morning. I went to Arrow Centre Uganda Limited, opposite Jinja Road Police Station and bought new tyres. My driver was directed to drive round and go behind where they change tyres from. I was given a chair to sit while they changed the tyres. To my surprise, Mr Speaker, when the man changing the tires started unfastening nuts on the front left wheel - the side on which I normally sit - all the four nuts were very loose. He commented that it seems somebody had tried to steal that wheel at night.

After this second incident, it dawned on me that there was some act of sabotage going on, that some persons somewhere seemed to be up to no good as far as far my personal security was concerned. I sat my driver down and talked to him seriously to find out about the two incidents. He denied knowledge of any conspiracy to harm me. 

A week later, on November 2nd, we went back to the North and returned to Kampala on November 4th. That was the last time I saw my driver. He has absconded. I tried for two weeks to reach him by phone but he could not pick my calls. I used a stranger’s telephone and got him. He told me that he had too many problems at home and that he would come and apologise to me later. He has now bought a taxi, a kamunye which he is driving himself in Gulu.

Some investigations have been instituted and the results are awaited. I would, however, advise my colleagues, honourable members to take keen interest in the vehicles they travel in especially when undertaking long journeys for you never know.

I requested to make this statement because my family, my relatives and my supporters are concerned about the aforementioned incidents. If people can plan accidents, they can plan other things, such as poison or even live bullets. The friends I have shared this matter with keep on asking me what could be the possible sources of the problem. The highly suspected source is the land - both actual and potential land grabbers - since some of us are a stumbling block in their way. I thank you, Mr Speaker; I thank you honourable members for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.

PETITION

3.08
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to present a petition of the parents’ school management committee of Bat Valley Primary School and all the concerned stakeholders of the school concerning the ownership and the current legal status of the school. But before I do that, I wish to notify this House that we do have in the gallery representatives of the school management committee as well as the parents. 

I will be very brief because it is a very brief petition. It is a humble petition of the parents, stakeholders and school management committee of Bat Valley Primary School presented by myself in my capacity as area Member of Parliament. 

The subject matter of the petition is Bat Valley Primary School which is situated in Kampala District, Kampala Central and which is one of the largest Universal Primary Education schools in Kampala, contributing largely to the primary education of a big number of children in Kampala and the surrounding areas.  

The petitioners are parents, staff and the school management committee of the school committed to protecting and defending the public interest in the school, as well as socio-economic interests and rights of the persons concerned, especially the school-going children, the parents, staff and management. Bat Valley Primary School provides primary education services to the city children and serves as a training ground for future citizens. It also provides a basis for the livelihood of the local community through employment and other benefits to teachers, support staff and the public at large who directly or indirectly deal with the school. 

The petitioners are committed to promoting Government policies on Universal Primary Education (UPE), and the socio-economic development of this country. 

The persons represented by your humble petitioners have been comfortable with the school location whose catchment area is located close enough to allow the pupils walk to and from the school, saving the hard-to-get transport money. The teachers too have been accommodated within the school premises saving on rent and transport costs and providing convenient access and availability for duty.  

However, by a number of communications made recently, notably a letter dated 21 August 2007 and another one dated 18 December 2007, the executive committee of Shree Sanatan Dharma Mandal (SDDM) expressed interest in taking over the premises for purposes stated therein, and did notify the management committee that they should vacate the premises to pave way for other developments. 

The petitioners’ grievances hinge around the claim of ownership of the school by the Shree Sanatan Dharma Mandal and the intended re-location of the school. 

This school has been in existence since 1938. It became a public school in 1964, and like any other non-Government founded schools, it was vested in the hands of Government. This school has never been a tenant of the custodian board nor declared an abandoned property during the time when the said association of the Ugandans of Indian origin left this country. Therefore, it is wrong for Shree Sanatan Dharma Mandal or board of trustees of the said association to claim ownership of the school. 

All Government-aided schools of which Bat Valley is one, are managed under rules and regulations as well as legislations made by this august House and of course different sectors in Government and board of trustees are established in accordance with those legislations particularly the Education Act and regulations made there under. However, as we talk, the said association is claiming powers to establish a board of trustees as well as a school management committee to be in their hands, which clearly offends the laws I have mentioned, particularly the Education Act.

The lease on which this land sits, that is plot 110 William street, volume 433, folio 16, and the instrument is also there, expired way back on 01 November 2006. And the information available is that this lease has not been renewed.  

This land is 4.99 acres, approximately five acres. In 1956, the Buganda Government contributed 50 percent to the completion of the 24 classroom blocks during a fundraising campaign and a foundation stone was laid then. The trustees of the said association, as per the records, where expelled in 1972, and the records available indicate that they were compensated for the developments that they carried out. 

The parents of this school have got a very big stake in the school as they have contributed to its development since 1956 by putting up more structures including the current administration block, the theatre, 21 units for the staff members, a tailoring unit block as well as other facilities like toilets and others.

As I wind up, Mr Speaker, the records available clearly indicate that the parents have made considerable contribution to the development of the school. When His Worship the Mayor of Kampala visited the school, there was assurance given that the school will not be repossessed. The school management committee is also in possession of documents to the effect that this school has never been in possession of the Custodian Board. It is not part and parcel of the expropriated properties, and therefore it has never been repossessed because there is no certificate of repossession. 

Among the documents is a piece of communication, which is very clear, from the Solicitor General. It is the view of the school management committee, parents and members of staff that if the said school is to relocate, the interest of the stakeholders - the parents, school management committee and staff - would be grossly violated and the education programme would be tremendously affected.

Again, it is the view of the petitioners that as part of the process of the relocation of the schools, the executive committee of Shree Sanatan Dharma Mandal intimated that they would commence renovation soon after the end of this term - and the term is ending tomorrow – and that they are taking over the premises of this school immediately this term expires. The school term is expiring tomorrow and we are very worried that the premises may be taken over soon.

These are the prayers: Considering the controversies surrounding the ownership of these premises and the magnitude of the problem that the current stakeholders are facing, and the fact that their interest is at stake, it would be of great importance and pertinent interest if this Parliament intervened in this matter. It is the prayer of the petitioners that you forward this petition to the relevant committee – any of the available committees - or in your own wisdom, Mr Speaker, if it is necessary establish a select committee specifically to handle this matter, given the urgency of the matter; we would appreciate it. Bat Valley Primary School should remain where it is; it should not be demolished. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we presented a petition here before concerning Shimoni Demonstration School and it never succeeded. It is my humble prayer, if education is to be promoted at least in my constituency, that this time round members put this into consideration. Government-aided educational institutions are an endangered species in my constituency as of now. So I humbly pray that in the interest of UPE and in the interest of education in this country generally, this petition be given the due attention it deserves.

I also wish to note that the petition is duly signed by the treasurer and other members of the school management committee, and the treasurer is Prof. Livingstone Luboobi. He signed it together with the area chairman and many other members of the community. So I humbly pray that this one will be received in good faith. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We have understood the gist of the petition. Apparently, it appears to be within the portfolio of the Committee on Social Services because this is education. We have appreciated the urgency of the petition, I therefore ask the committee in charge of education to handle this petition expeditiously. From the account given by the presenter, it is an easy one; it is not as complicated as you seem to say. The committee should enlist the services of the Departed Asians Custodian Board. They should be familiar with the law, and get the assistance of Ministry of Finance, Education and maybe Kampala City Council. You will be able to get the true status of the school and be able to report to us before our break on 20th of this month.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION NO. 43/1/08 TO THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER

3.23
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Can the Prime Minister inform this House if there are plans to shift Uganda’s Capital, since Kampala is completely choked with lack of roads, consequently traffic jams, lack of planning, seasonal mud, dust and slums?

If there is such a plan, would Government consider Masindi Port area in Masindi District, Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom, as the most appropriate and most central location for a new city?

3.24
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, before I answer this question, I wish to take this opportunity to request hon. Okello-Okello to get in touch with me concerning his security, because when he read the statement I was saddened. The state can protect you and shall protect you. (Laughter) Although I do not agree with you politically, you are a very diligent Member of Parliament, I must say. You are here on time and you are very diligent; we appreciate your work.

I wish to inform hon. Okello-Okello that the matter he has raised was settled by Parliament while amending the Constitution in 2005. According to Article 5(4) of the Constitution, Kampala, located in Buganda, shall be the Capital City for Uganda and shall be administered by the Central Government. Government has no plans of amending the above constitutional provision.  

I wish to take this opportunity to inform hon. Okello-Okello that Cabinet has considered and approved the Bill on the administration and development of Kampala City in accordance with Article 5(4) of the Constitution. This Bill, if passed by Parliament, will go a long way in transforming Kampala into a modern city.  The Minister of Local Government has been directed to introduce the Bill on the administration and development of Kampala City to Parliament for its first reading. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, when Dar-es-Salaam became a total confusion, the government of Tanzania, in its wisdom, transferred the capital city to Dodoma. Similarly, when Lagos became very chaotic -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, what is your supplementary question arising from the answer given?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is what I was going to put forward. Kampala is a city and it is failing to function. Seventy-five percent of our city is unplanned and this cannot be corrected. Is the Prime Minister telling us that in our case, if the city fails to function completely we shall be here because the Constitution says so?

Secondly, due to the insensitivity arising because of poor planning, in future it will not be possible to acquire land anywhere in Uganda big enough for a capital city. Is the Rt hon. Prime Minister aware of this? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But what are the supplementary questions from the answer given by the Prime Minister? He has said Government has no intention to change the Constitution; now, what is a supplementary question?  

3.28
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to understand from the Prime Minister how the Bill that Government intends to introduce to Parliament will cure the problems inherent in the city of Kampala. We know that drainage alone in Kampala is a problem.

Secondly, it is also clear that Kampala is already built up and there is an ever increasing population. How is the Bill going to address issues of redevelopment without having to demolish structures that have already been built, probably including Parliament?

How is the Bill going to address issues where even Government structures are on major drainage paths? How is the Bill going to address issues of rural-urban migration? How does the Bill intend to address poor roads in Kampala?  I thank you.

MR HILARY ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to inform you that Government has no plans to amend the Constitution. However, this question has triggered off a debate and this debate might probably cause a reconsideration of amendment of the Constitution. My concern here is –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when a question is asked and answered, what a member can do is to ask a supplementary question arising from the answer. The question as it stands was: “Can the Prime Minister inform the House if there are plans to shift Uganda’s capital city since Kampala is completely chocked with lack of roads, consequently traffic jams, lack of planning, seasonal mud, dust and slums?” The answer that was given was that Kampala being a capital city is a constitutional matter, and that Government has no intention of amending the Constitution and that is the end.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, even if this question was constructed in a strict sense and the Prime Minister said that we have no plans of amending the Constitution, the problem still remains intact, that Kampala is not habitable in the manner we would have loved it to be. So, could the Prime Minister consider talking of the merits of the suggestion? 

Some of us travel almost 400 kilometres to come here; can we not have a central place with all the risk that is accompanying all this?  Nigeria did it and other countries did it. Even the name of this country is so synonymous with the name of an ethnic group in this country. When you are in London and you say you are from Uganda, they say, “Oh, you are a Muganda”. These are serious issues that we feel the Prime Minister as a professor of political science should answer to our satisfaction other than saying, “We do not intend to amend the Constitution.” We amended the Constitution and lifted the term limits, what about this one?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Changing the location does not necessarily mean that you should become cleaner; it does not, logically. I want even to inform you, for example, during CHOGM this place was well cleaned. The problem is one of maintaining what we have done. 

With regard to hon. Amuriat, I wish to refer him to Rule 67, which says: “It is out of order to anticipate a Bill by discussion of a motion dealing with the subject matter of the Bill on a day prior to that appointed for the consideration of that Bill.” 

With regard to my son, hon. Otto, I would like to inform him that of course any provision of the Constitution can be amended. In fact, the Article referred to requires only two-thirds of the Members of Parliament. If Government is satisfied that there are sufficient reasons for amending Article 5, we shall not hesitate to do so, but you have not moved us to do so. I thank you.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE TRIAL ON INDICTMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

THE SPEAKER: Well, this is a subject for the Minister of Justice and Attorney-General. 

3.35
THE MINISTER OF LANDS AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is out of the country and so is the Minister of State and Deputy Attorney-General. Both of them are out of the country, so they have requested me to inform the House to have the Bill read as soon as they are back in the country. Thank you.  

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON UGANDA NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITY AND UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS

3.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr John Odit): Mr Speaker, I think it is the problem of the Clerks office that the reports are not here now, but for us we are ready. 

THE SPEAKER: With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.37 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 11 December 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)

 


