Thursday, 6th December 2001

Parliament met at 2.24 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is to inform Members of the Business and Welfare Committee that we shall have a meeting tomorrow at 10.00a.m. in the South Committee Room to review the programme for our business in the House. 

I wish also to remind Members from Nakapiripit district that they have not yet elected a Member to represent them in the National Executive Committee of the Movement, which is due to meet next week. So, Members of Nakapiripit district are reminded to do the needful.  

I have been requested by the Young Parliamentarians Association (YPA) to inform you that there is a YPA 2001 Workshop on Strategic Planning for Effective Representation to take place tomorrow in Equatoria Hotel Hall. So you are urged to attend this workshop for your and the country’s benefit.  

MR.AWORI: Mr. Speaker, you have mentioned something to do with the Business Committee. I do not want to read too much into what you have said, but will the matter of NEC next week eat into our parliamentary time?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know the programme of NEC. I am only concerned with the programme of Parliament. I am just calling the Business Committee to consider business of Parliament. Whether it affects NEC will be a different matter for those concerned to adjust their schedule and see how to fit in the other.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr. Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to inform hon. Awori that the NEC meeting as was publicised in the media starts on 16th and will end on the 19th December. As all Members know, the Members of NEC are 73 out of over 300 people. So, I do not think it would interfere with our business here. Thank you.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, with due respect to you, I am rising on a point of procedure. I am amazed that in spite of the debate we had recently related to the people of Luwero where a whole Minister in charge of Luwero made a statement, up to now, as if we do not have a Government, the people of Luwero are still comfortably seated in front of the Office of the President, in the premises of Parliament, posing a possible security risk to this Parliament and the President’s office. In light of that, I seek to know from Government, possibly the Leader of Government Business, whether we have a Government in action today.  

I have got a document here with information that the President directed the Minister in charge of the Presidency, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, that these people should have been seen by the 30th of last month.

MRS.SEBAGEREKA: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to mislead everybody that there is no Government in place? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, in the first place, he is part of the Government.  So there is a Government.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you for you your wise counsel Mr. Speaker. I hope the Member who came up –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Lukyamuzi, whereas we are also concerned about this, I think there are rules we follow in dealing with business in this House. You very well know that this matter of people who are in the gardens was considered this week. We cannot keep repeating the same business whenever somebody feels he has to air out his views. We dealt with this matter; the Minister responsible for Luwero made a statement. Now you are resorting to a Minister in charge of Presidency; he is not the one handling this matter of Luwero! 

You heard the queries, which were raised by Members of Parliament here. They said they did not know the legal status of these payments. They were even querying those people who are claiming. They wanted the Minister to come out with a legal basis of paying these people. So, we should wait for that statement. It will help us to analyse whether there is a legal claim or it is just out of sympathy that these payments are made. 

If there is a legal claim, definitely it should be paid. But if it is not, as some Members were raising - you heard hon. Okulo Epak, he is the Chairman of Public Accounts Committee. He refers to a report where they queried this payment. Why do you not wait?  Why do you repeat the same business, which you have dealt with the same week and bring it back? Please, proceed with another business.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr. Rukutana Mwesigwa): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2001,” be read a Second Time.

THE SPEAKER: Your Motion is seconded. Proceed.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr. Rukutana): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, you may recall that the Income Tax Act came into force in 1997. During its implementation, a number of technical errors and omissions have been identified. The proposed Amendments, as contained in the Bill, are largely of a nature of technical corrections. They are either to correct typographical errors, to insert missing words, or to state more clearly the intention of the Act so that it is properly operational.

Mr. Speaker, while the Committee on the Economy has handled the intended Bill, there are a few areas that I want to clarify, like section (6) of the principal Act.  It is proposed to amend section (6) of the Act to substitute the words ‘rental income’ by the word ‘rent’ and the rationale is this: Section (5) of the principal Act provides for chargeable income on businesses, and chargeable income is further stipulated in the Second Schedule of the Act.  But when it comes to rental income, the Act has a specific provision to deal with rental income, and that is section (6), which we are intending to amend.

In the old Act, the terminology used is ‘rental income.’ Mr. Speaker, the rental tax terminology is of particular essence.  There is a difference between rent and rental income.  Under the rental tax, rent is the gross amount of money a person with a rentable property obtains.  The gross amount called rent is not taxable.  However, there is what is called rental income.  

To arrive at rental income, you get the rent subject it to reductions, which arise as a matter of expenditures and losses that a developer puts on a rentable building, and after those deductions, that is when one gets the amount that is taxable.  So, the old provision, which talked of rental income, was misleading.  Rental income is taxable, but rent per se is not taxable.  In order to tax it or subject it to tax, you must first make the deductions, which are allowed under the Income Tax Act, as 20 percent.  So, I thought I would make that clarification that we are replacing the words ‘rental income’ with ‘rent’ because rent is not taxable while rental income is taxable.

The second aspect where I want to make some clarification is in paragraph 5 of the Bill.  The original provision in Section (20)(g) of the Act stipulated that: “any contribution or similar payment by an employer made to a retirement fund for the benefit of the employee or any of his or her dependants is not considered as income for purposes of tax”.  Now that posed two problems:

One, it did not stipulate the contribution which is talked about, so we want to make it clear that that amount which is not taxable is a contribution made by the employer to a retirement fund.  Otherwise, if it was left like that, one would argue that his income, which is supposed to go to a retirement fund should not be subjected to tax, and yet we know we first subject the whole income to tax before we deduct the sum that goes for a retirement fund.  With those few explanations, I beg that Members support the motion.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Prof. Kamuntu): Thank you Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. The Committee of Finance Planning and Economic Development scrutinized the proposed Income Tax Amendment Bill, 2001, and we held meetings with the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development, as well as officials from Uganda Revenue Authority.  

The Committee reviewed the Income Tax Act 1997, the parent Act - this yellow one - and also the Report on the Finance Bill, 2001, which you passed here as well.  From this review, the objects of the Income Tax Amendment Bill, 2000 are basically four: One is to rectify, as the Minister has said, the errors and the omissions committed since the enactment and implementation of the Income Tax Act 1997, and the proposed amendments are largely technical corrections. And that is what the Minister has confirmed to you, hon. Members.

The second object is to ensure equitable treatment between interest earnings from Treasury Bills and other earnings on loans and other investments. We could be making observations to show that the amendment now establishes a better treatment in terms of tax earnings.

The third object is to allow employers who provide housing to their employees not to include housing expenses in the employee’s taxable income.  That is what the Minister has tried to elaborate as well.

Finally, there are deductions, which are now being proposed by this amendment, of expenses in preparing of a company for offering shares on the stock exchange.  These four objects are reflected in the proposed amendments. The Committee observed as follows:

• The Income Tax Act, 1997 has been found to have a number of errors and omissions, and the Bill has corrected these.  

• By taxing Treasury Bills, the Amendment is favouring or at least encouraging commercial banks to lend to the private sector. Most commercial banks were investing in Treasury Bills at the expense of lending to the private sector because Treasury Bills were tax-free. This Amendment will now put this tax on equal footing, and we think it is good.  

• On the rental of employers, we observed that the Amendment would now avoid double taxation and equally act as a relief to over taxation.

• To prepare a company to be offered on the Stock Exchange, you incur quite a lot of expenses of auditors, prospectus, legal fees and so on. Deducting them can now relieve these preparatory expenses. And this is an incentive; the company should now offer their shares on the Stock Exchange and they should promote Stock Exchange operations in the country.

• It is also important to note that the financial implications of the proposed Amendment Bill have already been covered in the Financial Bill, 2001 in the relevant revenue projections. Therefore, the provisions of the Budget Act 2001, which require indicative financial implications, if any, of every Bill introduced in Parliament, have been addressed.

The Committee recommends that this House adopts the report and the small amendments attached to the report.

In conclusion, the Committee would like to thank the Minister and his officials, and we would like to thank the Members of Parliament for their contribution in facilitating the work of the Committee. I beg the House to adopt the report and the suggested amendment.  I thank you. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. I will now put the question that the Bill entitled “The Income Tax Amendment Bill, 2001” be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

(Clause 1, agreed to)

Clause 2 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr. Chairman, Clause 2 in the Bill says, “This Act applies to years of income, commencing on or after 1st July 2001” and this sounds clumsy. We are therefore proposing an amendment to the clause to read as follows: “The Act shall come into force effective 1st July 2001”.  I beg to move.

MR. WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr. Chairman, I am just seeking clarification on this matter. Given that the consent to this Bill will definitely be after July 1st, I was wondering whether that is the best way to frame this.  I wonder whether it should not be “this Act shall be deemed to have come into force”, because we are really doing this well after 1st July, and this is retrospective.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Technically, what the Member has raised is correct. We are passing the Bill in December when in effect it comes into operation on July 1st. Therefore, I have no objection to the wording “it is deemed to have come into force effective July 1st 2001.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I will now put the question to the proposed amendment improved upon by hon. Wagonda Muguli of Buikwe North.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 2, as amended, agreed to)

(Clause 3, agreed to)

(Clause 4, agreed to)

(Clause 5, agreed to)

(Clause 6, agreed to)

(Clause 7, agreed to)

(Clause 8, agreed to)

(Clause 9, agreed to)

(Clause 10, agreed to)

(Clause 11, agreed to)

(Clause 12, agreed to)

(Clause 13, agreed to)

(Clause 14, agreed to)

(Clause 15, agreed to)

(Clause 16, agreed to)

(Clause 17, agreed to)

(Clause 18, agreed to)

(Clause 19, agreed to)

(Clause 20, agreed to)

(Clause 21, agreed to)

(Clause 22, agreed to)

(Clause 23, agreed to)

(Clause 24, agreed to)

(Clause 25, agreed to)

(Clause 26, agreed to)

(Clause 27, agreed to)

(Clause 28 agreed to)

(Clause 29 agreed to)

(Clause 30 agreed to)

(Clause 31 agreed to)

(Clause 32 agreed to)

(Clause 33 agreed to)

(Clause 34 agreed to)

(Clause 35 agreed to)

(Clause 36 agreed to)

(Clause 37 agreed to)

(Clause 38 agreed to)

(Clause 39 agreed to)

(Clause 40 agreed to)

(Clause 41 agreed to)

(Clause 42 agreed to)

(Clause 43 agreed to)

(Clause 44 agreed to)

(Clause 45 agreed to)

(Clause 46 agreed to)

(Clause 47 agreed to)

(Clause 48 agreed to)

(Clause 49 agreed to)

(The title agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr. Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr. Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2001” and has passed it with one amendment.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr. Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr. Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2001” be read the Third Time and do pass.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2001” be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, congratulations! (Applause)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE INCOME TAX ACT, 2001”

MOTION

MOTION TO REQUEST HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO ADDRESS PARLIAMENT

Mr. Aggrey AWORI (Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament, to invite His Excellency the President, Y.K. Museveni, to address Parliament on matters of national importance and utmost urgency at the earliest opportunity.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move. 

MR. SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, “WHEREAS relations between Uganda and her neighbour, the Republic of Rwanda, have been deteriorating rapidly almost to the point of war, given the inflammatory statements and articles in the media attributed to senior officials of the two Governments; and reports that both countries were harbouring and training rebels for subversive activities;
 
AND WHEREAS the purported letter of His Excellency the President, Y.K. Museveni, on the 28th of August 2001 to a British Minister, Hon. Clare Short, about an increase in Uganda’s Defence expenditure due to alleged Rwanda’s recent hostile attitude towards Uganda, also raised a lot of dust in the air;

AND WHEREAS at the invitation of the British Government, President Yoweri Museveni and President Paul Kagame of Rwanda met in London on the 7th of November 2001 for mediation talks;

AND WHEREAS the Cabinet has failed to harmonize its position with Parliament on the modalities of privatizing or selling Uganda Commercial Bank Limited, given the numerous unfulfilled pledges by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to respond to Parliament’s concerns on this issue; and the intransigence of the Governor of the Bank of Uganda in this process; 

AND PURSUANT to the provisions of Article 101(2) of the Constitution, stating among other things that ‘the President shall address Parliament from time to time, on any matter of national importance’;

Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that we, Members of Parliament do hereby resolve as follows: 

As a matter of National importance and utmost urgency, His Excellency the President, Y.K. Museveni, is invited to address parliament at the earliest opportunity on the following important and very urgent issues:

1. (a) The current Uganda-Rwanda relations, and the way forward.


(b) (i) Authenticity, substance and wisdom of the purported letter of His Excellency the President to a British Minister, Hon. Clare Short, about our Defence expenditure and relations with Rwanda
           
  (ii)The efficacy and import of London (Lancaster House) Talks and Agreement;

(c)  Privatization of Uganda Commercial Bank Ltd, for example, the modalities and transparency of the sale, the role and mandate of the Governor of Bank of Uganda vis-à-vis the Financial Institution Act of 1993 (31 to 33) and Article 162 (2) of the Constitution.  

We invite His Excellency the President to tell us about the status of security in northeastern Uganda, referring specifically to Teso and Karamoja, and the way forward. And here we are referring again to the disarmament programme and long-term solutions to good neighbourliness in the sub region. Resettlement of internally displaced people- (Interruption)

MRS. SEBAGEREKA: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to take us back on issues that are being handled day by day, and which are in the Press and everywhere? Is he in order to call upon His Excellency the President to come for issues that are already being handled? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, the problem is about the right of a Member to bring a Motion. At the moment, I do not know whether we are concerned with the details and whether the details are good or not. But of course, the Member gave notice of this Motion, and the Business and Welfare Committee allotted him time to table his Motion. Whether the Motion has merits or has no merits, that is a different matter, which the House will consider.  

So, the Member is right, as a Member, to bring a Motion so long as the Rules of Procedure have been followed. But of course, hon. Member, the Member is saying this matter is being handled by other institutions of state, and she does not consider it appropriate for us to consider the same matter in the House. But as for the right to bring a Motion, you have that right, but whether it is appropriate at this time, that is a different matter.

MRS. MWESIGYE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I am looking at the Motion before us relying on Article 101(2) of the Constitution. Article 101(2) reads: “The President may, also, in consultation with the Speaker, address Parliament from time to time, on any matter of national importance.”  

This provision in substance presumes that the President will address Parliament on his own initiative. Is it procedurally correct, Mr. Speaker, to accept this Motion, which seeks in the long run to compel the President to address Parliament? I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: No, I think this Motion cannot compel the President because Article 101 is just in favour of the President. The initiative has to come from the President. This is an ordinary Motion that really will just be moved, but it does not compel. It will be the President either to say okay, let met go or not go. If he does not come, then you cannot say he has disobeyed a parliamentary resolution. 

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, once again, thank you for your wise counsel. I continue with the last parts of my Motion. We are also requesting the President to come and address this august House on matters pertaining to promotion and deployment of UPDF officers, procurement policy and processes, allegations of corruption in the UPDF, alleged deployment of UPDF in South Western Uganda, the current DRC/Uganda relations and the withdrawal of the remaining UPDF troops from DRC vis-à-vis the Lusaka Agreement, and the last but not least, the need for national political dialogue, especially with political dissent.  

I am also requesting that should His Excellency the President accept the invitation, this agenda should be open for interaction or for exchange of views with His Excellency, varying the Rules of Procedure that govern Article 101 (2), so that Members of Parliament are able to ask any question for clarification from His Excellency the President for further elaboration. That is why I am requesting that, should this invitation be accepted, then the rules could be waived so that Members can ask His Excellency questions.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: So that the President becomes a Member of Parliament, otherwise how will this happen?

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, when it comes to interaction, he has addressed the House before, and according to the Rules, although he has been good enough and kind enough to answer questions, we are requesting that he continues in that spirit.

THE SPEAKER: Then it should be an informal meeting. Because, what will happen is that he comes here and addresses, and that will be the end. Are you asking for an informal meeting or you are asking for a formal meeting?

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, if it is the matter of exchange of views with the President - well this is a formal invitation - I am ready to waive the last request.

MRS. ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to get clarification from hon. Aggrey Awori, and maybe from the Speaker. 

Some of the issues which hon. Awori has raised definitely fall under the Presidency, and hon. Awori is a Member of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. In that mandate, he can ably, through his chairperson, invite or seek to meet His Excellency the President and interact directly on these issues.  May I find out from hon. Aggrey Awori whether this avenue has been barred so that he is now bringing this as a Motion on the Floor of the House? And this may even lead to the House amending the rules to enable this kind of interaction, which would have been very ably presented if it was in the Committee? May I get this clarification?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I have read through the Motion of hon. Aggrey Awori. I do not know whether our Sessional Committees would not have interacted with the President. For example, what does he want to know about the promotions and deployment of UPDF officers? What do you want to know about the alleged deployment of UPDF officers in South Western Uganda? What allegation is that? Doesn’t the Army Commander have the right to deploy anywhere in Uganda? Is South Western Uganda in Kenya? Is it in Rwanda? Where is it? Does the Commander in Chief not have powers to deploy in any part of Uganda? So the motion itself was good, but it is now mixing up issues calling for a formal and informal - what is this confusion?   Can’t our Committees handle this?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aggrey Awori, are you still including that bit ‘pursuant to provisions of Article 101(2) of the Constitution the President…’ – because if you do, as I have said, this is the provision that equips the President to seek opportunity to come and address Members? Are you putting it as a basis of this motion?

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, first of all, I will start with clarifying the points you have raised, before procedurally I come to the last two questions from the Floor by my hon. colleagues.  I would have done so, but with your permission, if we are now open for debate, I can justify the motion.  But if it is a matter of procedure, on how I have related a, b, c, d, Mr. Speaker, I will start off clarifying what you have sought to understand from me on the part of the motion.  

Number one, Mr. Speaker, I do not necessarily insist on that.  It was a matter of reference that the President is permitted in case somebody thinks that I cannot invite him. The Constitution permits him to address this House from time to time on matters of national importance.  So, Mr. Speaker, I am not basing my entire motion on Article 101.  I am only inviting His Excellency the President to come and address this House, and Mr. Speaker, with your permission, in the same breath, I can answer my hon. colleagues who are concerned about the issues I raised.  

Mr. Speaker, number one, those issues will constitute the agenda, if and when His Excellency wishes to address this House.  They are not issues for debate today at all.  When you invite somebody, you need to tell him or her the purpose of the visit.  When you invite somebody and you do not tell him what you want, he might come and say, ‘what do you want me for, you said a matter of national importance, what is that’? There are so many issues of national importance.   That is why, Mr. Speaker, I have made an effort to elaborate some of the items, which need to be addressed by His Excellency, the President.  The second point, Mr. Speaker, my colleague raised- (Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me hon. Awori; have you said that these matters need not be debated now?  Is it what you are saying?

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I am not by any chance implying that. The agenda, which I am sending to His Excellency, attached to our invitation, is a matter of debate in this House, unless somebody feels that something could be amended by way of adding or subtracting.  That one I am open to.  But, Mr. Speaker, -(Mr. Vincent Nyanzi rose_)  

MR. NYANZI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to inform hon. Aggrey Awori and all Members of Parliament, that I am on the Committee of Defense.  Last week the President had invited our Committee and the Committee on Presidential Affairs, but we found out that many Members had gone to Tanzania and he postponed the meeting.   So very soon, we are meeting the President over these issues.  Thank you.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I would like to accept the information from my hon. colleague, who happens to be my neighbour, but it is totally superfluous.  Why do I consider it superfluous?  Mr. Speaker, this motion was sent to the office of the Clerk more than a month ago, before you got that invitation you are talking about.  

Number two, Mr. Speaker, the right of this House to access the President is not conditional to any rule or procedure or any part of the Constitution.  This is a cooperative, joint invitation by Members of this House who happen to belong to different Committees.  In the event your Committee was invited to State House, Mr. Speaker, the rest of my colleagues are not aware of it, and for that matter, since when have we ever reported to this House that we were invited to the State House and we have never been there?  Mr. Speaker, with your permission, can I also answer the other concerns of my colleagues?  

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, you doubt the information. Do we have the Leadership of the Committee here?

MRS. ZZIWA:  Mr. Speaker, I happen to be the vice chairperson of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, and I want to affirm that, yes, we received correspondence from the Clerk to that effect, and it is only unfortunate that most of us had gone to Arusha to witness the official launching of the East African Community.  

So, I think hon. Aggrey Awori will bear with us that, even in the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs, this very issue was being handled.   So, maybe he would just be patient and when we have the opportunity to meet His Excellency the President, most of these issues will be raised.  

I also wanted to add that while we belong to different Committees, these Committees are not closed.  If any Member has an issue, which he would like to raise in a particular Committee, he is free to come in that particular Committee and raise it.  That is what I wanted to add.  

MR. OKOT OGONG: Mr. Speaker, I want to thank hon. Aggrey Awori for moving this motion, but I want to inform Members that the President is more than willing to meet Members of Parliament.  The President has expressed this by meeting individual Members of Parliament, by meeting Committees of Parliament, by meeting Members of Parliament in the caucuses, which is open to everybody, including hon. Awori.  

Mr. Speaker, just this morning, I, together with hon. Awori met with the Minister in charge of the Presidency, hon. Gilbert Bukenya, on this same motion and informed him clearly and very categorically that the President is willing and very willing to meet Members of Parliament, and right now he is in Karamoja to handle a matter that has been raised by hon. Awori regarding disarmament and as soon as the President comes back from Karamoja, he will be meeting the Members of Parliament as his first business; and this, we communicated to hon. Awori -(Mr. Awori rose on a point of procedure-)

THE SPEAKER: No, let him complete his statement.

MR. OKOT OGONG: Mr. Speaker, I want to appeal to hon. Members of Parliament that with or without moving this motion in Parliament, the President is ready and willing to meet Members of Parliament.  He inviting Members of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, of which hon. Awori is a Member, has demonstrated this.  The President was ready but that time, hon. Awori and many Members of the committee were not within the country.  They had gone to Arusha to represent Uganda in the inauguration of the East African Community. I want to request Members that this motion should be rejected because the President, even without this motion, is willing and ready to meet Members.  I thank you.

MR. AGGREY AWORI: Mr. Speaker, on a matter of procedure, several issues are being raised.  They are becoming cumulative and lack of my input is making them repetitive and more or less pushes the debate on the wrong track.  

Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my point to correct one impression by my honourable colleague on the frontbench, the hon. Minister for Parliamentary Affairs.  Indeed we had a meeting on this same issue.  It was on a matter of procedure that we differed. It was not the principle of inviting the President.  There is always this distinction between the substance and the method or modalities, the objective.  The honourable colleague on the frontbench has admitted that indeed His Excellency should address this House. 

My honourable colleague, the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee of Foreign Affairs, has even said the process is being cooked.  I admit the food is being cooked.  All I am saying, this cooking of food, we want the invitation to embrace all of us so that we can be at the table knowing what took us there.  Mr. Speaker, I do not want to divert the debate by getting into the substance of some of the items mentioned in the invitation.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I think it is not diverting the debate.  But I think the information we have now received from the Minister is that you had a meeting where you were informed that His Excellency the President is willing to meet Members of Parliament, even meeting the Committee.  So, he is just saying that because of this - I do not know whether you believe him or you do not - it is not necessary to go by a motion because the person you want to invite is willing to come and address you.  I think that is what I have gathered from him.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, you are absolutely correct in substance.  Number one, Mr. Speaker, I am saying we all agree, even the President agrees. I have no objection.  Our only problem I can see this afternoon is the modality.  Other people are diverting us into the substance of the items, and I am saying no. And as a matter of fact for your information, Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is like yesterday; we had a debate here over Kampala City Council.  There was a motion here and you remember how we handled it.  They said you send it to the appropriate Committee to consider.  What are the proper modalities by which you think this matter should be handled?

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Basically, I will wind up in this fashion.  Having noted the statement from the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs that indeed the President is willing to address this House in various methods, Committee or the whole House, Mr. Speaker, my motion and his statement are in unison.  I have no problem.  Let His Excellency address us on these issues at any given moment in any method or modalities.  The principle is that we have invited him.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker - (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Now, do you want me to put the question?

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I ended my statement having noted the Minister’s statement and the comments of my hon. colleague who is the Vice Chairperson, and I can see the mood of the House is expectant of His Excellency’s address to this country through this House.  Mr. Speaker, we have no differences at all.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: So, I think the Member has withdrawn the motion. So, the motion is withdrawn.  Is that the position?  Fine!  

Thank you very much, hon. Members, for this matter. And this brings us to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until Tuesday, 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 11th December, 2001 at 2.00 p.m.)

