Tuesday, 1 December 2009

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FORM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting. It is special because of what has happened to us – Parliament regrets the untimely death of hon. Balikowa, Member of Parliament for Budiope County in Kamuli District.

Hon. Balikowa, aged 40, a member of the National Resistance Movement in this Parliament died in a tragic accident in Mabira Forest on the night of Sunday, 29 November 2009 at about 10.30 p.m.

The late hon. Balikowa joined Parliament in 2006 and served on the Sessional Committee on Physical Infrastructure and the Standing Committee on the Budget. He was a very active and diligent Member of Parliament who effectively represented his constituency.

He was one of the Parliamentary “Peles” we had; he recently participated in a soccer competition in Arusha where he exceedingly performed well.

Fellow Members, we are here today to pay our last tribute to him and to make a proper send off of one our very Members who has passed away. We are here to do exactly that. Thank you for finding time to come and participate in the proceedings that are going to follow. 

The members of his family are here with us. We express our condolences to them for the loss of the late hon. Balikowa. We also express our condolences to his constituents of Budiope and the entire country that has lost a great son.

(Entrance of the late Henry Balikowa)

National Anthem (One Verse)

Laying of wreaths.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO 
THE LATE HON. HENRY BALIKOWA

2.55
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Henry Balikowa.

Let it be it resolved by the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda duly convened, constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 1st day of December in the year 2009 that: 

“WHEREAS Parliament notes with deep sorrow the demise of hon. Henry Balikowa, Member of Parliament for Budiope, Kamuli District, which occurred on Sunday, 29 November 2009;

AND WHEREAS the late Henry Balikowa has had a distinguished career as an accountant, dedicated political leader and a prominent teacher who deserves recognition of this Parliament;

NOW, THEREFORE, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda: 
(a) Do hereby convey its most sincere condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the people of Budiope, the Busoga community and the entire nation upon the loss of a distinguished son of Uganda;

(b) Do further register its unbounded admiration and gratitude for the services that he has, in the course of his life, rendered to the people of this nation.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded.  

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, this is a very sad moment for us all. We have lost a colleague; we have lost a friend and we have lost a brother.

Hon. Balikowa had been a member of the committee that I chair, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, but he had also been a member of the Budget Committee.

Hon. Balikowa had been a very effective and active member in my committee. He had always attended committee meetings in spite of the fact that attendance in committees is low.

During one of our oversight functions when we went out to the field, Balikowa was always the first to be in the bus. He appreciated the good work done by those we had gone to oversee; he gave positive criticism where necessary and he gave advice to people we visited. My committee and the party have really lost a great man. 

Hon. Balikowa articulated the needs and aspirations of the people he represented. He fought to get roads for Kamuli District. Members will remember that last financial year a number of roads were upgraded from district level to national level. Kamuli District got a lion’s share in this. He outsmarted some of us, even I the chairman because of how he bargained and put his points forward. 

My committee was planning to go and inspect roads in Kamuli District. Henry had convinced us to go there. I want to assure the people of Kamuli that early next year my committee will be there to inspect those roads.

Our roads in Uganda need urgent attention especially with regard to maintenance. The Government of Uganda, Ugandans and development partners want to see good roads. A Road Fund was established to provide an answer for funding road maintenance. 

The late Balikowa worked day and night to see to the establishment of this road fund. The late Balikowa even visited several East African countries to see how the Road Fund is operated. The late Balikowa effectively debated when the Road Fund Bill was presented in the House. I am sure all you, Members, remember his contribution. His contribution cannot be overlooked in the establishment of the road fund.

As you know, hon. Balikowa was an accountant by profession. He led the committee and gave assistance with regard to figures especially when we were debating ministerial budget framework papers and national policy statements. 

Hon. Members, if you can remember, this year’s financial budget had figures that were not tallying in many sectors. It was the late Balikowa, with his sharp eye for figures that this was pointed out. 

We have the BKK Ferry (Bukungo-Kasilo-Kaberamaido) ferry. Hon. Balikowa had been very keen on having a ferry operating in this area. Mr Speaker, each time he stood up in the House, I am sure you were worried and expected Balikowa to either be talking about the BKK ferry or the proposed new district of Buyende. He always reminded the Minister of Works about the BKK Ferry each time we met them, he never got tired of putting his point across.

The stage where we have reached in the procurement of the BKK ferry is because of the efforts of hon. Balikowa in particular, and the Deputy Speaker. I am sure the Deputy Speaker can give a long story about this ferry.

The proposed Buyende District; hon. Balikowa convinced us and justified the creation of the new Buyende District. By the time of his death, this was a concluded item. He talked about this whenever he got the opportunity to do so.

He advocated for the BKK ferry and the creation of Buyende District at every moment when he would be contributing in the House. He even supported other Members from other parts of Uganda who deserved to get a district. So, hon. Balikowa was not a selfish man. 

He was a nationalist. Since hon. Balikowa joined Parliament, at no time had he ever debated as a district councillor. He has always debated as a Member of Parliament debating for Uganda and not just Kamuli District. 

He had been a great friend of mine. We talked, laughed and shared many things together. Whatever hon. Balikowa did or said had been in the interest of the people of Uganda. He attended to his interests last.

Hon. Balikowa had been a God fearing man. I will always remember him because he had always reminded me to pray before we started business in our committee. 

Mr Speaker, let me talk about road safety. I want to remind you that Uganda’s record on road safety is not good. However, the Government of Uganda is trying and it is committed to improve the roads. 

Each year, we lose 1.3 million people globally and most of them are from the Third World. Road safety is a problem in many countries and it is not only a problem in Uganda. 

Last month, there was a global road safety conference in Moscow and our Minister of Works and Transport attended it. I am sure he will put into practice what he learnt there.

The Government of Uganda is in the process of putting in place a national road safety agency. I would urge the Minister of Works to expedite this exercise. To improve road safety, we need to improve these areas: from the perspective of engineering, that is, the curves, the smoothness of the roads and road signs among others. We also need to look at the enforcement. The issue of education is also very important if we have to address road safety. The formation of the national road safety agency will coordinate all these efforts with the Ministry of Health. 

However, before we form this national road safety agency, I appeal to the Police to enforce the existing laws. If the police enforced the existing laws, the speeding on our roads, the poor driving, the DMCs, there would be a reduction in accidents on our roads. 

I have been informed that the fellow who caused this accident was driving in the middle of the road. Honestly, this was wrong. This is being irresponsible and I appeal to drivers that there are other people using the road as well. If they are considerate to other drivers, this will reduce accidents. 

My committee, if voted the necessary funds, will spearhead a sensitisation crusade for road safety on behalf of Parliament -(Interjections)- yesterday, we were in Entebbe discussing about funding of committees. This is one area where I requested for a lot of money and that is why I am pointing it out.

Hon. Balikowa had been a great member of the NRM party. He had assisted the party greatly and the party will miss him.

Hon. Balikowa had been a friend to all of us. We shall miss him; Parliament will miss him and the rest of Uganda will miss him.

I convey my sincere condolences to the family of the late Balikowa, relatives, friends, the people of Budiope, the Busoga community and the entire nation upon the loss of hon. Balikowa. 

To you, the family members, Henry is gone and he will not come back. You have lost a loving father; you have lost a loving husband; you have lost a bread winner among other things. However, you must re-adjust and organise yourselves to fit in the new situation. But most importantly, I appeal to the family of the late Balikowa to put everything in the hands of God. It is God who gives and it God who takes. Henry is gone. May he rest in eternal peace! I thank you.

3.11
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I rise to second the motion of paying tribute to our fallen brother, the late hon. Henry Balikowa, Member of Parliament Budiope, Kamuli District, for his illustrious life and contribution to the welfare of the people of Budiope, the Busoga community, the NRM cause, our Parliament, our country and to humanity.

I also would like, on my own behalf and that of the people of Butembe, the NRM caucus, to register condolences over this most untimely and tragic loss of a highly resourceful person in the person of Henry Balikowa.

The death of Balikowa is a major tragedy to all of us. His death has robbed his family of a husband and father. It has deprived the constituency and NRM, as a party, of a highly dedicated mobiliser and development minded person. 

Balikowa died in a motor accident when the vehicle he was travelling in collided with a sugarcane truck in Mabira Forest. He had had a tight schedule in the last two to three days just like many of us Members of Parliament who have been working around the clock in our constituencies and in other parts of the country, to serve our constituents and the country. It is highly possible that just like many of us he could have been overcome by fatigue at the time of the accident. 

In the death of Balikowa, we have lost a good East African, a good Ugandan, a good nationalist and a good representative of his constituency. Balikowa appreciated and advanced issues, which address the national development agenda, as you have heard from my colleague hon. Byandala. His qualities and attributes as a nationalist came to the fore particularly when he handled work in the committees of Infrastructure and Budget.

The East African credentials of our fallen brother always came in handy through his participation in activities that fostered the coming together of the people of the five partner states and I believe many of you will recall that recently in Arusha, he did a lot of work to galvanise various interests within the East African region.

At the age of 40, there was still a lot hon. Balikowa was planning to do to serve his constituency and our country. He had painted his life to the service of his people and indeed by the time he met his death, he was coming from his constituency where he had addressed several consultative meetings on the way forward for the people of Budiope. 

Balikowa led the people of Budiope in advocating for the creation of Buyende District. He wanted services to be brought closer to his people and in effect tap into the benefits that go with the establishment of a new district. Some of these are creation of jobs, provision of hospitals, road units, electricity, tap water, et cetera. 

He sought to transform Budiope and its environs to fit the acceptable present day living approaches. He wanted his people to live a sedentary life style as opposed to the nomadic life style they were used to. Most of the people in Buyende are cattle keepers and keep on moving from one place to another looking for water and pasture. 

By seeking to transform the lifestyle of his people, he had exhibited traits that indicated that he was a good student of our President, Yoweri Museveni, who some time back in the 60s and 70s led to similar transformation of his people in the Nyabushozi from a pastoral life to a sedentary life.

I would like to add that hon. Balikowa always looked forward to our trips to Rwakitura because in visiting Rwakitura, quite often, he was helped to take on board benchmarks that were vital for his people and for his constituency. 

The late Balikowa will be specifically be remembered for the following:

1.	Advocating for the establishment of a new district of Buyende, which our NRM Government has granted and took effect in July 2009.

2.	Advocating for the power extension to his constituency, and in particular to Bukungu Landing Site where fishing is big business and hence availability of electricity is an imperative for the establishment of fish factories and other production facilities. I must add that in the quest to pull electricity to this part of the country, he did not only get electricity services provided, but he also managed to convince the authorities that electricity in this area of the country should not be provided by Umeme but should be provided by a local concession.


3.	He also advocated for ferry transport services to link his constituency of Budiope to the constituencies in Lango and Teso. In effect underscoring the importance of easing of utilisation of water transport, which is one of the cheapest modes of transport that one can always take advantage of in ensuring accessibility and interruption of people from one area to the other and the gains arising from the trade that would flow between these various regions of the country. 

4.	The late Balikowa also advocated for the construction of a tarmac road between Kamuli and Bukungu Fish Landing Site. In effect he was trying to ensure that the cost of doing business in this part of the country would be greatly reduced and, therefore, lead to the attraction of investment in this part of the country. 


5.	The other thing that hon. Balikowa will be remembered for is his strong advocacy for pursuing Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education. For these nomadic people these would be critical in transforming the values that they would stand to appreciate in order to thrust them into the future. 

6.	Lastly, we need to applaud the late Balikowa for his steadfast and unwavering support for this part. That is something that many of us have always known and seek to talk about even at this moment. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to second the motion and may the soul of the deceased rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

3.21
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, I support the motion. On behalf of government and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved and to hon. Members of Parliament on the tragic death of the late hon. Henry Balikowa.

As Leader of Government Business in Parliament, I wish to confirm that whenever the NRM party focused on an issue, and agreed on a position to be adopted in Parliament, the late hon. Balikowa has always complied with the official position of our party. 

This means that he has been a disciplined person. There is no organisation which can run efficiently if its members defer its rules of the game. By being disciplined, and predictable, hon. Balikowa contributed to the smooth implementation of a multiparty system in Uganda. 

Hon. Balikowa requested government to grant a district status to Budiope to be called Buyende District, as you have heard. Cabinet accepted his request and the Motion for the creation of Buyende District among others is before Parliament for approval.

He also argued and worked closely with government to establish a ferry to connect Kamuli to Lango and Teso. He lobbied government to establish a fish processing plant at Bukungu Landing Site on Lake Kyoga. This project is being implemented and will create jobs for the people of the area. 

Government is very concerned about the road carnage which is claiming the lives of many Ugandans. It has been established by Police that 80 percent of the accidents on the roads are attributable to reckless driving; over speeding; driving under the influence of alcohol and drugs; driver fatigue, especially in respect of buses and lorries; driving while using a mobile phone; and excessive and dangerous loading –(Interjections)– and of course bad roads. (Laughter)

Government has, therefore, taken the following steps to address the road carnage. In 2005 there were 300 traffic personnel but now there are 1,094 personnel. They have nine patrol vehicles and 42 motorcycles concentrated in Kampala and the highways. 

To address the problem of over speeding, Police has acquired 49 speed guns. To check drinking under the influence of alcohol, Police has acquired 17 breathalysers. Police has also acquired 24 digital cameras which will capture evidence required in courts of law. Police acquired 30 radios for communication and co-ordination of traffic operators. 

Police has arrested Mamba Emmanuel who was driving the sugar tractor belonging to SCOUL in a reckless manner, in the middle of the highway, before the accident which claimed the life of hon. Balikowa. Police had already agreed with the manager of SCOUL that these tractors should never be driven along the highway. Mr Mamba Emmanuel violated the agreed measures and is going to face the courts of law. 

Ugandans are urged to be disciplined while driving. May God sustain the bereaved. I beg to support the motion.

3.27
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Rt. Hon. Speaker, I rise to support the motion. I stand here on behalf of the Opposition in Parliament and on behalf of the people of Terego, whom I represent, to convey to the bereaved family our deep and sincere condolences upon the death of our colleague, Hon. Henry Balikowa, which occurred in a tragic accident last Sunday.

Ever since we came to the Eighth Parliament, I got to know Hon. Henry Balikowa more intimately when I had a trip with him outside the country. I was with the late hon. Balikowa in Geneva for the IPU conference and that was the moment when I had personal contact with the late honourable member. From the time we came back, whenever we would meet in the corridors of Parliament, we would greet each other, “Munna, okoba kyi; munna, mpegano aye”. We would always chat with such terms among ourselves –(Interjections)- This is not the time for us to talk about the meaning of the slang between me and the late hon. Balikowa. Those of you who know some little Lusoga, you know that is a sort of greeting for a person you are very close to. 

Hon. Balikowa was a man who stood for the truth. Hon. Balikowa was not a political fanatic to assume that because he belonged to this party, even if it does something wrong he should still support it because he is a member. We remember the late hon. Balikowa when he stood on the Floor of this House in defence of his people who were militarily manhandled after the elections of the Kyabazinga. The late Balikowa spoke without fear or favour because he was there for his people. He laid on the Table pictorial presentations of how the soldiers went on rampage beating his people in Jinja. 

The late Balikowa stood for Uganda as a country. He was not the type that said that he came from Busoga or Kamuli and, therefore, he limits his service to the people of Busoga and particularly the people of Budiope whom he represented in this Parliament. As a man and a person, the late Balikowa focused on the welfare of his people, as it has been said earlier on. He closely lobbied and advocated for the creation of a district for his people. It is very unfortunate that he is not there to see the fruits of a district status in his area. 

Colleagues, this is the sixth Member of Parliament we have lost in the lifespan of the Eighth Parliament and we are now beginning to ask ourselves, “How many of us will remain to see through the term of office of the Eighth Parliament?” We individually ask ourselves that question. It is very unfortunate that the death of the late hon. Balikowa came shortly after the death of our colleague who also perished in a road accident when she was coming from Nkozi University. 

Time and again, as legislators and leaders of this country, we have complained about the non-adherence to road safety measures in this country. It is not the first time that we have complained about the reckless driving of tractors without headlamps and reflectors on the Jinja-Kampala highway. It is very unfortunate that little is being done to curb vehicles in dangerous mechanical condition on this road. Out of every ten tractors belonging to Mehta Group of Companies, you would be so lucky to find one with a headlamp, let alone a reflector. That is the major cause of road carnage. 

Uganda is only second to Ethiopia when it comes to deaths on the road. It is a shame that we are here expressing concern just because we have lost dear colleagues. How many more do we want to lose before action can be taken? How many more should die on the road before Mehta’s tractors are impounded and taken to the IOV for inspection. This is the problem! (Applause) Somebody in the name of an investor – surely, Mr Speaker, this touches our hearts. We have seen the loss of one of our own. 

Uganda is the only country where you see lack of respect for proper road usage. A person gets his money, goes to Katwe and buys a motorcycle and on the same day he is already on that boda boda before he even acquires a licence. When it comes to campaigns, these are the people that we, the leaders, say are our voters -(Interjection)- Yes, we even get onto the motorcycles in order to take us to nomination grounds. So, there is need for seriousness on the part of the Executive of this country and on the part of the policy implementers. 

We have the Police but the Police too have their limits. The Police have also got counter instructions from above. One of the reasons that was being advanced by the Police was that whenever they impound Mehta’s tractors, they are told to release them immediately because they are frustrating the efforts of investors. How long are we going to continue with that?

Mr Speaker, the late Balikowa has left us; it is now those that are still alive to safeguard the lives of those who use this road. Sometime back on the Floor of this House, I said that during the regime of Idi Amin there was a regulation barring heavy commercial vehicles from travelling at night and indeed it helped. 

Most accidents happen at night because first of all, vision is not clear at night and as human beings, people are already tired. However, most probably if it were not because of this heavy tractor on the road at night, the late Balikowa would probably be alive in hospital. However, these are suggestions for us to consider in terms of how it would affect our economy and how it would affect the wellbeing of our people if we came up with regulations of that nature. 

In other developed countries, heavy commercial vehicles have separate roads, but in Uganda, our roads are narrow and all these heavy commercial vehicles are plying the same roads with the other passenger vehicles. That is our problem. I say this so that Government should be able to consider either coming up with appropriate legislation or other avenues of diversions so that we can have heavy commercial vehicles re-routed. 

This past week, we also had road carnage just in the city here, opposite Spear Motors. It was the same; it involved a PSV commuter and a heavy commercial vehicle. Today, we have again come up with policies where vehicles get themselves on the road without inspection by the inspector of vehicles. How many DMCs do we have on the road? You find the easiest time for them to travel is at night when the Police are not on the road. Colleagues, I appeal to each one of us to seriously consider coming up with programmes and enforcement of laws that can be of benefit to our people.

The late Balikowa has left a very young family; I saw the young orphans in church this morning. These are children who cannot fend for themselves. As an institution, as a Parliament, what do we have in place in terms of the wellbeing of families of our fallen colleagues? The late Balikowa died on duty; he was coming from his constituency. What policy do we have as Parliament? If the late Balikowa was in civil service and he died on duty, there are provisions. What provisions do we have as a Parliament for a colleague, for a staff of Parliament or for a Member of Parliament who dies while executing his or her duties? What social safety net provisions do we have as an institution? This is something that I feel as an institution we should be able to think about. 

As believers, it is the Lord that gives life and it is the same Lord who takes. We commend the soul of the late Balikowa into the Almighty’s hands. Let his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.39
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and in so doing, I wish to pass on the condolences of the leadership of the NRM party to the family of the late Hon. Henry Balikowa and to this Parliament on the tragic loss of this brother, Henry Balikowa. This was his first term in Parliament but as we have heard from the speeches of those who spoke before me, he had already had an impact on our politics. 

It is true, as the Leader of the Opposition said, Balikowa was a true Movementist. He was open, transparent and forthright. He never noticed anything that was going wrong and kept quiet; he talked about it. That is the true spirit of the Movement. 

In the short life that he has had as a public leader in Parliament, hon. Balikowa had clearly demonstrated that he was a leader of great potential. He was disciplined as a parliamentarian, he was disciplined as a party member, and there is no doubt that he was a role model in terms of managing oneself as a leader. It is tragic that we lost him in a road accident. 

It is true, Mr Speaker, that bad roads cause accidents, but it is also true that good roads cause accidents. In fact, I do not know where my brother, Hon. Kassiano Wadri was during Idi Amin’s time; maybe you were still young. You must have been young because in Amin’s time, people did not travel at night not because there were no commercial vehicles on the roads, but because of fear. (Interjections) Let me tell you because I was there. People did not travel at night for fear of their lives but for fear of government agencies because they were causing death. The greatest deaths that happened in Idi Amin’s time were by action of Government. Therefore, I think we should study these issues. 

We should look at what happens in other countries. Do they have such restrictions on the movement of heavy vehicles at night? No, they do not. Do they have accidents because of these commercial vehicles? No, they do not. Therefore, let us do the right thing that may stop accidents without crippling the economy of this country.

Mr Speaker, we in security have been studying this problem and we have no doubt that we need to invest more not only in road construction, to expand our roads as the traffic gets heavier, but also to have effective mechanisms of managing traffic. In most advanced countries, they have electronic means of managing traffic, speed, misbehaviour on the road and breach of traffic rules. We are in advanced stages in Uganda of introducing this system so that we are able to see at any given moment those people who are on the road –(Interjections)- Yes, CCTV is one of them where we are able to see what is happening on the road anytime. In fact, in some countries a penalty is automatic once you are caught on camera over speeding or acting in breach of traffic rules, for example, and this is the correct way to move. 

It is a pity that this comrade, Henry Balikowa, died in an accident. I really was saddened when I received the news. I was in the district of Nyadri yesterday and I decided to come in order to pay respect and tribute to him for the great effort he has rendered to his constituency, to the party, to this Parliament and to the nation in the short time that he has been with us. 

He fervently believed in the transformational programmes of his party. He pushed them as hard as he could. He had earned respect and admiration of his constituents because of the leadership he had offered them. He had earned respect and admiration beyond his constituency in the short time because he had demonstrated what leadership ought to be - to be disciplined, loyal to your cause, loyal to your party, and to fight for the services of the people that you lead. 

I am sure the greatest tribute we can pay to him in this Parliament is to pass the resolution for the creation of the new Buyende District, which he so strongly fought for. I think the greatest tribute we can give him is to emulate his example of discipline, dedication and service of his people. 

We know that the family of the late Balikowa is in great pain now. We know the people of Buyende are in great pain. We know the people of Budiope Constituency are in great pain. I just want to assure them that the party stands firmly with them as it has always done and will continue to do so to the extent that it can help in these tragic times when we really needed the leadership of Balikowa the most. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Leader of the federal alliance. (Laughter)  I understand she is travelling to Rwanda. There is a conference that she is going to attend, so I have to release her. 

3.49 
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to express my deep condolences to the family of our colleague, hon. Balikowa. The family of hon. Balikowa and friends, the people of Budiope Constituency and fellow mourners, my name is Beti Kamya. I am the Member of Parliament for Lubaga North and I am standing here to convey my personal condolences, those of Lubaga North and those of the entire fraternity of the Uganda Federal Alliance to the bereaved family at the untimely death of our colleague. 

My heart goes out to you, the widow, because I know what it means to raise young children without a father. However, I want to encourage you, my sister, to be strong for the children because I know that God is watching over you. I want to encourage you to celebrate the life of hon. Balikowa because he brought honour to your family and that honour will never go away. 

I want to encourage our children; walk with your heads high all the time because you are the children of hon. Balikowa and he was an honourable man. Walk with your heads high all the time. Our children, I want to show you the corner where Hon. Ruth Nvumetta is seated. Kindly put up your hand up so that they can see you. That is where your father used to sit. My wish for you is that one day in 10 years’ time or 15 years’ time, because I can see that you are young, one of you should aspire to occupy that seat because –(Applause)- it was occupied by a man with a vision; a man that has been given so much tribute by all the people who have spoken this afternoon. 

The death of hon. Balikowa has provided us with yet another occasion to focus on the management and safety of Uganda’s transport sector. For every high profile person that we mourn here, there are hundreds and hundreds of ordinary people who perish on our roads whom we do not mourn as a country. People in Uganda die like insects because of poor management of the transport and safety sector. 

It is not just the roads alone that play an important role. There are many things as well that play a big role in the unnecessary deaths. Roads are the territory of the Ministry of Works but the Police too have their own territory of the vehicles that are in dangerous mechanical condition. In Bakuli, which is situated in Lubaga North, every month we are treated to a horrendous experience of heavy vehicles which fail to control themselves from Namirembe going down towards the Kibuli Mosque. People die almost every month in that area but nothing has been done. It is not just roads and vehicles but boda bodas as well –

THE SPEAKER: For the record, did you mean Kibuli Mosque or Gaddafi? 

MS KAMYA: I meant Gaddafi Mosque. Thank you, Mr Speaker. All our hospitals have a special ward with people whose legs are suspended because of boda boda accidents. The United States Embassy in Uganda has given specific instructions to its citizens in Uganda not to use boda bodas. In fact, on Idd day, the 27th November, there was a formal instruction which was placed in the New Vision by the United States Embassy instructing their citizens not to use boda bodas. Other international organisations like the US Peace Corps will send their members back to the USA or to wherever they got them from if they do not comply with the instructions not to use boda bodas.

Parents who are able to, including me, have warned their children against the use of boda bodas. The boda bodas themselves are under constant threat of robbers and muggers but here we are; the Government of Uganda has abandoned the choice-less to the risks of the boda bodas. I have watched with my eyes closed a boda boda carrying four nursery children, one in front and three behind, negotiating recklessly through the traffic in town. They do not respect traffic lights, they do not respect traffic rules and they do this under the watchful eye of the traffic policemen who are always standing there.

We need to have a comprehensive traffic transport and public safety policy. We cannot just talk about roads as a piecemeal thing. It must be a comprehensive thing which includes a public transport policy. What is our public transport policy? Is it boda bodas? It is not adequate because they are too expensive, they do not carry luggage, the people are not trained and it is a death trap for many people.

As I wind up, I would like to encourage Government and all of us to consider a comprehensive transport and public safety policy not just for the roads but a comprehensive policy. If we do not do that, every time somebody dies, we stand up and condemn and call for hon. Nasasira’s head, but it is not comprehensive enough. We are still falling in the trap of half-baked policies which lead us to half-baked legalisation. Government, please, we needed a comprehensive policy yesterday.

I thank you very much for the opportunity you have given me to say this, but there are our hospitals also. The condition of preparedness of our causality units where some people would have been saved also needs a lot of attention. Let the death of hon. Balikowa get us a well-considered and thoroughly investigated comprehensive policy on transportation and public safety. God look kindly on hon. Balikowa’s young family and may his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

3.59
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejjinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will restrict myself to the motion. I would also like to state the old Kisoga wisdom that one of the most difficult things is for a parent to stand on the grave of his child. To lose a person at 40 while some of us are still around, you can see the pain. Who is likely to continue the course on which we have dedicated our life?

First of all, I want to give an official report. You have reported to the head of the government about this accident, but the one in charge of Police is me and I think the most authoritative report should be given to Parliament through me. We have already got a Police preliminary report about the accident, which clearly shows that it was caused by a reckless driver of SCOUL called Mambo Emmanuel. He was driving in the middle of the road allegedly to avoid potholes on the left side of his lane. When he saw an oncoming vehicle, he swerved back to his lane to avoid a head-on collision, but the trailer remained in the middle of the road. The approaching vehicle in which the late was, hit the side of the trailer killing him instantly. Noteworthy, the trailer had no lights illuminating it and that is the reason why the hon. Balikowa, who was driving himself, could not see the trailer. 

In the past, considering similar incidents caused by the trailers of SCOUL sugar factory, the Police had instituted measures to which SCOUL also agreed, where no SCOUL tractors would drive along the highway; they could use it just to cross. Unfortunately, these agreed measures were not respected. This accident would not have happened. The driver is in Police custody charged with reckless driving. (Interjections) I have to give you the report of what happened. For the rest, you are law makers and the law will take its own course. 

I beg to lay the report here on the Table and I would suggest that we restrict ourselves to the motion. As legislators, we should not come here to mourn; any of us is capable of moving a motion so that we can be able to consider the problem of road accidents. We cannot be able to do it here now because some of us are not emotionally equipped to debate and be able to come to rightful conclusions.

That said, I would want to say that Balikowa is one of the people from the younger generation from that part of Busoga who, although did not appear to contribute much, contribute very much to the stability of this country and the stability of the politics of this country. After the Seventh Parliament, a group that had always professed to be Movement jumped out and were trying to go into a different party and were, therefore, depriving the area of its pivotal role in brining peace and political stability to this country. It was the Balikowa group which actually came up to block that move. Up to now, Busoga still remains the stabilising factor with a sense of judgement. 

In 2006, all the people who moved out of the Movement were pushed out and that remained a stabilising group - [Hon. Members: “Katuntu”) – No, 2006. He was also pushed out and so we remained. This was the young group that had taken up the mantle to be able to build politics which is not based on intrigue and grabbing, but on clean politics. You will not find any person in that area in the group of grabbers. Therefore, it is a big loss to the area and the country because unless there are some cool heads, it is pretty difficult to keep this nation together. 

In that light, this has been a big loss but in Lusoga we say, “Awakula enhume, tiwakula ndala.” That means, where there is a very good bull there will always be other bulls that will emerge. We just hope and pray that Busoga will be able to provide people who are level-headed and who always put Uganda first before anything else. Balikowa was one of them.

I think I do not need to contribute more. I will just say that it may not be enough for all of us to come and pay homage and say good words when we take Balikowa to his resting place. Many of you may not be able to know his children. So I say, those who were great friends, please keep in touch with the family. A word to the children and guidance will be able to bring up these children who have been born in the glory of their father. Therefore, they are national products and all of us are responsible. Maybe they may have more courage to be able to defend the nation than those who have no history. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I have already identified those who will speak. However, honourable members, as you see, so many honourable members want to make their contributions but I am conscious of the fact that the casket will be transported to Kamuli this evening; I do not want them to travel at night. I have to curtail the debate somewhere so that they travel during day time. I am suggesting that whoever makes a contribution now may not take more than four minutes.

4.08
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I bring condolences from the people of Busiro South constituency to the people of Budiope and to the bereaved family of the late honourable colleague, Henry Balikowa. Like very many have said, Balikowa was a man of very few words but principled in character. 

We were with Balikowa about two weeks ago in Arusha, and I ascertained the real man in Balikowa. I ascertained his love for family. I ascertained a number of things in hon. Balikowa that were really very good. We came back from Arusha on 9th November and we met the young family waiting for hon. Balikowa. The wife told him, “Sweetheart, welcome back” and the kids said, “Daddy, welcome back.” I reflect on such moments and feel for what is happening to that family. 

Honourable colleagues, look at that young family. It is such a young family. So, let us say whatever we say on the Floor of Parliament and mean it. We have bad roads, so let us get to know why we have bad roads. We have DMCs on our roads, so let us ensure that DMCs are not on our roads. 

Yesterday early in the morning, the very first call I got was that Balikuddembe was dead -(Interjections)– that I, Balikuddembe, was dead. I told all the people that were talking to me that they were talking to a Balikuddembe who was alive. Throughout the day, I did see a number of things when I got one of my colleagues with whom I work. He and his wife had acid poured on them and we ended up in the casualty ward in Mulago. During the four hours I spent in Mulago, I was able to witness the death of over eight people –(Interjections)- because of road carnage. This is because of the bad health facilities we have in the hospital. 

The Ministry of Health and dear colleagues on the frontbench, I am speaking these words from facts. If you want to see what we go through as a country, you take two hours and go to the casualty ward in Mulago today. I was there this morning and I did talk to Dr Eyoku and Dr Ssekasanvu. People are sleeping on the Floor -(Member timed out.)

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to the late Henry Balikowa Bwanga who has left us and gone to a place in heaven. It was on Sunday around midnight that I saw my phone flashing. I had put it on silent, but it attracted my attention because it was flashing. I picked it up and the person who was calling was the CAO of Kamuli. But I had just been with the CAO of Kamuli at a burial in the home of the district chairman. So I was wondering why would the CAO with whom I have been earlier in the day call me at midnight. What is it that can’t wait or couldn’t wait?

I picked the phone and he broke the unfortunate news to me. I started calling people. I want to thank the following people: the Inspector-General of Police, the District Police Commander (DPC) of Lugazi; there was a young lady there who was very useful. I want to thank the DPC of Wandegeya and the OC Traffic of Wandegeya. I also want to thank the Mulago hospital people.

After that I went to Mulago as part of the advance party and I was surprised that the people in Mulago were there and they were very helpful. It is something that I had not known could happen in Mulago Hospital.

There were a number of people who we linked up with that night and one of them is hon. Elijah Okupa with whom we were in Mulago until around 4.00 a.m. There is another person in Kamuli called Kanaku from Budiope who drove from Kamuli to join us. It was a very sad moment to see him (Balikowa) in the state he was, having seen him earlier in a state of a live human being; it is a very sad situation.

I want to thank the Parliamentary Commission, which has helped to finance the process of burial and request that maybe a little more will be done to cover the remaining activity that requires additional financing. We also had talks with the Minister of Finance who was also helpful together with her Secretary to the Treasury.

Everybody has lost but let me say this; the people of Budiope have actually lost a leader of unique character and calibre. Budiope is one of those areas in Kamuli that are not on the same level with the rest. Someone is using the word marginalised but I do not know but it is an area that needs affirmative action and Balikowa although he was not known to many of us when he became MP, he actually has been able to show the difference. 

The people of Kamuli have also lost somebody who continuously reminded the Kamuli District Council and followed up on the subventions from government to Kamuli District to ensure that money that is sent there is utilised effectively for our people; he was a very enthusiastic legislator. 

Balikowa for those of you who do not know, he other name is Bwanga, he is a royal; he belongs to the Obwa Kyabazinga bwa Busoga and I want to say that Obwa Kyabazinga bwa Busoga has lost one of its people.
 
One other person who may not be able to say anything on the microphone today is the Rt Hon. Kadaga who actually has lost a friend. This young man has been running around to ensure that the parliamentary group has to sit and many more.

We have really lost a young man with a lot of energy so has Busoga Parliamentary group and I think we will have to find time and discuss what assistance can be found for the young family of Balikowa. That is something that we have to do because it is the right thing to do. The young man in his life has rendered selfless service to the Busoga Parliamentary group, to Kamuli, to Obwa Kyabazinga bwa Busoga and for that we will not forget. I want to pray that the good Lord gives hon. Balikowa Henry Bwanga eternal place and gives his soul eternal peace.

4.20
MR JULIUS BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to register my tribute by seconding the motion. Those of you who do not know what has been transpiring, Balikowa is my cousin. He is an uncle to my mother; we come from the same parish and neighbouring villages. We have grown up together, studied together, done so many things together and whatever he has been doing we have always planned together. It is unfortunate that he is gone. 

On the fateful Sunday we were together in Kamuli meeting the DPC on the security situation in Budiope and this shows how committed and dedicated we have been. He will be remembered for his development oriented mind and the zeal to have an educated Budiope.  Balikowa did play a great role when we were trying to weed out ghost teachers in Budiope County; the failures being talked about; the Prosperity-for-All, and several other things.

It is a tragedy to us as the people of Nduria Parish, which is the parish where we come from because about five years ago, we lost another great son who was a leader and LC V chairman by then and who also died in a motor accident. When such things happen, it brings back bad memories and this is more or less the same family.

My question and appeal to government is that we should not wait for our dear ones, those who matter so much to die before we come out to promise heaven on earth. I was saddened yesterday when I was coming and I reached the scene of the accident. There were potholes but by the time I went back, they had been covered. The question is: were they waiting for someone to die at the spot before these potholes can be covered? These are potholes that we are always talking about. We are appropriating a lot of money to the ministry but we wait for someone to die like he did and then we start lamenting.

There is another pothole after Lugazi, around Kawolo Hospital, which is very big. Who knows even today someone might die there!

On Sunday when we were burying the daughter of our LC V chairperson, I said that death is like a short relay. You get the stick, run and give it to another person. Little did I know that the stick was being given to my cousin!

4.25
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. We have lost a friend. I saw hon. Balikowa on Thursday, 26 November 2009 when they had returned from Tanzania where they had a good time. I made a joke to him by saying, “How could you go to Tanzania for two weeks only to come back with a consolation trophy?” He told me, “My brother, it was not very easy.”

How do we remember hon. Henry especially those of us who were in the same team, the parliamentary football team with him? He was a team player and team builder although he wasn’t the captain. These are the qualities that have eluded Africa for a long time. We don’t have team builders in the country and we don’t have team players in Africa.

To be a team player, you must share your vision with other people. You must have a common mission with the team and have common values with them. This was hon. Balikowa. In the parliamentary team, we shared a common vision and mission and we had values that we were defending.

I know that hon. Balikowa died due to human errors; not only on his part but if you look at the quality of our roads, you will know that there is a problem with our engineers even when you are not an engineer. Hon. Balikowa died on the Trans African highway. You can imagine that stretch of Mabira to be called a Trans African highway. We are cheated at every stage of road construction in this country. That is a single lane divided by a yellow line and it is called a double lane and a Trans African highway! This is terrible for Africa and for this country. You cannot construct a single lane, put a yellow line and tell the people of Uganda that this is a highway. This is fooling the people of Uganda.

The road has been marked a black spot, I don’t know for how many years. We are not telling or asking you to design special cars with sensors to tell us that these are black spots. We are not asking that because you can’t do it anyway but if you are really engineers, can’t you design these roads to reduce the accidents? Can’t you improve a black spot to reduce accidents? If we ask for that, are we asking too much from a government we pay our taxes to?

I propose that this Mabira stretch of a road - hon. Nasasira, do something. If you cannot put humps, put security lights. I know if I ask him to widen it and make it a dual carriage, it will be asking too much from him. I am proposing what is possible for hon. Nasasira. If you cannot do that, put road lights on this road –(Member timed out_)

4.30
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to pay my last respects to my fallen young brother. On my own behalf and on behalf of the people I represent, I wish to convey our sincere condolences to the family, to the people of Budiope, Kamuli, Busoga and indeed this House upon the loss of my young brother, Henry.

I did not know Henry until I came back to this House in 2007, but there are two points that I would like to share with you. If there is any constituency on Busoga where we, members of the Opposition, think we lost in an honest race, it was Budiope. He ran a clean race and won a clean election. He did not believe in anarchical politics of stealing votes. He did not believe in the politics that because you belong to the government, you intimidate your people in order to come to Parliament. Due to that, we worked together knowing that he had the mandate of his people.

One thing we shared was generational aspirations where we think we need clean politics for ourselves and for our children; where we need politics of tolerance. We do not need politics of intimidation. With this kind of politics we might differ, but we just need to narrow our differences and work for our people. That is the politics my young brother there believed in and I will always respect him.

Like many young people within our region Busoga - some of them Members of Parliament - they have that sort of politics. When I lose one of them, I am losing a comrade. Those are the people who believe in the prosperity of our region; people who believe in brotherhood and common aspirations. Henry, I will miss you.

When the late Viccy Kyaka died, I was with hon. Balikowa at the steps of Parliament and when the children of the late Kyaka came crying, Balikowa said: “Who will look after those children?” I also look at the late Balikowa’s children like that. They are of the same age with those of the late Kyaka and the question he asked is the question I am asking myself. The irony is that in that same place where hon. Nvumetta Kavuma is seated, the late Balikowa was always talking about roads and pot holes and he died because of a pot hole -(Member timed out_)

4.34
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti District): Thank you Mr Speaker. I beg that you bear with me and give me more time.  I was among the first people on the scene of the accident up to 4.00 a.m. when we delivered the body to Mulago Hospital. 

THE SPEAKER: I will give you six minutes, only you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I have known the late for some time. He lived in Kasilo County in Kagwara. We met in this House. We are neighbours; it is just the water that separates Kasilo County from Budiope. We, together with the Deputy Speaker, have been fighting for a ferry to link Kamuli to Kasilo to Kaberamaido. 

That night when I was coming from Kasilo, I reached Mabira Forest at 11.30 p.m. I found a heavy traffic jam and jumped out of my car. I walked with the driver and the police officer I was with in my car. I asked, “What has happened?” A gentleman who works with UBOS identified me and said: “Honourable, your friend is dead.” I asked who it was and he said, “Henry”. I moved forward and found Henry’s body being cut out of the vehicle. He was dead. We were all shattered. 

I tried to make calls, but it was difficult go through. The first person whose call went through was Lydia Wanyoto. The phones for most of my colleagues were off. Immediately, hon. Meddie Mulumba arrived. He had heard of the news because someone on the scene had communicated to the radio. Then hon. Patrick Ochieng arrived. We carried the late to the police car out of his wrecked car. All his legs were loose because all the bones had been broken. 

When the car hit the trailer – you know the front part of the tractor is smaller than the trailer so as he was driving, he hit the side of the trailer. That is why the impact was so grave. It crushed his legs and with the steering wheel near his chest, it pushed him backwards. He could not get out. He had to be cut out with the help of some Kenyans who were on that road. 

That spot – the chairperson of the committee, you remember very well the late raising the issue in the Budget policy statement in the committee room to the Executive Director of UNRA that, “Can you do something about these potholes, which are developing in Mabira?” If that had been done, Henry would not be dead today at the same spot where we lost people two weeks ago. In the process of dodging the pothole, he hit part of the tractor and passed away. How much do we need to talk to be listened to? You have heard colleagues saying he was an honest person. I used to sit in that corner in the last Parliament. That is where the late was sitting. He kept raising the issue of roads.

Hon. Mbabazi said he was a true Movementist. He spoke his mind when things were wrong or right. That is the message to all of us. When things are wrong whether we belong to that party or not, we must say things are wrong –(Applause)- and those in authority –(Applause)- should listen and do something to save people’s lives. How many people need to die before we rectify the problems in this country?

It is painful to lose such a young man. It is painful to the family; it is painful to the people of Budiope and it is painful to us colleagues who had just returned from the East African Community in Arusha where we were able to lift the name of Uganda in the process of widening and deepening the integration of the East African Community. The day we beat Kenya 4–2 in the semi finals, Henry was playing No.11 where he was very influential. Today we have received condolences messages from our colleagues in the Rwandan Parliament, the East African Legislative Assembly, the Tanzanian Parliament, the Wazee Club of Arusha and the Parliament of Kenya. 

Colleagues, we need to do something. Last week, we lost a few people just here at the Spear Motors junction. We who stay in Ntinda have been notifying you of potholes that have developed on that road from Spear Motors to Ntinda; we have been raising this issue and I have even communicated to KCC and the ministry but it is bad. 

This morning as I was coming from Kampala Parents joining the bypass, I noticed that someone is erecting an office block on Lugogo Bypass, which is going to cause jam and yet that place is a road reserve and nothing is being done! Mr Minister, please take it up. 

Can we also help the Police because when the Police came that day after we had called the IGP, the DPC of Lugazi was of help; he joined us with several officers at the site because the scene of the accident is next to that police station where there is normally a roadblock. When I asked them why they allow these trucks to travel at night, they said, “Please, honourable, do not blame us. Whenever we arrest these people, we get calls from all over saying ‘stop harassing the investors’.” And these are orders from above. 

Today, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker was telling us that on Sunday her cousin was arrested for over speeding at 50/60 kph in that place as they were going for burial - (Member timed out.) 

4.42
MR GERALD MENHYA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Mr Speaker, hon. members the constituency I represent is in the South of Budiope County. In other words, Budiope constituency is in the North of my constituency. So we have been close neighbours. 

Personally I am extremely shattered on account of the untimely demise of my colleague, hon. Balikowa through the tragic road accident.  The people of Ndwedwe, the village where he comes from, have missed him.  His parish, Ndulya and sub-county of Nkondo, Kamuli District and also his constituency, Budiope, have lost a great legislator and a great leader. 

Like the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker said this morning in Church, Henry was a Prince belonging to the Gabula Clan and, therefore, was extremely instrumental on this Floor fighting for Obwa Kyabazinga bwa Busoga. And I remember him for those eloquent remarks he made on the Floor when he was presenting the pictures that demonstrated nothing other than the tragic events where the people were clobbered left right and centre.

The late hon. Balikowa was a self made and seasoned politician who took the needs of his people as core business and he fought tooth and nail to address them. The late Balikowa demonstrated a rare skill of sourcing for resources both financial and non financial by knocking on different doors of different establishments – NGOs and private and government establishments looking for support for his people.

On Tuesday last week, he hinted to me that he wanted to get some boreholes from a certain organisation from within but of international nature. I asked him to take me there but he said, “Wait, the Executive Director of that organisation is not there, he has gone back home for leave and he is coming back next week on Thursday.” But he has not lived to take me to that establishment where he intended to get boreholes for his constituents. 

As a member of the organising committee for the funeral of my younger brother lying over there, I had the opportunity of visiting Mulago Hospital yesterday to find out the plan for the transportation thereafter of the deceased body. I asked the doctor whether hon. Balikowa had an opportunity of surviving if he had been picked fast enough from the scene of the accident. He said, no. The late Balikowa had broken over ten ribs and punctured his heart, which made him bleed about three litres of blood; and he had also punctured his liver –(Member timed out_)

4.47
MR MEDDIE MULUMBA (NRM, Luuka County, Iganga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker for allowing me to pay tribute to hon. Balikowa. On behalf of the people of Luuka that I represent and on my own behalf, I send my condolences to the people of Budiope.

There is no doubt that hon. Balikowa as everybody has said was a good man. He was dedicated and wanted the best for his people, for Uganda and for Africa especially East Africa as a region. 

I arrived at the scene of the accident fifteen minutes after the accident and it was quite a scene. The site of the accident is one that periodically has accidents; there was an accident on Thursday and there is an accident every week. 

This House passed Shs 1.1 trillion and hon. Suruma said he was going to launch an assault on bad roads. Where did that money go? The Prime Minister is here just telling us of good things and he is not talking about the bad roads. That place has over ten potholes and unless they do something about the roads, we are going to die on this Mabira road. 

I use that road every day, at night and during the day time. Everybody in Mabira tries to move as fast as possible to leave Mabira because it is not safe – the roads are bad and we are just here listening to government, Parliament and everybody lamenting. Up to when shall we lament? I think it is high time that these people from the works ministry come and tell us what they are going to do about that road. This business of them coming every time there is an accident and talk about good things, I think we should ignore them next time they come asking for money. If they do nothing, they should not come back to Parliament to ask for money and maybe even telling us how good the people were. (Applause) 

Besides that, we have these DMCs – people should try to respect traffic laws. The sugarcane vehicles and trailers always have one light or no light and reflectors at all and you may think you are following a boda boda because they are very slow. Up to when will people die? They are moving very slowly - what are they going to do about it? 

The hon. Kirunda Kivejinga, the Minister of Internal Affairs is here and he cannot talk about them seriously. What does he expect us to do? Should we riot? Most of your Members of Parliament move every day at night because they are busy people. I wish you can tomorrow go to Kamuli and see the road that takes you to the Deputy Speaker’s constituency. It was done in 1980 and it is in bad shape. Now, if a Member of Parliament dies, are you going to come here and say, “You know he died blah, blah.” (Laughter) We should get serious because we have bad roads and yet we are passing a lot of money to that ministry. Where does that money go? 

Having said that, May the soul of hon. Balikowa rest in eternal peace. I thank you.

4.50
MR MOSES MUKOSE (NRM, Busiki County, Iganga): Thank you very much – 

THE SPEAKER: No. Why don’t we mix the contribution with gender?

4.51
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): I thank you very much. On behalf of the Members of Parliament hailing from Buganda, the people of Nakaseke and on my own behalf, I wish to extend my condolences to the family and the members of the Football Association that we belonged to. We have come again to accept the silent and devious hand of fate that has taken another one of our own from us at a time when he had started to do the work for his constituents and indeed for this country. 

Everybody has said it – very committed, courageous and determined when he decides to do something. Hon. Balikowa got injuries during training and I told him, “Hon. Balikowa, we are going to miss you in Arusha”, and he said, “Abadiope tebapowa,” – meaning the Badiope do not give up. Indeed he was in Arusha, played his heart out and we got the trophy that we got. 

I also want to re-echo the concerns raised by the President at the burial of Brian Bukenya, the late son of the Vice-President. He wondered that whenever we mourn, religious leaders say, “God has called them,” and he was wondering why Africans are called early. The question I have today is that at 40, hon. Balikowa’s life is too short to be celebrated. Are our enforcement agencies facilitating God’s calling of our members? Is the works ministry facilitating the early calling? When we talk about this, it has nothing to do with political parties or the side of the House I am seated on. It has a lot and everything to do about the lives of Ugandans. When certain layers of these roads are put in people’s pockets and then we lose lives – certain kilometres are put in people’s pockets and little is done because you find a road that has been rehabilitated in one day and the same time you find potholes here and the other side is okay. 

I was perplexed when the committee chair said that more than a trillion has been given out –(Interjections)- how much must we appropriate? This pampering of investors must also come to an end. Is this disregard for traffic laws part of the pampering? We want taxes but what amount of taxes must be equated to an individual’s life? I think this must come to an end.  

Members of Parliament are very vulnerable because of the nature of our work. It is a Sunday and you have four speech days to officiate at; one at the extreme end of the constituency, another at the other extreme end and two in there that you must attend to. We are driving ourselves or use drivers whom we recruit ourselves – I will recruit a driver because he campaigned for me or because he is a son of my campaign manager. I want to suggest that Parliament recruits professional and experienced driver for Members of Parliament because of the nature of our work -(Member timed out­.) 

THE SPEAKER: The deceased was a member of the Budget Committee and I think the Chairperson of the Budget Committee will speak. A lot has been said about Mabira and yet there is the owner of Mabira –(Laughter)- then there is hon. Okello-Okello – but I have already received requests that I should release you early.

4.56
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to our fallen colleague who has been a Member of the Budget Committee. I am paying this tribute on behalf of the Members of the Budget Committee and on my own behalf. 

The late hon. Balikowa has been a Member of the Budget Committee since he joined Parliament in 2006. He will be remembered for his unwavering support and contributions during his time as a member of the committee. 

As an accountant by profession, he was a resourceful Member
and, therefore, made informed contributions especially where technical input was necessary. 

During the recently ended budget cycle, hon. Balikowa displayed to me a character of a team worker and a dependable Member. He is one of those Members whom you would be sure will be there to attend the committee meetings and indeed he has always been there despite the pressures he has as a Member of Parliament from his constituency. 

Hon. Balikowa, as already said, was an active football player and together, we used to train at the Rugby Sports Club for the last two months before we proceeded to Arusha where he again displayed his skills as a team player and indeed together with the rest of the team, especially at the semi-finals, managed to get us a 4:2 win over Kenya and that was splendid. It was his contribution as a member of that good team that made that success. 

All Members of Parliament will remember his endless smile; whenever you met him, he would always smile and had no quarrel with anybody. I remember last Thursday when we were debating the Land Bill, he came in a very unique attire and I think everybody noticed it. He wore a dark navy blue suit, a red shirt and tie and when I met him I said, “Honourable, you are very smart.” He said, “Yes. Today is a day for serious business and I am dressed for serious business.” So, I laughed. Whoever met him made a comment on the way he was dressed. 

That said, I think this time as a Parliament we have to get serious, especially with the death traps – the tractors of SCOUL. A lot has been said, but for today, how many more are we waiting to lose because all Members of Parliament from the East – I am also one of those who travel at night. If the tractor does not have only one light, you just see a dark shadow and if you are lucky you will see it. You have to make sure you keep on your side of the road, but when you reach Mabira and because of the dangerous nature of that place, you have to drive very fast. I am sure these are the circumstances under which our honourable colleague had to lose his life. Can’t it be decided today that these tractors be banned forever because so many have died and are dying every day. So many of us have escaped narrowly hitting those tractors – several times and not just once! I am appealing to Members of Parliament that these tractors be banned on our roads - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: What I must say is that, the organisers have already asked me to end the debate latest by half past five. 

5.03
MR MOSES MUKOSE (NRM, Busiki County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to take this opportunity to talk about my brother who has just died in a motor accident. I came to know hon. Balikowa four years back immediately after the NRM elections. We met at the NRM Secretariat and from that time, we have been family friends. 

Hon. Balikowa has been a man who could not mince his words as far as his developmental factors are concerned. Another factor which hon. Balikowa has prospered in is prosperity for his family. Hon. Balikowa would in most cases talk about his family, especially his children; and three weeks before he went to Arusha, he was planning to pay school fees early for next term with the money he got for Arusha but unfortunately, this could not be achieved. He would pay his school fees earlier than the term begins simply because he was caring for his family. 

Another unfortunate thing which I got yesterday from his children is that after the death of hon. Balikowa, his children were asking me various questions, “Uncle, our daddy has died. Shall we go to school? How shall we go school?” Most of those children are yearning to go to school, but the question they were putting up was, “How shall we go to school after the death of our father?” 

Hon. Balikowa has been a person caring for his madam. When we were in Arusha, as other people were saying, he was always communicating to her. He could get some money and buy airtime to communicate to his family. 

On the cause of his death, I am totally amazed by these trailers of Mehta. For the case of Madhvani, you will never see a trailer of Madhvani crossing the road. Why are those of Mehta? (Applause) From Wairaka up to Magagamaga you will never see a Madhvani truck crossing the road, but for Mehta’s case, it is different. Those trailers have no lights so at night they put on chains to make noise and then you will know that it is a trailer coming. When those chains make sparks, you know it is a cane truck coming. 

This is not the first time; at that particular spot where hon. Balikowa died, the proprietors of Sax Pub died from there. Then an Inspector of Police called Byekwaso died in that place. Those potholes, as hon. Balyejjusa has said, that they had covered them, but within one month the potholes will be there again! They only cover part of it, but if it rains, those potholes will be uncovered within just one month. As most of these people who drive through Mabira know, at night, even during rainy seasons, Mabira is covered with mist and fog. At that time it had rained and so the whole of Mabira had been covered with mist and fog and you could not see ahead. If you saw anything, it was only see a small light which would make you think that it is a motorcycle coming. 

Honourable members, let us stand up today, and make a resolution to totally ban those vehicles from using the main road. Let Mehta make his own roads like Madhvani –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we came to pay tribute to our fallen friend. Let us concentrate on the motion of that purpose for the time being. We can, however, follow up this matter later. Let us respect the dead by concentrating on his motion. 

5.07
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion, but before I can say anything, allow me to thank God for the life of Hon. Henry Balikowa. He has been a close friend and we used to share same issues, we used to sit together and he could never contribute without consulting me. We could share issues regarding the region, the district and his constituency before raising an issue on the Floor of Parliament. Henry Balikowa has been a true friend and a confidant of mine. Indeed, he was my best man last year at my wedding. Yesterday, I looked at the photos and I could not imagine missing Balikowa. 

Henry Balikowa has been a team builder. When we were in Arusha, there came a time when we were playing the finals. The captain had instructed us to leave the pitch because of the way the referee was handling business on the pitch, but Balikowa said, “Please, for heaven’s sake, we are here as Ugandans; we have a name to protect; kindly stay on the pitch.” Odonga Otto had instructed everyone to leave the pitch, but Henry said, “Please, members, calm down.” In a way, I personally felt like mishandling the referee because she was a lady but hon. Mawiya and hon. Balikowa calmed me down. They said, “Please chill; we are trying to concentrate and integrate the community. So, we should bear with the outcome.” 

We have had a lot to share especially as far as Busoga is concerned. Henry Balikowa loved Busoga; he loved the Kyabazingaship just like everyone stated here. When I raised an issue of national importance as to why people were battered in Busoga during the eve of the Kyabazinga elections, the way Balikowa presented matters here and even the photos he laid on Table, told that he had a lot of interest in seeing Busoga become a peaceful region. We will miss him, but I pray that Government takes up all those issues that Balikowa had raised on the Floor of Parliament such that as we say, he has a peaceful rest. He will not rest peacefully if certain things do not move the way he wished them. 

Some of us have begun feeling lonely because when I look here, I miss him. We were together on Thursday after the Land (Amendment) Bill. Balikowa has not been a regular Member in the canteen but on Thursday, we were here up to 9.00 p.m. We were having a good time until when I left for Iganga and he also left for Budiope in the night because we were preparing for Idd. People were calling us all over, asking us where we were going to pray from. So, we had to move. 

As I wind up, I want to appeal to all honourable members that as we parted on Thursday, Balikowa prayed that since we are done with Section 32(b), next on the agenda is Buyende District. Balikowa will not be here because he had promised us that on Wednesday, which is tomorrow, we would discuss the issue of new districts. In his absence, I pray that you all support him over this cause. His spirit will be here watching and I appeal to you that we support him in this particular cause –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us finish with the three Members and then the Minister of Works will come at the end. 

5.11
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all convey my sincere condolences to the family, the people of Busoga Kingdom and all Ugandans. 

I have known the late hon. Balikowa since after the swearing in of this Parliament and I have been interacting with him on a number of occasions. He was liberal, open-minded, humble, and friendly and he would not pass by anybody without saying hello. At least he would not pass me without saying hello. He was a very good man and we shall all miss him, but above all, he was humble. Some of us are hearing for the first time today that he was a prince. He didn’t behave like one. We know how these people behave with a lot of airs around themselves. (Laughter) 

My point today is lamentation. The roads are finishing our people. We come here and lament and go back and another accident happens. We lament in the media and on radio talk shows all over the country. Just 20 days ago, we were in Kakiri at the burial of yet another promising young man, Brian Bukenya, the son of our Vice-President. What disappointed me most on that occasion was that His Excellency, the President, completed the list of lamenters. He joined us in the lamentations. If the whole country from top to bottom is lamenting, where shall we go for solutions? Who will give us the solutions to these problems? Should we take it to prayer? I believe there is somebody in charge of this country. We cannot allow our people to go on dying everyday. Road carnage is being taken for granted now. Even today, you will go home and tune your radio and hear of somebody who has died on the road. Until when will this go on?

I would like to suggest that the government should go back and look at the Idi Amin Decree which banned trucks from travelling at night. It saves life. If that law is still useful, let us dust it, bring it here and make it an Act of Parliament. Kenya introduced the same ban last year because they could not afford to see their people dying en masse like we are doing here. 

Lastly, I would like to end with a word of advice. I know that as Members of Parliament we are stressed 24 hours and driving is another stressful activity. I know that drivers are very difficult people but let us utilise them. Secondly, avoidable night trips should not be undertaken. If you can avoid travelling at night, please do so -(Member timed out.)

5.16 
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Lango and on behalf of the Members of Lango Parliamentary Group, of which I am the Vice-Chairperson, I would like to send my condolences to the people of Busoga and more especially the district of Kamuli.

I came to know Hon. Henry Balikowa when we had just joined this Parliament because he religiously participated in the Public Service and Local Government Committee. He would always tell us about his district and the constituency until we started teasing him. We told him, “It looks like you need BUSAF (Busoga Action Plan) because it is not possible that without affirmative action, the people in Busoga, in your area, would move on.”

I want to summarise his character. This boy was so consistent. I would say he had humility. I do not know how to say it but I would say he was a very peaceful person. Every time he went to our committee and he wanted to move about the district of Buyende, which we could not even pronounce, the chairperson would say, “We know you want a district” but he would insist, “If you do not look at Busoga, yet we support the Movement Government, it looks like you people want us to die.” Those were his words in the committee. 

It reached a point when I did not know the difference amongst the three of them: There was Meddie, Milton and him because they would sit together in the Committee of Local Government to talk about the Busoga issue.

I always travel to Busoga and we are talking about Mabira. I want this Parliament to move because we have the authority that that area be widened. When you move from the Owen Falls Dam to Mabira, it is not far. Can’t we extend the power so that we have the security lights around there? Remember we lost the Chairperson of Busoga in Kamuli who was doing a lot of work in the fishing industry. He was handling 10 districts in the area of LKIMO (Lake Kyoga Integrated Management Organisation). The Chairperson LC V of Kamuli died on the same road and our Deputy Speaker keeps moving that side; we cannot lament!

We have the resources; this government has always said that the problem is no longer financial resources, but I want to add that there is mismanagement of the financial resources that we have. We have the money and wherever the money is put, it must be put to good use.

When they begin repairing the roads - I want to look at the Karuma-Gulu road where they are repairing. You find that the humps are put without any road signs and when you move you can die any time. Many people have died on that road and nobody cares.

Therefore, I want to move that the children of hon. Balikowa - actually, if I had the authority, I would have said that Mehta should pay for their school fees or else the government takes over.

I would also want to move that whatever benefits he has, this Parliament should be able to give it to him. And I want to propose that since the Prime Minister said that you are the pivot to stabilise this country, you support the government. I want to say that if you are to think of hon. Balikowa, then Busoga needs affirmative action. You forgot to say you need affirmative action. We have PRDP and we have NUSAF, you need BUSAF so that you stabilise Busoga. I thank you.

5.20
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I had almost surrendered but I stand up to support the motion and to pay my tribute to the family of my brother Balikowa. My condolences to you and the institution of Parliament, Busoga and the country at large. We have lost our very dear one. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

A lot has been said; I stand here to give a way forward. It is important that the government takes this advice or input very seriously to save the lives of Ugandans. I am happy my brother John, the engineer is here and he is taking serious note. I hope he takes this in good faith.

Potholes should become history not by words but in action. Mabira road should be widened as my sister has alluded to. Even Budo; if you are going on Masaka road, there is a sort of zigzag road somewhere there. These are risky areas which we know should be considered and widened. The problem I am talking about is that the roads are so narrow that if you have any problem as my brother Balikowa had, you have no way of dodging.

Where you are dodging, you are running away from a pothole, you are going to another pothole. We do not even have provision for those with motorcycles and pedestrians. Literally, you wave from a pothole in the middle of the road into another pothole on the side of the road. Let the design be improved.

I also emphasise that Mehta should pay for what has happened on our roads; should think about this young family. They are giving out scholarships; I want them to include the children of my brother Balikowa Henry. They should be paid for to ease the pain and as part of the punishment that their vehicles have been loitering on the roads illegally.

As I have heard, they are supposed to have other roads to pass through and we ensure that those vehicles stop running on the highways.

I think the Police should also expressly impound vehicles with only one headlamp travelling at night. I was also travelling that night from Kitgum, I arrived here at 2.00 a.m. but you could see heavy vehicles with one headlamp and you can even think that they are a motorcycle while they are big trucks. They should be impounded so that they do not travel at night. 

Lastly, we are talking about these bad vehicles and inspection of vehicles to ensure that they conform with the standards of vehicles on our roads. I was recently surprised to learn that what is in the offing is that we are trying to fish out foreign firms to come and inspect vehicles in Uganda to ensure that they conform with the quality of our vehicles to be on the roads. This is going to be a window for more corruption because we are fishing from foreign firms. Secondly, these foreign firms will not know exactly what type of vehicle and drivers’ mentalities we have in our country and that means we are going to spend money to hire foreign firms to come and inspect vehicles in Uganda and they do not meet the expectations -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. What I have seen in some countries I have been to, especially in respect of these big trucks and buses at night, is that they have lights that would enable a person who is passing them to know the profile because they have, for instance, lights on the top of them and so when you are coming you realise that that is a big truck. You find that some of these trucks, as Members have said, have one lamp and are offside and, therefore, you think it is a motorcycle when actually it is a big vehicle. Some of these things can be looked into to minimise the incidents on traffic. 

5.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am supporting the motion and I want, on my own behalf, and on behalf of the people of Ibanda South, as well as on behalf of the Ministry of Works, to extend our sincere condolences to the family of Hon. Henry Balikowa who has been a friend as well as hardworking Member of Parliament.

I came to know about the tragedy early in the morning. I was going to Munyonyo where we have got a seminar of International Labour Organisation on intensive labour construction technology by all African ministers of works and transport and labour going on. I had to take time to go and look at that section where the accident happened. I agree that that road is an old road which has reached an unrepairable condition and, therefore, needs to be reconstructed. And I am happy to note that this road has already been contracted out and the contractor was mobilising to start on its rehabilitation. 

Hon. Balikowa was a Member of the Committee of Infrastructure and he was very hardworking. Hon. Balikowa would pass the Ministry of Works every week. He knew how to do his things slowly without making a lot of noise. He would come and we would discuss, especially concerning the ferry to Bukungu-Kagwere-Kasiro. 

Mr Speaker, we have come here to mourn our colleague and would you please let me mourn and pay tribute to my friend Balikowa -  

THE SPEAKER: Let him finish because there are demands that I release you. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, we have researched information about the road carnage on our roads. It is true, as our Secretary-General said, that good roads kill and bad roads kill. When you look at the statistics, you will see that we have just lost the presidential advisor who died on Mubende Road. I was outside the country but when I came, I went directly to that place to see what happened. That is a very smooth road but he died. Recently, we had an accident on Bweyale that involved our colleague and a friend of mine, hon. Latigo. We have just had an accident with Kalita bus on a straight stretch of a new road. We have had accidents on Kiboga-Hoima. So, the question I am asking - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what the House would expect from you is reassurance that issues that have been raised here will be looked into for an effective remedy.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am driving to that. There are standing instructions between Police and Ministry of Works and Lugazi and Kakira - 

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not only in Mabira because these accidents will happen anywhere. But I think what we need is reassurance that you are going to take up the matter and see an effective way of handling it. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for your guidance. My ministry has got researched causes of accidents and we are trying our level best. And that road which is very old, we have already tendered it out and I am sure that very soon it will be a smooth road.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Like we have done with Jinja-Bugiri Road and other roads in Uganda. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much. Now, honourable members, this concludes the debate on the motion. But before we pronounce ourselves on the motion, I want to inform you that many condolence messages to my Office and to you have been received. One is from the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy here. The message is signed by hon. Justine Lumumba and the chaplaincy is contributing Shs 1.0 million towards the burial expenses. 

Then we have got one from Uganda Peoples’ Congress signed by Okello-Okello. They have put mabugo of Shs 0.3 million. 

There is a condolence message, on your behalf, from the Speaker’s Office and the Parliament is undertaking the burial expenses whose details cannot be given. 

There is another condolence message signed by hon. Okello-Okello, a Member from the Acholi Parliamentary Group. They are enclosing Shs 0.3 million for burial expenses. 

The Workers’ Parliamentary Group has also sent a message signed by Hon. Tuunde Mary Marion. Then there is a condolence message signed by hon. Omach, State Minister of Finance and another one from West Nile Parliamentary Group. 

There is one signed by hon. Kassiano Wadri, the Opposition Chief Whip and there is a message from the East African Legislative Assembly signed by Hon. Lydia Wanyoto Mutende, the Co-ordinating Secretary of EALA Uganda. 

We have got a condolence message signed from the Uganda Parliamentary Press Association by their President Emmanuel. Uganda Bureau of Statistics has sent a message to the family, signed by Mr John Male Mukasa, the Executive Director. There is another message signed by Wasswa Ziritwawula Joseph, the former Mayor of Kampala as well as one from Uganda Rural Enterprise Co-operative Union, signed by Hon. Reverend Canon Dr Hamlet Kabushenga Mbabazi - he was a member of parliament here. 

The other message is signed by Janet Jackson from UNFPA and there is one signed by Beti Olive Namisango Kamya, Lubaga North and founder of Uganda Federal Alliance. There is one from Parliamentarian Savings and Credit Society signed by Hon. Okwero Odwong Jane, the Chairperson. There is one from the Electoral Commission signed by Engineer Badru Kiggundu.

Another condolence message signed by hon. Amuriat, Chairperson Teso Parliamentary Group. I want to thank these people who have sent us these messages and other messages that may come.
 
There is another one from the team captain, hon. Odonga Otto. There is also a condolence message from NRM office of the secretary and he was here, signed by Hon. Amama Mbabazi. We also received a message from Hon. John Nasasira, the Minister of Works and Transport.

I now put the question on the motion moved by Engineer Byandala and seconded by hon. Migereko.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

National Anthem (one verse)

(Exit of the body of the late hon. Henry Balikowa)

Honourable members, as you have seen the programme, burial will take place in Kamuli on Thursday. I do not know whether we can really transact business tomorrow.

(House rose at 5.40 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 8 December at 2.00 p.m.) 

