Monday, 1 December 2008

Parliament met at 10.32 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. I know this is normally not the day when we sit; in spite of that you have been able to come. Last week we agreed that because EALA would be sitting here and using this facility for their meetings, Parliament should sit on Monday and that is why we are here today. 

We have a lot of work pending which we should clear because we may start the Christmas recess around the 20th or 21st of December. We are going to lose two weeks; EALA will be sitting here up to the 12th of December. So we shall not be able to sit then, we shall only come again and sit on the 16th, 17th, 18th and because 20th will be a weekend, we will not be able to sit and it may not be convenient for me to tell you to come and sit two days before Christmas. 

After 18th we may say, “Okay, let us go and start our Christmas recess”, which is likely to take us up to the end of January. That is why we should put in a lot of time; we may not be able to clear even half of what we have but we shall clear something and that is why I really appeal to you to attend. Today we shall move up to maybe 6.00 p.m. We shall have done a lot by then. Thank you very much.

10.36
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to report to this Parliament that last week the Parliament of Uganda hosted meetings of the African Parliamentary Union in Munyonyo. The meetings involved sessions with the executive committee of the union and the plenary or the Conference of the Union. 

The Speaker, hon. Edward Ssekandi, of the Parliament of Uganda chaired the conference which was held on Saturday and Sunday. I also wish to report that at the end of the conference, Uganda was elected to the presidency of the union. (Applause) What this means is that the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda will not only in the next two years, chair meetings of the African Parliamentary Union but also be the chief executive of the union. (Applause) This is a very important achievement to our Parliament and I think it is worthy of note of this House.

Secondly, I wish also to report that the meetings in Kampala could possibly have been one of the best organised meetings of the union. I can say this without any fear of contradiction because I have attended a number of these meetings. I would, therefore, wish this House to not only congratulate ourselves but also to congratulate the Clerk to Parliament and his staff who worked tirelessly to see that this meeting was such a success. I wish to report, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

10.38
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Opposition in this Parliament, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, in particular, the Parliament of Uganda and Uganda as a country for having successfully steered the African Parliamentary Union. I believe that hosting this very important conference was not a matter of chance but it was because of the confidence that the African democracies have in Uganda especially at this time when the debates of the two sides of the Houses, that is, the Opposition and the NRM in government, are trying to see how they can harmonise working relationships through the deepening of democracy programme.

For the next two years, Mr Speaker, we will continue to rally behind you in championing the cause of the African Parliamentary Union. I wish you the best and thank you very much for the confidence that the people of Africa have placed in you. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

10.39
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, as you know, I closed that meeting on Sunday and I congratulated you. I would like to reiterate my congratulations to you! There were controversies but as usual you chaired very well. I have no doubt that you are going to do a good piece of work. I thank you.

10.40
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of Isingiro District and Bukanga County in particular, I wish to register our sincere appreciation during the loss of our colleague, the late hon. Viccy Kyaka Kyokuhairwa, for the assistance you accorded to us. I can say that you gave her a decent send off especially when colleagues made tributes here and went all the way to Isingiro to grace the occasion by having more than 50 Members of Parliament there and financing most of the crucial expenses. 

It was an honour to us people of Isingiro especially coming from the Parliament going an extra mile to the deep hills near Tanzania to give our colleague a send-off. I am extremely grateful! The people of Isingiro said that the word thank you could be meaningless, but they were extremely overwhelmed by your kind words and messages. And most importantly, I want to thank the Clerk who on Saturday was busy monitoring what was happening to the bereaved family. We are very grateful and hope that this will continue. 

To us all, let us cast the vote against enmity, rivalry and be good citizens because we are all going in the same direction. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, in the first place, I want to congratulate you as Parliament of Uganda for successfully hosting the APU which meeting started on Wednesday up to last night when the Prime Minister closed it. 

I want to thank His Excellency the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for blessing the occasion because he is the one who opened this conference and the contents of his speech were upheld and people were really happy with his message, plus also the message which the Prime Minister gave us at the end of the meeting. 

The success is also shared by the other delegates from other areas. They really thought it was a successful meeting and the facilities put at their disposal were very attractive and they asked me to thank you for hosting them. 

As indicated, I have been elected chairperson of the union for two years and I promise to fulfil my duties as expected. I want to thank government, especially the Ministry of Finance, for honouring our budget estimates for this conference that enabled us to succeed. I want to ask hon. Ben Wacha to thank the Clerk who was actually in charge of administration of the conference. He did a good job! Please, thank him. 

And on our late Member of Parliament, Kyaka, again I want to thank you for giving her befitting send off. Those who travelled to Isingiro, thank you very much. May her soul rest in eternal peace! 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO BORROW AN ADDITIONAL US $61,059,125 AND US $15,391,511 FOR PHASE I AND PHASE III RESPECTIVELY OF THE NATIONAL DATA TRANSMISSION BACKBONE INFRASTRUCTURE AND E-GOVERNMENT PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: You mean you want to complete what we started on before? I see ministerial statements – shouldn’t we start with these ministerial statements: Lands and Energy. And I think the Chairman of the AIDS Committee, this being an internationally recognised day, I wonder if he has a statement.  Well, the clerk has advised me; since we had started on them, we rather complete them and then go to the other items. 

We had two loans last time, which we considered on Friday. But there were some comments, which were made and we did not pronounce ourselves on them because we wanted to get responses that we sought in the House. On the first loan, there are three issues which were raised. There was concern that this loan does not take care of areas like Karamoja, West Nile and Bundibugyo and people wondered why. Are there other arrangements made to cater for these areas? Then the other issue was that the Belgium Government some time ago made a grant to take care of the Northern region in respect of the same subject matter this loan is taking care of. What happened to that grant?

On the second loan some Members suggested, “Cant we use this loan only for taking care of health centres rather than spreading it to other sectors?” I think those were the points that were raised. The Minister of ICT was not here, he was presiding over a graduation at Nakawa, so it was understandable that he was not here, and his deputy was on other assignments. So, we thought that he would enlighten us on that. And also Minister of Finance, the owner of the motions for resolution, to answer some other queries. Let us start with ICT.

10.47
THE MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS AND ICT (Dr Ham Mulira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There were a number of issues that were raised, and you have summarised the key ones that came up. One was to do with the extension of the backbone to cover the Northern region. 

Just to give an idea of what a backbone should be, just like the human body backbone, once you lay the backbone, then there are other technologies which are used to link back into the backbone. And as had been earlier indicated in previous debates on the matter, as we lay the backbone, we lay it in rings or concentric rings starting with the back end, which controls the entire system. 

We have distributed what we refer to as the synopsis of the fibre optic cable systems to indicate what has been done even in neighbouring countries like Kenya. Nevertheless, when we interacted with the Committee on National Economy, this issue came up strongly much as we indicated the wireless technologies. So it was felt that a fourth phase should be included. In the maps that we have distributed, we have indicated what we have proposed to be the fourth phase of the entire National Data Transmission Backbone Project.

Having said that, it does not mean that in the original design Northern Uganda was not going to benefit from the transmission because it was part of the project in terms of ensuring widespread connectivity and affordable access to broadband. In the second map on the right next to Uganda, we have indicated what has been planned for Kenya, which is about to take place. Arising out of the recommendation by the parliamentary Sessional Committee on National Economy, Phase IV has been designed to cover West Nile and the Karamoja regions as indicated on the map attached. 

The funding for this phase may not be part of the current loan as we have already gone so far in the preparations for acquiring this loan. However, in that interaction, the Minister of Finance indicated that government will either look for funds directly from its own sources or find alternative means to cover phase IV. We have an estimated cost of US $30 million as it is roughly equivalent to Phase I, which is actual laying of the fibre.

On the issue of the Belgian loan - it was actually a grant which was given to roll out -

THE SPEAKER: It was a grant not a loan.

DR MULIRA: It was a grant, as far as we understand, to roll out communication systems in Northern Uganda, which would be either fibre or other means. This was before the privatisation of Uganda Telecom Limited. At the time, these funds were channelled through Uganda Telecom Limited. They did not lay fibre because a fibre needs a back end like what we are doing now; a data centre here on which the rings start growing from. Instead, they developed a micro wave link for communication between Kampala and Gulu. It also provided land line telephone exchange in Gulu with a capacity of 3,000 lines. The project was implemented under Uganda Telecom Limited and from the information that we have on hand, it is operational.

There were other issues, which were raised. I wonder whether I could quickly go through them. One of these was the coordination and harmonisation of usage of the road reserve. This was raised by multiple honourables. To avoid damage to cables, which are laid while road reserves are being worked on, the Ministry of ICT in conjunction with the Ministry of Works and National Roads Authority have had several planning meetings to deal with laying down fibre cables and utilities along road reserves. The other stakeholders include the Ministry of Water and Environment, National Water, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and UMEME. 

Authority and guidance is given by the Ministry of Works and the National Roads Authority. In future, plans are underway to undertake construction of ducts on all on-going projects, which run along roads. The implementation plan was also another issue, which came up for the phases. Phase II is planned to take 12 months after effectiveness of contract and Phase III seven months after effectiveness of contract. 

Training and Sensitisation

The ministry held very many workshops for people within different ministries because it is impossible to train all ministry officials across the entire government. However, IT officials in the respective ministries were identified and taken through thorough training on usage of the system so that they can provide in-house training within each of the ministries. Again, demonstrations and ideas were given to the permanent secretaries in ministries and a workshop was undertaken as the first step through a series of workshops for district officials from Eastern Uganda, CAOs, district information officers and others. We were sensitising them on the uses of Phase I and subsequent phases. 

Regarding –

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me. There was one Member who asked why we spend all this money when this system, which you are trying to install, is an old one. Aren’t there other sophisticated systems that can be used instead of digging up our soils?

DR MULIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect, I wish to correct and create awareness to my honourable friend. The technology that we are putting in place is known as fibre optic technology. The honourable member asked why we are using fibre when today we could be using wireless. I think we need to distinguish certain aspects and that is why we have presented a map of the world in terms of connections and connectivity. 

When we are talking about communication systems and sharing, we not only talk of voice communication but also data communication which includes the internet, we have radiuses within which we are working. If it is within a building like the precincts of Parliament, we use wireless because that is known as a local area network. As we move out into the city, we have what is known as a metropolitan area network where communications can be by wireless or not. Once we move to a national level, it is not feasible at all to use wireless technology point to point. That is where satellite technology comes in. 

Satellite technology is very expensive. It is true that 20 or 30 years ago satellite communications were introduced. At that time, communication was only for voice and maybe broadcasting. Today we are talking about internet access. When we talk about voice communication it was, for instance, broadcasting companies which needed satellite communication. The users of broadcast would have radios in their homes, which they would just switch on and listen to. 

Today we are talking of every single person being able to have access to the internet. In other words, what it would boil down to is that every single home would have to have a dish to link to the satellite. Also in terms of infrastructure, the communication is measured in terms of what are called megabytes per second. This is a unit of communication. One megabyte per second using satellite currently costs US $4,000 to US $5,000 per month. For fibre cable, in our plan the cost drops down to about US $300-400 per megabyte per second. 

In the maps provided, there is one on the bottom left hand corner; that map shows the status of fibre cables in the whole world. Those red lines are actually fibre cables and USA to Europe has dozens if not hundreds of fibre cables, which have been linked. That is what makes it possible to have very affordable internet broadband access in those countries and even Asia. If you look at the East Coast of Africa on that map, there is actually no cable whatsoever. 

There is even a comment – this is as of 2004 and it is from the tele-geograbic research. The comment made is quite clear: the high cost of international connectivity in Africa is a result of limited African investment in sub-marine cables because we are dependant on satellite. Therefore, the map shows on the right hand side sub marine cables being developed. Those lines on the Africa map show the fibre cables that are being developed. The – (Interruption)

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you, Minister, for giving way. In my constituency we tried to get broad band for internet and data transfer but we were informed that if we got the best satellite technology, it would be just okay. However, even with the best satellite technology, in addition to the cost that you have talked about, we are finding problems with weather. I am saying this because once it rains even if you have the best technology, the internet will go off; you cannot transfer data; you cannot connect. 

Therefore, the need for the fibre optic cannot be over emphasized; not only is it cheaper but it is also more reliable. The only challenge is when you get terrorists who go and cut the sub marine cables in the Indian Ocean, but that can be handled. Thank you.

DR MULIRA: Thank you very much for that information, hon. Member. That is a clear demonstration of why fibre is actually coming in.

Additionally, the capacities that fibre cable can handle are so immensely and infinitely bigger than that what can be handled with the satellite and costs. In addition to this, it was agreed across the entire world that by 2015 all countries shall cease broadcasting using analogue technology like the one we are using now with the FM stations and television broadcasting; they should move to digital technology transmission. The digital technology transmission requires fibre optic. That means we can get so many broadcasting channels with a more efficiently clearer signals at reduced cost. So, with due respect, I think that hon. Mabikke, at the time maybe some of the areas needed clarification as per the statement that he made. It is antiquated; in fact it is the current technology. Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the response. My concern is about the Belgian grant because what the minister has said is not true; it is inadequate. What exists in Gulu now is a product of Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme (NURP). The Belgian grant came after the NURP; the grant was kept for some sometime. And to the best of my knowledge it must have been diverted; it has not been used in Northern Uganda. 

I would like to challenge the minister to bring the documents on how the money was received, channelled, where it was used and who used it, which contractors did the job and table them in Parliament. I am saying this because to the best of my knowledge there is nothing of that kind. The Belgian grant either has been diverted or – at least it has not been used in Northern Uganda, Mr Speaker.

DR MULIRA: Thank you, hon. Member. Mr Speaker, this grant issue came up long before the Ministry of ICT was established. The information that I have just presented is the one that we were been given. As per his request, I think what we shall do is to prepare the information and then come and table it in Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, that is fine. Yes, hon. Member.

11.02
MR WILFRED KAJEKE (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last time the question of counterpart funding –

THE SPEAKER: That is supposed to be answered by the Minister of Finance.

MR KAJEKE: Okay.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Finance, another issue was: where is the counterpart funding locally? Was it provided for in the budget? If not, why? What do you propose to do?

11.05
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We did provide in our budget proposals, for counterpart funding for this loan but Parliament, in its wisdom, did not agree that we should provide for the counterpart funding before the loan was procured. So, the money was removed.

Therefore, we shall provide for the necessary counterpart funding in the next budget. In the meant time, we do have some money, but which is for the counterpart funding for the current phase; the first phase. We could not continue to have it here since Parliament did not agree with us that it should be there.

MR BALIDDAWA: As far as I know, the money for counterpart funding for this second was provided for; it is Shs 1.9 billion.

MR KAJEKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First I would like to agree with the chairman of the committee that Shs 1.9 billion, as counterpart funding for Phase II, was provided. There is evidence because I consulted the Hansard where the Minister of Finance was quoted to have confirmed to this House that Shs 1.9 billion was sufficient for the phase II of the project. What was not provided for was in regard to phase III of the project.

That now brings me to the issue of the loan request of Shs 15 billion in respect of phase III because its counterpart funding has not been provided for. So, we cannot go on to approve that loan when the counterpart funding has not been provided for. What has been provided for is in respect of the Shs 61 billion - that is okay and we can go on to approve it.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, as I mentioned, Parliament in its wisdom did not agree with the provision of Shs 8.0 billion that we had requested for as counterpart funding for this project. Only Shs 1.9 billion is in the budget. I do not believe that this phase is going to be completed in the next six months. So, there is no reason the loan cannot be approved then in the next budget, which starts in July, the additional counterpart funding will be provided.
 
THE SPEAKER: Okay. So what you are saying is that let the event happen, then we will provide for counter funding, and that it was us here, as Parliament, who resisted providing for it before the loan materialises.

MR KAJEKE: Mr Speaker, I think what the minister is saying is not correct. The issue of the Shs 8.0 billion was supposed to be for taxes but when we looked at the budget and consequently the financial bill, all the equipment for the telecom sector were exempted from taxation. That is why we even asked the Minister of Finance to provide us with a list of all that equipment that is exempted and that is when we reduced the amount from 8 billion to 438 for those few that the tax will apply to. So, it is not correct that Parliament blocked counterpart funding for the project.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, is your case that Parliament did provide but a less amount?

MR KAJEKE: We provided for that amount and so it is not true that we did not approve the counterpart funding. 

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, under the circumstances, I think the principle is well agreed to by all parties. But what hon. Kajeke is saying is that, some equipment was exempted from tax and that it would mean that it would be a saving to government, in a way. But it was money from government to pay for taxes to government. 

I would propose that when the Minister of Finance is preparing counterpart funding for phase III, he takes note of that development because this came up in the Budget Speech of this financial year, and actually our committee on ICT will harmonise that position and the loan is approved. 

In my view, I would propose that we approve both phases. This is because in the first place the entire project is about two and a half years and so we would have considered it at once. We will take a lot of time negotiating another phase whereas these are short times and we would be looking at Phase IV very soon. I propose.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Mr Minister, the other problem we had, I think it was raised by hon. Kasozi, was the interest that this loan will attract. He had given a figure which was US $80 million, then for us in our own way we calculated and we said it was US $60 million. But eventually, personally, I thought what we did not consider is that this loan reduces and yet the calculation we made was that the loan will not be reduced up to the point of 40 years. Therefore, I think even the figure which I was given by an honourable member presupposes that the loan will not reduce and therefore the total interest in 40 years on the same loan, given 40 years ago, will be US $60 million. I think it was wrong and it should be less than that. I do not know whether the Minister of Finance can help us. Yes, hon. Kaddunabbi.

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, that was the second loan of Poverty Reduction Support Credit and it was not affecting the ICT loan.

THE SPEAKER: Yeah, but whatever it is, I think our calculation of a total loan of US $22 million will not stand the same amount for the 40 years. Therefore, when you are calculating the interest you do not multiply the other figure with 200 as if the loan never reduces. Yes!

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the minister came up to speak, he said something which made me temporarily happy. But for how long are we going to be excited and pleased temporarily as people of West Nile on issues of development?

When you look at this map which he gave us, with the phases of the project as Phase I, Phase II, Phase III and Phase IV, and then you go to the ministerial policy statement, where the plan about this laying of the backbone cable of fibre optics is, and particularly this issue where we have requested for money or negotiated for money from China, the project has three phases and there is no fourth phase. Even if you have any intention of extending this thing to West Nile, it cannot be during Phase IV because it is not here. 

When I tried to follow this matter to the committee level, the first map which you had which came to the committee, did not include this other ring of Phase IV and it was again the concern of a son of West Nile in the committee that forced you, for political expedience, to just include that thing like that. And you temporarily made him happy also there. I do not want to say that temporary happiness should be ours alone. 

I suggest that given the significance of the technologies of fibre optics worldwide, if we are laying a backbone, let the backbone begin from the head and reach where it is supposed to reach at once so that at least we shall also be on the same footing with the rest of the Ugandans. 

Today schools are connected to the internet here in Kampala but how many schools in West Nile are connected to the internet? If the old technologies cannot reach, what about this one? (Interruption)

DR MULIRA: Information.

MR FUNGAROO: I will take it.

DR MULIRA: Thank you very much honourable. When you say that there are a number of schools connected to the internet, there are many other initiatives, which we have carried out in the sector to ensure that there is equitable distribution in connectivity. The Rural Communication Development Fund under Uganda Communications Commission is actually doing just that: connecting schools; connecting areas on to the internet outside, say Kampala. 

And on your point on Phase IV, in the original design, as mentioned many times, it was wireless communication. I mentioned in my opening remarks that the distance from any point of Uganda to hit fibre would be a maximum of about 60 or 90 kilometres because of the WiMax, the wireless technology, which was being used. 

And, yes, it was because the issue on the concentric rings came up in the committee that phase IV therefore was included. The ministerial policy statement is for this financial year. It is moving from 2008 to 2009 and as has been indicated, we are now planning to make sure that in the subsequent financial year, we shall move into Phase IV. That is why it did not appear in the current ministerial policy statement. Thank you. 

MS KAMYA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. While I share the concern of my brother, hon. Fungaroo, about schools that look like they are marginalised in terms of being connected to the internet, I have many times stood here and informed this House that in Lubaga Division, there are 617 education institutions. Out of those, only 17 are government-aided while 600 are private, and the private ones are connected to the internet through their own private initiative and not through the government initiative. 

We have a problem with government-aided schools. Indeed, Kampala is highly marginalised in many government projects because they are seen to be okay. However, pupils who go to government schools do not have access to internet precisely because it is accessed by private initiatives. So when considering this, honourable minister, we would like you to please note that Kampala is not covered because almost 100 percent of the UPE schools are not covered. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much for the information, my sister. Individuals and private institutions make their own efforts to get connected to the internet and they are able to do so just because the environment, the main framework and the backbone from which they connect individually, is provided. Now look at our private schools; even if they are willing and capable, how will they honestly do it without government providing the main backbone from which they should connect? 

For the record, I know you do not have the will to do it. For the record, we the people of West Nile are conscious because we have also gone to school in these days, unlike the old leaders that you say did not go to school. We have gone to school like you and we know the needs of the modern world, and we have aspirations to be fulfilled in accordance with the needs of the modern world. 

I would like to suggest that we approve the loan but do not forget about West Nile and Karamoja. Karamoja and West Nile were marginalised right from the time of the British. Even with the growing of coffee, they did not know that in those days Paidha in West Nile was a good place for growing coffee. Today, you cannot deceive us. 

THE SPEAKER: I think I may have to end this but you take note of the concerns of West Nile so that remedial action is taken. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You know that as Parliament we take the responsibility of these loans, and hon. Ham Mulira has made it very clear that this project is a necessity and not a luxury. The last time I asked, I wanted an explanation. Unfortunately, it is not among the ones you transmitted to the minister. My worry on these bilateral loans and the international loans was the conditions. 

THE SPEAKER: That is Ministry of Finance. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you. 

11.21
MR WILFRED KAJEKE (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Now that the question of counterpart funding for Phase II has been resolved, may I get clarification on whether it is acceptable for us to approve a loan for Phase III without the minister indicating to us the counterpart funding for that phase?

Secondly, Parliament has always been accused of sabotaging government business either by delaying the approval of loans or by something else. I want to put it on record, and I want to quote the Minister of Finance from the Hansard of 19 August 2008 in respect of the counterpart funding and in respect of the taxes. This was hon. Fred Omach, on page 5856, said: “Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. The issue of Shs 8 billion that is requested for taxation, we did meet with the ICT ministry yesterday and we have resolved that there are those which are going to be zero rated and there are those that will be paid for. We have the list and the actual grant amount that will be outstanding and the outstanding amount is Shs.438 million. So, we are in agreement and it has been resolved and this will be included as part of the budget process for the ICT ministry.” So, the question of the Minister of Finance saying that we did not approve counterpart funding is not there; he should correct that one.

Another quotation is from page 5861, still from hon. Omach: “I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. The first question is directed to the Minister of Finance from hon. Kajeke the Shadow Minister of ICT. The counterpart funding of Shs 1.9 billion is included in the budget and it is sufficient for the second phase of the project….” So, Parliament approved your budget with counterpart funding. The question of saying that we did not approve or we blocked counterpart funding should not arise. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, then there is no issue. If this is on the record, then there is no issue about counterpart funding. Let us proceed because if you have quoted the Hansard, I think we should take that position as the correct one. 

MR KAJEKE: Mr Speaker, the counterpart funding is for Phase II. Phase III is not provided for and there are two loans. 

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your ruling. I do not know where the honourable member’s problem is. I did indicate that we have some money for the current phase in the budget. I know of the Shs 1.9 billion and I know of the Shs 400 million. I also indicated that the Shs 8 billion we had put in was rejected by this Parliament and that the entire ICT project is not going to be implemented in the next six months, and if additional funds are required, they can be provided to start in July. So I do not know or understand what the honourable member’s problem is.

THE SPEAKER: I think this is no longer an issue, hon. Members.

MR FUNGAROO: I would like the minister to clarify to the House about the counterpart funding of US $ 15 million for Phase III, not for Phase II. Funds for Phase II have been provided and approved, but I am talking about Phase III. 

THE SPEAKER: What he has told you is that this project is going to run through this financial year and another financial year. If there is demand for more to be provided, it is not only in this financial year that this project will be completed.

MR FUNGAROO: If that is the case, then recommendation No. 3 of the report of the committee should not arise. It says: “Supplementary funding to cater for taxes and management fees under the project be provided.” We have already provided everything for the financial year. So this recommendation is redundant.

THE SPEAKER: That is right. I think we have finished the debate on the first loan. We should now pronounce ourselves on it. I put the question on the motion for a resolution to authorise this borrowing.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Can we have the second one? I think the main issue was brought up by the Shadow Minister of Finance. He asked why we do not put the whole loan on health facilities rather than scattering it to other programmes.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON AUTHORISATION TO BORROW FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) FOR THE SEVENTH POVERTY REDUCTION SUPPORT CREDIT

11.27
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The poverty reduction credit is a budget support. This means that the lenders, in this case the World Bank, have sufficient confidence in the government. Instead of specifying the precise sector in which the loan should go, they have allowed us to put it in a basket of funding available to the government budget. We are then able to allocate these funds ourselves according to our priorities and this indeed is what we have done. 

We have put this credit in our budget estimates, expected budget revenues, and then we have come to this House and indicated the priorities that we believe this money should be used. We have agreed on the priorities and the allocation of these funds. This is what has been done. In effect, the House has really agreed that we should receive these funds and use them as indicated in the budget.

Concerning the health sector, honourable members may recall that we increased the health sector budget by Shs 98 billion and we have also requested the World Bank to provide an additional US $100 billion for this sector and we are in the process of negotiation. We expect that in the near future, we shall bring this credit to this House for its approval so that we can improve on the infrastructure in that sector. So we are aware of the important need to upgrade the health sector infrastructure and we are in the process of doing so. In the sense that the loan is a budget support and therefore it has been allocated to the various sectors, you could say that indeed the health sector and other critical sectors have already received or will receive a portion of these funds because they are general funds in the basket.

There was some concern about the impact of these poverty reduction credits, this being the seventh one. As I have just indicated, they have assisted us to have the funds we need for our priority sectors. As honourable members know, we have had considerable success in maintaining a high rate of economic growth and economic stability, which would have been more difficult if this funding was not available. So we believe that it has been a very important credit for the country in enabling us to maintain micro economic stability and also to achieve a high rate of economic growth in priority areas.

I urge honourable members that we do receive this credit as a part of our budget because I think it is a good credit; it is the last one. The next credit that we receive will be sector credits for USE, for health sector and other sectors. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BIHANDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue was that this credit has actually been translated into growth as the honourable minister is saying. Unfortunately, that growth is not being seen in improved welfare of the Ugandans. When you are carrying out the feasibility of these projects, do you mind looking at the rate of return in terms of welfare improvement of the people that you are going to serve? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, Kalangala District.

MRS RUTH KAVUMA: Ssese Islands, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The problem I have is the Constitution. When you look at the Schedule on districts making up Buganda, they mention Kalangala but we can amend the Constitution. (Laughter)

MRS KAVUMA: Thank you for that, Mr Speaker. If it does not, then we will have to refer to Kabarole as Fort Portal District. 

I was just wondering whether the honourable minister at one point will give us these allocations by percentage. I was a bit worried because it was said that the health sector probably has already received or will receive. That is a bit vague. Is it possible for us to know the general, so that then we can judge the growth in those areas by percentage and know if this sector got only two percent and this is what we should expect? Thank you.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the committee I did put this to the minister. I feel so strongly about it that I want to reiterate it here. I told the minister that in my House, I eat traditional food: beans, millet and cassava flour. Before I purchase or buy anything, I must ensure that these items are available. After that, I can go and borrow money for sugar or meat.

When you read the list of why we are borrowing - primary education, primary health care, feeder roads and water - we are borrowing for what we as a country should be responsible for. If you cannot pay so that our children go to primary one, what is our worth? If you cannot buy Panadol in health centre IIs and IIIs, what are we for? 

For upgrading of roads like Kabale-Kisoro, we can borrow. However, there are certain things which we must do ourselves. If these loans are not passed, that means our children cannot go to primary school. It also means we cannot access the basic medicine in hospitals. This is what I was emphasising in the committee. Next time round, government should take note. Let us not borrow for beans -(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the member of the committee is whether he is now presenting a minority report. (Laughter)

MR ARUMADRI: No, Sir. I am just emphasising the fact that it does not look good for us to borrow money for things for which we should be responsible for as a country. That is all. For Bujagali, we can borrow and for Kisoro Road, we can borrow. We borrowed for Karuma–Arua and that is okay. But surely if my child is to go to P1 and we have to borrow; it does not look good. This is what I am putting across. Thank you.

11.39
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. What is development? In my understanding of the subject from the perspective of Biology, development must be a quantitative and qualitative achievement, adding on what you already had previously. In line with this, I would like to seek for some clarification from the minister on poverty reduction and improvement of service delivery, particularly referring to education. How is the reduction on poverty helping in the improvement of the performance in the education sector? Look at old schools like St Joseph’s College, Teso College, Lango College, and Sir Samuel Baker; if you are really improving, then the performance of these schools should be increasing and not dropping. Today, go to Makerere or just cross to the Ministry of Education; these schools that used to excel in the past are no more. You are telling us of improvement; where is the improvement? Where is the development? Where is the growth? 

In my opinion, there is something basically wrong. It is like we are trying to fill an empty pot with water yet the pot itself has a hole and water continuously flows out of the pot. You struggle by bringing loans and loan requests again and again. So can you help us to clarify this matter? Where is the improvement with the old schools’ performance, including Kabalega?

11.41
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What hon. Nandala said on Friday was that the sectors which we are focusing on to spend US$200 million are very many. We are overstretching this fund and therefore we shall not have an impact. 

To peasants US $200 million is a lot of money and you may think that you can spend this money under education, health, agriculture, animal industry and fisheries, works and transport, lands and the rest. This country and the whole economy excel in nothing. There is no sector where we say we are doing very well. There is no sector, which is an admiration of Africa or even East Africa including Uganda. 

Last week I returned form Kisoro, Kasese and Bundibugyo. The health centres are doing very badly. If we could borrow this money and focus on the health sector, it would be much better. I am assuring you, a healthy population is able to produce its own food. A healthy population is an engine of a country.

In Bundibugyo, Nyahuka Health Centre IV, everybody is a volunteer; people are not being paid and some are not even on the payroll. This what we said with hon. Nandala: why don’t you invest this money in the health sector? If you are thinking like a peasant that this is money is too much, then add on education, so that you have a healthy society and a highly developed, highly skilled population. You will be improving the human resource in the country but spreading this loan to all these sectors - in fact the entire government is going to benefit out of this little money and therefore you will not have impact.

I submit that you re-focus the loan to a few sectors so that there is an impact from this money. We cannot continue borrowing money for consumption; we must borrow money for capital development. I thank you very much.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of this committee but I am rising on a matter of clarification or further information to this House. In the committee, we approve some of these loans with a very heavy heart because it is getting increasingly difficult. When the loans come, we are almost blackmailed as, “You have no choice, the country is going to get stuck, this is very urgent and it has been done anyway”.  

Mr Speaker, we discussed in our committee that this House must begin to serve this country as we serve ourselves. You cannot borrow money for your wish list. You do not go to every bank and borrow money for everything you wish to have. We live beyond our means. That is what everybody in this country is trying to say. We borrow money but we live beyond our means. I have informed this House that last year on the 24th of November, I travelled to the UK after CHOGM and I travelled in business class with three presidents of other countries. 

MR ISHAA OTTO: Mr Speaker, the colleague on the Floor is trying to articulate seriously on this particular report, but I have checked No.12 and hon. Beti Kamya has signed whatever is in this report. This means that she could have agreed with the position, which we arrived at in this report. Now, what credibility does she have to again debate? Is she actually in order to debate her own report? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, the practice is that a member of a committee whose report is being handled does not participate in the debate. They can maybe come up to clarify something which other members may not understand, but to come here and seem as if she is contradicting is not our practice.  

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was just giving information to this House. The concerns of the members debating this issue -

THE SPEAKER: The concern as expressed by hon. Kibanzanga was that this money is so little and spreading it to many sectors may not be helpful. In his view the most serious area that requires funding is health. That was his contribution. You are saying that we live beyond our means and we are we borrowing for luxury. If you say “beyond”, it means you are becoming a big person when you are not. I think borrowing here is borrowing because we need the money to fund the sectors. He is saying why should we spread it to ten instead of concentrating on two or one? That was hon. Kibanzanga’s contribution and in his view, he zeroed on health. 

MS KAMYA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

MR ODIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we are getting trouble because the minister has not clearly explained what is meant by basket funding. Of course if he had done so, the matter would have been clarified much earlier on. 

Once the money has come into the basket, I do not see how you draw a boundary between health, education and other sectors. It is going to support the entire budget process. So I think the minister should be able to be useful in helping us so that this matter is sorted. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it possible to address hon. Kibanzanga’s concern with this loan or is it strictly impossible? Please, tell us.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Budget support means that the funding they are receiving becomes part of the total funds available to government to allocate according to its priorities. These priorities include health, education, roads. This is indeed what we have done.  

THE SPEAKER: After getting the money, is it possible to say that we zero on health and one or two other items?  

DR SURUMA: Yes, precisely. We have in the current financial year priorities, which honourable members will recall, ranging from roads where we allocated Shs 1.1 trillion because of the road conditions. We allocated money to human development as a priority and this is education and health. These are priorities that we agreed on. Of course, there is also agriculture and energy. So these funds from the World Bank are included in the funds that have been allocated to these priority sectors because they are part of that basket. 

I do not agree that the money is being squandered. In fact, our condition is such that because of the difficulty in funding, we could only increase funding for five sectors; all the other sectors had to remain at pre-CHOGM levels because we did not have enough funds. I want to remind you about the difficulty we have had with all the various sectors where money is needed but we did not have the money to give them because we thought by concentrating these funds in a few sectors, we could have significant improvement and progress in these critical areas. 

I do not agree either that growth is not seen. There is growth in secondary school enrolment, for example. This is growth because a service is being provided to more Ugandans than ever before. The number of enrolment in 2003 was 683,609 and in 2007 it was 954,328. This means an addition of almost 300,000 students are receiving secondary school education. When USE was introduced, enrolment increased by 35 percent. You cannot say that you do not see the growth. 

Improvement in the quality of Ugandans by getting education is the most valuable resource we can spend on –(Interjections)- please, the increase in schools and the infrastructure are a direct growth of the economy. This is visible –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Minister. The population of Uganda today is not the same as the population of Uganda in the previous financial year, or when the NRM government came to power in 1986 or at the time of Independence. Correspondingly, you would sensibly expect the number of children going to school to increase. That is normal and natural. 

The clarification I would like to seek is whether it is the number in schools or the output and product that are considered as a result of the growth. I think the Minister should tell us how many have got first grades or second grades, how many were admitted to university and how many have come to work with you in the Ministry of Finance as the real output. Can you please help us and tell us the growth in terms of output and not the people going to school? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, although you are facing this way, there were a number of clarifications sought from Ssesse Islands, Kalangala District and hon. Kiboijana.

MRS KAVUMA: The other point I would like the minister to explain to us is that there has been enrolment but have we had the results of drop outs as well? Are all those who are being enrolled actually completing? That is what is important, and not a matter of getting you to school and not knowing what happens after that. 

MRS TUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I accept the explanation that this is for budget support, but I am surprised that I have not seen Ministry for Gender, which has over five departments and is the least funded. It is not mentioned here. What do you have for us? Thank you.

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am concerned that the rate of enrolment does not translate to the rate of the students that qualify. When the enrolment is very high, the dropout rate in between is equally very high such that at the end of the whole system, the rate of those that qualify going to the next level is minimal. 

When we speak about the health sector, for us who have been in PAC looking at these hospitals know that the health sector is rotten. Actually, it is rotten to such an extent that even when we went to bury the late hon. Viccy Kyaka, the brother who is a doctor at Mulago Hospital lamented that he had to first pass through Wandegeya to buy gloves to work on patients who were badly off. Considering that Mulago Hospital is the main referral hospital in the whole of this country, if it can be in such a sorry state, how about the other hospitals? 

Most of these hospitals do not even have mortuary facilities and dead bodies stay on the wards with the living human beings and it causes trauma among those who are sick. Even if you are to recover and you see a dead body next to you, just imagine what would happen. I wish to ask that we concentrate on health sector improvement such that we see something happening in these hospitals.

On the issue of monitoring and evaluation –

THE SPEAKER: We are expanding this debate. The question arose from hon. Kibanzanga as to whether it is possible to put emphasis on health centres. We therefore asked the minister what this loan means. He said it is budget support and it means collecting this money in a basket and then they will take into account the priorities, and health may be emphasised. When we go deep into policies of Ministry of Education, the drop out rates and the quality, I think we are expanding this debate.

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let us put emphasis on health and we pass a loan on health. We can then handle these others as need arises. Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Mine is just a small clarification from the minister’s own response on the quantitative improvement. According to the population census of 2002, northern Uganda has the highest population growth rate of 4.6 percent followed by eastern Uganda at 3.5 percent, western at 2.6 percent and central at 2.5 percent. When you look at the enrolment however, it does not reflect that population growth. I want to get clarification from the minister on whether he has really done a thorough analysis of the enrolment throughout the country and why it does not reflect the population growth rate in the country. 

Lastly, the minister says now there is more enrolment, that people are getting educated and are of good quality. I also want the minister to give us an assessment; in the 70s and the 60s we also used to have people who got enrolled vis-à-vis the population at that time and the quality then. How do you compare the qualities of the 60s and the 70s and the current quality for both primary and secondary education? This is just to tell Ugandans that there is something and we are going towards a brighter future. 

12.00
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine are just a few observations. One, the minister should really admit that there is a problem in our planning system; this is why the Members are concerned. There is a problem. When we keep running away from it we shall not solve the problem. Like Members are saying, why do we not give this money the percentages according to the sectors such that people can monitor? 

The other issue is about the welfare, whether the welfare is improving or not. I would agree with the minister that at least there is improvement in the welfare of the citizens of this country. But at the same time, Members are complaining, and I am complaining too because we are looking at the improvement vis-à-vis the money invested. We are putting in a lot of money but the improvement is just very slight. Much as you are emphasising that there is improvement, but is it worth what we are putting in? So that is what we need to observe minister.

The other issue minister that you need to know is that now we are saying we are funding our budget by 70 percent but a Member raised a very important issue that we are borrowing for virtually each and everything. Where is the implication of the 70 percent self funding? You see, these are the issues we need to get from you.

Members have not raised the issue of corruption. As long as we have corruption in this country to the level we have today, we shall keep borrowing. Because the moment we borrow and the money is just taken without serious investment, it means we shall again go and borrow. Honourable minister, if you read The New Vision of yesterday, the money we borrowed during CHOGM – I think you read it. So, now tomorrow we shall again go to borrow in order to make the same roads. But even if it is our money, it does not mean that people eat it just because it is our money. Surely, it comes to the same thing. (Laughter) And by the way, that brings me to the other point. We are saying that we are funding our own budget by 70 percent. Now if you are telling me that the 70 percent should be eaten, then I am defeated and I am sitting down. Thank you.

12.03
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate the minister for coming here to have a series of these beggings, to get money to reduce poverty. 

You will appreciate that the PEAP indeed is our overall development strategy, we acknowledge that. But the primary force to realise this was the PMA. Government thought it wise that through the PMA, money would now be in the hands of majority of Ugandans since around 80 percent of our population is engaged in agriculture. But the minister has given us statistics of poverty reduction over the years. I would wish to know before we pass this, how many farmers in our country have been phased out from peasant agriculture to semi-commercial agriculture to the extent that we then say, since the PEAP is being phased off, we have realised something out of PMA to actualise and realise the PEAP? Now, if this is not done, then what are we talking about?

In Arua, ever since the inception of PEAP, the same farmers I have been with are the same farmers still in a rudimentary state despite heavy investments in NAADS, despite heavy investments in other forms of agriculture. This has not translated into changing the lives of human beings in this country. 

Therefore, as a priority, as you move to phase away from PEAP, as you phase away from this development strategy to whatever is next, is this loan scheme systematised into the strategy you are developing next so that when the PEAP is phased out, whatever comes is in line with these loans so that in the next phase, the last one, the $100 million that you are going to borrow, will fit in the other system so that Ugandans do not just remain the way they are. 

Mr Speaker, it is really disturbing for me as the shadow minister for education that the ministry would justify asking for money using enrolment rates when our most important requirement as a nation, when we are talking about human resource development, should be the completion rates. 

UPE is in a pathetic situation, we know that. The other day, the Ministry of Finance presented very unrealistic statistics regarding completion rates; you can check it with your poverty analysis unit. The documents they gave us were totally unrealistic and they turned the statistics upside down deliberately and gave us indications that UPE is doing very well in terms of enrolment to achieve the millennium development goal, when in actual sense the completion rates are disturbing. 

You are talking about transition from P.7 to senior one of 26 percent. In quantitative terms, what has this translated into in terms of education attainment cognitively and otherwise in education? If this is not there, then how can you use enrolment rates as a justification to beg money? This would be imprudent on the part of government. 

And as far as issues to do with health are concerned, Mr Minister, you know, the Abuja Protocol that your government signed in 2001 to commit this nation to 15 percent of its budget to the Ministry of Health has never been realised? The same with the protocol you signed in Maputo, you have never taken the investment in agriculture to the 10 percent that you promised. And in Abuja in 2001 you committed our government to 15 percent and you have not done that and you are borrowing $100 million. Where is your commitment as government?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, since this loan is not going to be obtained tomorrow, I advice that the respective committees in charge of this sectors should go and discuss these issues, sort of lobby for sharing of this money so that a committee in charge of health, a committee in charge of education can sit and discuss this and pass some recommendations advising the Ministry of Finance or government itself as to the utilisation of this loan. I think this may help us. (Applause)

MR CHARLES OLENY: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of the Committee on National Economy. I feel this information is very important at this point in time when we are debating as to whether or not to approve this loan. 

One, I want the honourable members to note that the debate that is ensuing is not in line with the purpose for which the loan is sought. You will note that this is a request to raise money by way of a loan to support the budget that we have already approved; this is 2008/09 budget. So in my view, we are arguing with ourselves because already these resources are supposed to support what we already approved in this House. 

Two, we all know very well that the current government strategy on poverty reduction is multi-sectoral, and indeed I want on this point to appreciate and support the minister’s effort. The loan is well intentioned in that it is responding to the PEAP, which is our planning framework. So for honourable members to turn around and raise new issues, that to me seem to be not in line with what we are intending to do. It is not being fair, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we are doing is what they call re-allocation. After the budget has been approved it is possible to re-allocate. The Budget Act provides for that. I think this is what exactly they are trying to do. (Applause) It was a good clarification, but I am only saying that it is possible after the budget has been made to re-allocate. The law allows that so long as the procedures are followed.

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, my colleague has been in this House for the last two and half years. I am reliably informed that he is aware of that provision. So whatever we do here is talking of commitment, but I can assure you our voters are not joking on this.  

The essence of borrowing - you see us here suffering and trying to understand the details of this. Not so long ago I was with the donors and our plea to them is that on the African continent, for the last five years, the World Bank and its agencies have not helped to facelift poverty because the loans that are given are only discussed by the technocrats and executives. Parliament is sidelined to the extent that our oversight function becomes impaired. How can we watch? We do not know the terms and conditions of this loan. For example, we are not scrutinizing this as Parliament -(Mrs Masiko Kabakumba rose_)- we are doing this for the Government Chief Whip –

THE SPEAKER: I imagine what you are going to say is not all that a clarification. (Laughter)

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Speaker, I will give both. On Friday, actually many Members who are contributing today were not around.  Most of these issues were all raised and actually debate concluded today. The minister and the committee chairperson were supposed to respond. But the point of order is, is the honourable member in order to say that this Parliament is not aware of the terms of this loan when actually this loan was laid on Table, taken to the committee? Actually, we are debating the committee report. Is she in order to mislead this House?

THE SPEAKER: Well, what I can say is that I still remember that the honourable member, I think was from duty. She came late when we had concluded. So I think she was saying that she was not aware, but we are ware. (Laughter)

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much and my colleague, the Government Chief Whip. My genetic composition is very good in the cognitive aspect. I want to assure you.  

I was just emphasizing the fact that when these loans come to us, we need to scrutinize them very carefully. There are aspects of loans termed technical assistance that even take almost 30 or 40 percent and yet we commit our country to such loans at the expense of generations to come. I am not very sure if the Government Chief Whip is aware that 40 years from now, which is the ultimate repayment period of this loan, she may likely be 70 or so years and –(Laughter)

MRS MASIKO KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I think as national leaders, we should be serious and not waste time and taxpayers’ money. The honourable member has just joined this Parliament, I have been here for the last - this is the third time. It means I am very experienced and I know the operations of this Parliament.  

I once was the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, which had the mandate to scrutinize all these loans and I am aware of these timings and frameworks that are given and the conditions. Just because I am on the Front Bench does not mean that I have forgotten what takes place and if the honourable member has time, we could take it outside this Parliament and I will take her through the nitty-gritty of scrutinizing these loans. So is she in order to impute improper motive that I do not know the time when these loans will be paid and who will be paying for them?  

THE SPEAKER: I support you that you have the experience and you speak candidly and without any ill motive. So you should appreciate that she has the experience and you should be courteous to her and many others. But I think we should come to the end of this.

MS BAKO: Thank you. I appreciate my friend. Indeed, you have the experience and I am very aware of that. Not so long ago I was also having some experience as a lecturer of economics at the university and I am pertinent about these issues as well. 

At the end of it all, it is very prudent that we as Parliament get serious on issues to do with loans. It is going to be the face value of these loans and ultimately it is going to be the quality of life that our citizens will have after we have acquired these loans.  

Mr Minister, once we approve and give you this loan, next time you should do us a favour and tell us how many people will have slipped off the poverty line. Do not be worried, we shall help you wherever necessary. We also implore you to look into issues that are real to human development not enrolment rates and certainly not the unrealistic statistics that your ministry usually gives us. Today we may be judged as the front bench just because we are in government but our souls will perish because we are doing the wrong things just for survival. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise government to borrow from the International Development Association for the Seventh Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC VI). I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Lands? Is he here? Can we get the statement from the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development then? Hon. Members, I think the statements are not ready. Let us move to another item. Can we get a statement on HIV/AIDS? This is the international day.

STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS, ON WORLD AIDS DAY

12.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS (Mr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Speaker, today we mark the World’s AIDS Day and on behalf of the Committee on HIV/AIDS, I wish to register our humble symbol of solidarity with all those who have been infected or affected by HIV/AIDS. The World AIDS Day is part of the World AIDS campaign, which starts from 1st December of a given year to the 1st December of the next year. 

As part of the World AIDS campaign, Parliament in March this year held a special session on the HIV/AIDS. We also organised an HIV/AIDS music concert and candlelight dinner at Masaka as well as a commemoration of the 25 years of the HIV/AIDS response at Kasensero, Rakai. The purpose of the commemoration was to commit leaders at all levels to re-dedicate themselves to the fight against HIV/AIDS under the theme, “Leadership for Accelerated HIV Prevention.”  

During this commemoration, the Parliament through the Speaker recognised individuals and institutions that have made selfless, illustrious, pivotal and unprecedented contributions to the fight against HIV/AIDS during the past 25 years. A foundation stone was laid at an AIDS care centre by the Speaker for the construction of a health facility at this point where the first AIDS cases were noted more than 25 years ago. 

In preparation for this year’s World AIDS Day, Parliament recently organised a VCT session at Parliament and many people were tested for HIV. Sensitisation workshops were also organised for parliamentarians and staff as well as dialogue with civil society and the Executive. I wish to draw Members’ attention to the theme of this year’s World AIDS Day, which focuses on HIV counselling and testing.  

Last week on Wednesday, the World Health Organisation published a report in The Lancet, one of the British journals, which showed out that if you carried out universal HIV testing just like Cuba did and you followed that by immediate antiretroviral treatment to everyone diagnosed with HIV, you can reduce the number of new infections by over 95 percent within ten years and virtually eliminate transmission in countries with high levels of HIV prevalence including Southern Africa. This can be done by highlighting the importance of HIV testing and highlighting the theme of this year’s AIDS Day.  

However, in Uganda after more than 25 years of the epidemic, only about 11 percent of men and 13 percent of women know their status. It is estimated that about 6.3 percent of Ugandans aged 15 to 59 are infected with HIV but prevalence among women at 7.3 percent is higher than among men. We also found out that there are more co-habiting or married partners who are discordant for HIV (where one is positive and the other is negative) than there are co-habiting or married partners who are both infected at a rate of about 57 percent. 

It is also worth noting that although we are highlighting counselling and testing this year, 80 percent of the people who are infected with HIV do not know their status. We know that lack of knowledge of one’s HIV status and that of one’s partners is a key driver of the epidemic. Briefly, in the country we have had a number of voluntary counselling and testing approaches and we know the advantages of knowing one’s status at individual level. VCT provides clients with the knowledge of status, encourages safer sexual practices and serves as an entry point for HIV prevention, treatment; care and support services. 

It is also essential to identify infected persons as well as discordant couples so as to provide positive prevention and initiate life saving ART. Those are the benefits at individual level. At community level, if you have many people tested in a community, this increases coverage with VCT and can reduce denial, stigma and discrimination that attend HIV infection as well as mobilise communities to respond to the HIV epidemic.

Despite all these advantages, most VCT services in Uganda are urban based (where only 12 percent of the population live) and are facility based (they are based at health facilities). We know very well that facility based VCT programmes have very low coverage and the population denominator is often unknown. If you are using a system of health facilities, you will never know how many people or what proportion of the people have been tested in a given district. The traditional strategy of providing VCT is client initiated testing through fully standing VCT techniques like AIDS Information Centre.  

There are new strategies, which have been proposed by World Health Organisation, which include providing initiated VCT offered to patients attending general healthcare facilities also called routine counselling and testing. A person who goes to a health facility, say for antenatal care, will be required to do a test for HIV, Malaria, haemoglobin or blood levels and so on. So, it is up to the individual to either opt out or accept to be tested. 

However, there are also other methods like the mobile VCT services that offer services to clients in their communities and homes. Facility-based VCT is accessible to only those who can easily travel to the testing centres, which is a challenge to the people in rural Uganda. It also requires knowing the existence of VCT at the facility. 

Home-based VCT has proved to be increasing coverage and has got the lowest cost per client and couple tested. Home-based door VCT is feasible in Uganda. I will come to this topic and how it relates to Parliament later.

Mid this year, the Speaker of Parliament launched the Parliamentary Constituency Task Forces on AIDS and related matters. They were launched in Kamuli mainly to help in advocacy, efficient coordination, regular, systematic and sustained reporting on issues to do with HIV/AIDS. These task forces are expected to look into issues of AIDS and related matters including STIs, TB, Malaria and cancer, which is on the increase in the country.

The task forces will report directly to Parliament through the HIV/AIDS Resource Centre. They will consist of at least 11 people including the following: The area Member of Parliament who will double as the chairperson, the district health officer, representatives of NGOs, people living with HIV/AIDS, women and youths with disability from the respective sub counties. The district Woman Member of Parliament will also be a member of the task forces of other constituencies in the district. Members of Parliament can modify the above composition to suite the local situation as long as the secretary is from the health department. 

The task forces will be expected to hold sessions at least twice a year. Reports from those sessions will be sent to the committee of operations and resource unit and used in compiling six-month reports to Parliament. During the sessions, task force members can hold meetings, visit various HIV/AIDS service delivery units in the constituencies, launch HIV/AIDS campaigns such as testing, carry out advocacy campaigns on various issues in regard to HIV/AIDS, as well as gathering views on HIV/AIDS related laws and policies.

In Uganda, we have about 215 health centres at sub district level or constituencies of directly elected MPs, and about 500 parishes. We believe that in order to reach out to many people living with HIV - and this was tried out in Tanzania where the President, the Speaker of Parliament and Members of Parliament launched an HIV/AIDS testing campaign and within four moths of last year there had been four million people tested for HIV/AIDS. These were more than all the people ever tested in the previous 13 years.

Therefore, we think that having Members of Parliament come out to spearhead HIV testing campaigns in their constituencies can help more people get to know their HIV status. 

The current system where we have had government use health facilities for testing clearly shows that not many people go for such testing. But if, for example, in the 5,000 parishes in the country, government came out and trained about 5,000 graduates and deployed them to all these parishes with facilitation, within one year we can actually have all the people in the country tested; we can then continue with routine testing. Testing many people means that you can offer treatment to many, which can have a dent on HIV.

Fellow Members of Parliament, the Ministry of Finance and UNDP recently released a report on the micro economic impact of HIV/AIDS on Uganda. The report clearly showed that the country’s economy would slow down by 1.2 percent annually because of the effects of HIV/AIDS on the labour force and the high costs that families incur to provide therapy to infected people. That shows that HIV/AIDS has got a significant impact on our GDP.

Another study by the Conflict Security and Development Group at King’s College in London recently revealed that HIV/AIDS poses a major security risk to Uganda because it indicated that close to 15 percent of the members of the security forces are infected. 

The Uganda AIDS Commission also released a report that showed that about 130,000 new HIV infections are occurring every year, which comes to slightly over 10,000 infections per moth. The report also indicated that currently only 156,000 out of about 356,000 people that need ARVs are accessing them. So, if we were to increase the provision of ARVs to all these people, there would be a significant cost on GDP and the economy. This highlights the need for intensified HIV prevention.

It is also important to note that the data we have shows that actually the young people aged between 10 and 19 years hardly have any HIV compared to adults. The prevalence of HIV in the age group of 10 to 19 years is only about one percent as opposed to the past records. Previous records showed that the prevalence in the young people of between 14 and 24 years was high. The current situation indicates that most of those young people do not have significant HIV prevalence except that when you look at women of between 15 to 19 years you realise that the ratio on infected girls to boys is 9:1. So, while the infection rate is low, it highly affects the girls. 

Most of the infections are occurring among people aged 25 years and above. Actually 77 percent of all new infections are occurring among people aged 25 years and above. However, even in that age group, it has been realised that most of the new infections are occurring among married couples. About 63 percent of married individuals who acquired new infections had an HIV negative spouse indicating that the infection was not acquired from the spouse but from extra marital partners. 

The majority of the new transmissions also occur in stable HIV discordant couples. This highlights the need for increased advocacy and faithfulness among married couples. 

Another important fact is that 21 percent of the new infections occur among babies who acquire it from their mothers. This translates into about 27,000 babies who acquire HIV every year. This is something that is shameful to our country – to have 27,000 babies born with HIV every year? In developed countries like the USA, the rate is 0.04 percent of people who get HIV through this route.

Together, we believe that we can save millions of lives and achieve an HIV-free generation through the provision of an integrated biological and behavioural HIV prevention package tailored to different population groups with different profiles of vulnerabilities. 

The government and the country need to quickly evaluate the utility of the combinations of effective and implementable preventive strategies in the absence of a vaccine.

Suppose we offer every adult aged 15 years and above the opportunity to know his or her status using the most cost effective strategies such as home-based door to door voluntary counselling? After that we provide effective ART to all those who are eligible and even consider early ART initiation for discordant couples.

We also intensify it with a full range of PMTCT and replacement feeding. The reason why we have those babies growing up with HIV is because a significant proportion of babies get HIV from breast milk. 

For many years, people have said that they cannot avoid breastfeeding because, “We do not have sufficient good water to give to our children and to give milk substitutes. Therefore, if you decide that we do not breastfeed, the babies will actually die of diarrhoeal illnesses.” But in many countries like Botswana where it has been tried, I think this is doing very well and they have cut transmission.              

We need to also strengthen STI control and support research into various tools including vaccines and microbicides. 

On funding, all the above need sustained significant resources at a time when the world is facing a financial crisis. Recently, I had the opportunity, a unique honour, of travelling to Washington to address high level attendees of the White House Summit on International Development. This one day summit was also addressed by the US President, George Bush, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia and Secretary Condoleezza Rice, among others.

I spoke on the importance of country ownership in international development and also thanked President Bush and the American people for the support given in the fight against HIV/AIDS.

I also had a number of opportunities to meet with Congressmen from both Democratic and Republican parties. I highlighted the importance of continuing to focus on global HIV even in the face of worldwide financial difficulties. I urged them to keep the focus on global HIV by continuing to fight for full allocation of the funds that the US has committed to HIV prevention and treatment through PEPFAR reauthorisation.

Currently, the American Government, through PEPFAR, is the major source of funding for the HIV/AIDS activities in Uganda, contributing about 62 percent of the funds needed, while UNICEF contributes 5.41 percent, UNFPA 4.57 percent and DFID 3.8 percent.

Nearly US $2 billion are needed to fund the national strategic plan for the five years up to 2012. We have to call upon all developed countries to emulate the US example and significantly increase support to save lives because saving a life is the highest ethical act one can ever do to fellow mankind.

I would also like to thank the Uganda Government for the increased funding to HIV/AIDS, including the recently approved Shs 60 billion, which was also approved by Parliament, for ARVs. We hope more will be increasingly provided as tax revenues increase so as to reduce donor dependence on HIV/AIDS funds and ensure sustainability of programmes. 

The struggle has to continue until HIV is defeated. I thank you, Mr Speaker and Members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairman for the statement. Yes, hon. Kibanzanga.

12.39
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the Member for a really good statement; a political statement against a scientific problem. 

I join the rest of the world in the struggle against HIV/AIDS and I congratulate all those who have so far made some strides against this disease. My question is where are our scientists in Uganda and Africa? We have talked about AIDS; we have known about AIDS; we have enough information about AIDS. Today the struggle against AIDS must shift from political battlefields to scientific battlefields. I am reliably informed that in Europe and other advanced societies, the struggle today is to look for drugs and vaccines against AIDS. In Africa and Uganda, it is merely to talk about AIDS. 

Where are our scientists? What are we doing? What have we not done as politicians to empower our scientists in Uganda and in Africa to start engaging in the struggle to look for a vaccine and drugs against HIV/AIDS?

I am reliably informed that even the few drugs we have like ARVs, are not manufactured in Uganda, nor are they manufactured in Africa. They are being manufactured in Europe, America and other advanced societies, only to be tested in Latin America and Africa. Where are our African scientists? 

The battlefield must, as I have told you, shift from mere talking and mere dissemination of information to looking for a vaccine and a drug against HIV.

The statement you have just given reinforces our previous argument that we must refocus our planning and budgeting to go to the health services. As I talk right now, in our health centre IVs, there is no mechanism to prevent mother to child transmission. What are we doing as a country? You cannot continue boring us with talking. This has been the politics for the last 20 years. Where is the science? Where is the practical part of it against HIV/AIDS? 

Finally, I thank the honourable member for a good statement and as I have said, we sincerely join you. But as scientists, tell us what we must do as Parliament to empower you to engage in the scientific battlefields against HIV/AIDS. I thank you very much.

12.43
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for this report and hon. Tumwesigye for presenting it. 

Obviously we have many serious challenges in this country and each challenge needs a lot of money. Our answer seems to be, “Look towards the donor?” Where is the donor? We must talk to the donor.” 

In hon. Tumwesigye’s statement, at the end of it all, he says, “I call upon all other developed countries to emulate the USA example and significantly increase support to HIV to save lives because saving a life is the highest ethical act one can ever do to fellow mankind.” 

I think it is a great statement, but does saving lives only mean putting in money? What about saving money? What we can do if we do not have money? If we save money here in Uganda, it will be just as good as the Americans putting in money.  

The problem we have here, and we just talked about it in the last debate, is we do not save money. We squander money in this country; we live beyond our means in this country and then we look to donors to pay for our extravagant life styles.  

Last year in November after CHOGM, I had an opportunity to travel abroad. I have told you this before but I will say it again because it is extremely important.  

I travelled on a commercial airplane with three heads of state who had come here to attend CHOGM, that is, the Prime Minister of Malta, the President of Cyprus and the President of Guyana. They were in business class with me, and Mr Michael Frendo, the European Union Minister for Foreign Affairs, who shared a seat with me, took me and introduced me to the three heads of state. 

I was astounded and I asked them, “How are you travelling on commercial jets? Don’t you have your own?” Because I thought it was a culture everywhere that every head of state must have a private jet. They laughed and said, “We cannot afford it.” That was Malta, Cyprus and Guyana. 

When I reached London, I immediately accessed the internet, looked at their GDP and looked at their per capita. The least of them is five times ahead of Uganda in GDP and per capita. I was too ashamed to tell them that the only plane we have in Uganda is reserved for the President -(Interjections)- it is the presidential jet. Here in Uganda we drive the most expensive cars and nothing but the best is good for Ugandans. All our official government functions are in the Serena, Imperial Royale and Sheraton. When we travel to the UK, they host us in modest hotels; we do not go to the most expensive ones. So who are we as Ugandans to live this lifestyle? And it is not just in government; it is even the practise for all of us in Parliament, the representatives of the people; nothing but the best is for us.  

We need to do some serious soul searching in this country and if necessary to set up a committee of Parliament to investigate matters in which we can reduce public expenditure. We must show the action and because of that action we can now save millions of dollars, which we are going to put in our health sector. 

This begging syndrome must stop. We must manage this country as we manage our personal lives; our homes. We need so many things and we have wishful lists but we cannot borrow for everything that we need. We must prioritise; we must borrow; we must save and we must re-invest.  

The fight against AIDS must start in this House by showing our own contribution, by changing our expensive lifestyles.  I thank you.

12.49
CAPT. EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Elioda for this very elaborate statement especially today, on World AIDS Day. There are a number of issues that the statement raises and I would like, just for emphasis, to go through about three of them.  

One, the statement talks about less than 15 percent of the population of Uganda having been tested for HIV/AIDS, 11 percent of these being men while 13 percent are women. That is very shocking. I think the focus should now be on VCT.  

I am just from my constituency - I was there during the weekend - but the biggest cry of the people, especially in the villages now is, “When are we going to be tested?” “Can we have testing services?” In some areas people go to test but it is not enough. So the population is crying to be tested.  

Why am I saying that the focal point should now be VCT? It is because once you know your status you are likely to be more careful about how you handle your sexual life.

I know that in the neighbouring district, Kumi, there was door-to-door based VCT testing but even there, that exercise has been halted. So again to hon. Elioda -(Interruption)

MS AKIROR: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to give you this information that in Kumi District, it is not just the issue of testing that is a problem to the people of Kumi. Testing to find out whether one is HIV positive or negative does not help anybody. Their cry is the cost for the tests because after that you have to go a step further and test for viral load and have a CD4 cell count to know whether you can then be started on ARVs. Those tests are very expensive. Most people, after knowing their HIV status, are just forced to stay at home.  

Another issue that most of the people who are affected and infected by HIV/AIDS in Kumi cry out to this government about is the issue of mother to child transmission. This is because people know they are HIV positive and they are pregnant and they want to try to save their children but then the drugs are not available at the lower level.  

So the cry of the people from Kumi is that those two critical issues should be addressed because just testing will not help us in Kumi. After testing what next? You want to start on the drug but the doctor has recommended that your CD4 count should be at 350, but normally they wait up to 200 and even at times below 200, before people are started on the drugs. That is the information I would like to give my colleague.  Thank you.

MR ARUMADRI:  Thank you very much, hon. Akiror for that very good information. Still in that area, we need to look at how we can lower the costs because we are dealing with poor people in the villages. How can we lower the cost of testing; and then after testing what next?  

So in addition to the testing is the issue of structures. Hon. Elioda is recommending a structure from Parliament and I have no problem with that. But I would also like to inform the House that even now there are structures at Local Government level that handle issues of HIV/AIDS. 

In the district they are called DATs or District AIDS Taskforces. The chairpersons are normally the CAOs and the chairpersons of the districts. At county level, they are called CATs or County AIDS Taskforces. The secretaries of those taskforces are, as hon. Elioda has indicated, supposed to be medical officers of that particular area.

So another area in which we can closely work with local governments is to work within those structures so that when we have our own structures, we shall work together with those already on the ground. And they have a lot of information because they are working with the Uganda Aids Commission; they are working with the Aids Information Centre and many other organisations that handle HIV/AIDS. So, I think using those structures would also be very useful.

Lastly, emphasis should be put on other areas other than prevention. Mr Speaker, if you listened to many of the radio stations now, there isn’t a lot of emphasis on prevention of HIV/AIDS. Instead, there is emphasis on curative treatment of HIV/AIDS. But when you look at the measures of preventing a person from catching HIV/AIDS, that is dying out. When HIV had just come in the late 80s, I was also still a bit young –(Laughter)- there was a drum sounded every hour on the radio about HIV/AIDS. If you want to alert people about a situation, you sound a drum. So it would be sounded every hour. So even if you were trying to do something within that one hour –(Laughter)- the drum would wake you up and you would zip up quickly because –(Laughter)- it is a serious issue. 

Prevention is slowly sliding down and yet we have so many FM radios and so many newspapers. So again to the chairperson of the committee, hon. Elioda Tumwesigye, we need to reinvigorate prevention in our media. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Mr Byarugaba rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Byarugaba, is it possible to allow hon. Baba Diri to make her contribution before you come in? She has been standing now and then. There is a procedural question here.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, this is a very serious subject which affects the life of every citizen in this country and it is a factor of health, and we have a number of ministers in that ministry. There are some areas, which will require specific response from the ministers concerned. I do not see any of them here. 

I have been carrying out a cross conversation with the Government Chief Whip, I do not know whether she will really have the capacity to handle these issues which we are demanding. Normally it would be procedurally correct to have a minister competent enough to handle this very sensitive matter. Would I know whether there is an assurance from the Government side that after debating this sensitive subject we shall get the appropriate response?

12.57
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The substantive minister is on leave and hon. Nduhuura is in charge of that portfolio, and he will be joining us anytime. The problem is that Members knew there was no sitting today; some Members had other commitments. But I have been noting the Members’ concerns and of course some need some investigation, but for those that need quick answers, we shall be able to respond and I will pass on others for the line minister to handle. Thank you.

12.58
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank hon. Dr. Elioda Tumwesigye for the report. Today is World AIDS day. Indeed it is a day when we are thinking about AIDS - those who have died from AIDS, those who are affected and those who are to be affected. It is a very important day that we have really given time to talk about AIDS.

AIDS came about 25 years ago and Uganda was one of the leading countries to advocate and fight HIV/AIDS, and I commend our President for the openness and all the people of Uganda for being open. That is why we managed to reduce the percentage from 30 to 6 percent, but it is now increasing. That means we are relaxed. 

Some people think that because of the ARVs, you can get cured. I think we are being misled. The people of Uganda and the world must know that there is no cure. No matter how many years you take these anti retrovirals, you will die in the end. Many people look healthy but you find that they die suddenly because I think the ARVs are also becoming resistant. So we must not take things for granted.

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about the voluntary counselling and testing. This voluntary counselling and testing is very important but many people fear it because of the stigma attached to it. If you are a young man and you are found positive, no girl will marry you. It is the same with a woman who is positive because people will fear her. As a result, people do not go for HIV testing. 

I have witnessed that even when the testing was brought around here, the Members of Parliament who went for testing were very countable. Many of us fear. Why should you fear testing? If you have Malaria, your blood is tested and if the Malaria parasites are found, you are cured. Why not test HIV like you do for the Malaria? So if you are tested, definitely you will know your status and you will take care of yourself. 

If you take the number of people who are tested, you will find that the women come to test more than the men. When a woman is pregnant, she is tested during antenatal clinic and usually the man will say, “If she is positive, I am positive; if she is negative, I am negative.” As a result, men do not come up to test. That is the fact. So, women should not be used only for testing.

I would like to see that in our HIV/AIDS Bill, the testing for men must be compulsory. If the woman is pregnant, we shall say go for your husband, let us test, so that you all know your status and you can be helped together. This is a very serious gender issue. 

You find that these very men who are not testing are the ones spreading HIV/AIDS. Young girls are affected more than young boys. This is because the adult men go to these young girls, even to the extent of defiling. On the contrary women do not that. They know that this is a young boy; he cannot be my husband. So, this cross generation should be stopped and abolished. 

I think in our AIDS Bill we should include it because it is endangering our young boys and girls. 

I would also like to comment about the availability of ARVs. I have been reading this book of 100 questions written by a certain doctor. One of the biggest challenges is the availability of these drugs. The doctor mentioned very clearly, if you are sure that you may not sustain taking these drugs, it is better not to start because the moment you start and stop, then if you want to start later those drugs would never work. So, that means our Government must ensure that the drugs are available.

If we go out to sensitise people to be tested and to come for the treatment and the drugs are not there, what will happen? It is very important that we acquire enough drugs. I am aware of a factory, which is supposed to produce these drugs from Luzira. I would like to know from the minister how far this has gone and when it will be completed so that I go out and tell people that the drugs are available, in order for them to go for testing.

So AIDS has come; it is with us. We must not take it for granted. Those of you in this House who are not tested, today go and be tested as an example.

THE SPEAKER: I think we received a very comprehensive statement from the chairman of the committee and a number of you made very good contributions, also agreeing with the contents of the statement. There are also many of you who are interested in making further contribution, and apparently who are agreeing with each other.

But we have a very long Order Paper here and as we noted last week, this is the only day that we are going to be sitting here until 12 December 2008 when EALA completes its work. 

There are very urgent items on this Order Paper. For instance, I see Item No. 7 about Bat valley primary School. I understand the children and all involved are worried because they are supposed to start their holidays. They want to know what we have said about this. 

There is an item to debate from the Office of the Prime Minister, PRDP which we could not do last time because Members directly concerned with it had scattered because of various reasons.

I would think that really although this is an important subject, since it has been comprehensively covered in the statement of the chairperson, we should reduce the contributions on the floor so that we handle other items. It is now 1.10 p.m., we shall break for about 30 minutes and then come back so that we complete as many items as possible. 

So it is high time that we closed the debate, but I had already hon. Byarugaba and one other person. Maybe, we hear them and then suspend. But please be brief. If a colleague has already dealt with an idea, you need not to repeat it, so that you only give us new ideas.

1.08
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, I will try to be very brief. I would like to pay glowing tribute to my colleague for a very good report and also to government that has established the relevant institutions to fight this killer disease and also for having established - I think the first of its kind - a manufacturing factory for ARVs in the Sub-Saharan region. We must applaud and thank government for the same. 

I also want to remind everybody here present that MDG No. 6 particularly talks about halting of HIV/AIDS spread and reverse the whole trend by year 2015. This report could not have come at a better time than this. It is also very important for this Parliament that come next time when we have more time, we should establish a more concrete policy on how to tackle this killer disease. 

I will be very grateful if the committee charged with this responsibility comes up with a more concrete position on this. For instance, when we look at the Parliament constituency HIV Task Forces; we have heard about these but the operationalisation has not been very easy. 

I wanted to start one in my constituency, but the requirements needed for establishing one became very difficult; even opening a bank account is difficult. The requirements were difficult for rural people to manage. I actually failed totally. I think we need a more simplified system of establishing these task forces; and these task forces can be given further responsibilities. 

Like on HIV/AIDS day, what are we supposed to be doing as Parliament? I am told the activities are taking place in Lugogo. I wish we had taken a leading role in this. We should may be establish a week - like the Army has an army week- a whole week for Members of Parliament to create awareness about the dangers of HIV/AIDS. I would be very grateful if it could also be included as one of the Parliamentary Constituency Task Forces.

I would like to inform my colleagues who are talking about the PMTCs; these ones are available at health centre IVS. Those of you who are not aware, go to your health centre IVs. These facilities are available and I wish they could be utilised further.

I also want to inform my colleague, I think she has gone out, that the first step in the prevention and fight against HIV/AIDS is not treatment; it is testing. You cannot prevent something you do not know. Testing and counselling are the most important step in the treatment line. If you are not tested and counselled, you cannot get treatment. 

I would like to call upon the committee to emphasise sensitisation. Let us all go out to sensitise our people, about the dangers; how we can avoid it. It started a long time ago, when our President was a leading advocate. I think later on he relaxed and thought that many others would take on. It seems we have all relaxed.

I think it is time that you, Mr Speaker, as our leader here took the first role; we follow you and then others follow. I wish we started this sooner than later. The fight is a big one and we need a lot of determination. Why can’t we look at the focus group? We have been informed that - and it is true last time you sent me to attend a conference and I represented you very well; I made a report back to you on HIV/ AIDS and the role of Parliament in Canada. This is one thing that I think we should be focusing ourselves otherwise if we spread our efforts; we might not come to terms with the dangers that this disease causes. 

We have now been informed correctly so that only 1 percent of our youth are affected. Can’t we now concentrate and encircle those ones and ensure that they are not infected?   Can’t we do that at least and start with the married and other people can come later? Those are some of the few issues I wanted to raise but I should also raise one more.

Government, my dear government, what are you doing about these expired drugs? Why should people go without these ARVs? The other day we heard that we needed so many millions of shillings to incinerate expired drugs, is that not disaster enough to cry over?  I think we should cry over that; we should shed tears; it is a disaster. I think this is something that we should never ever hear of and it should end with what happened last time.  

I want to thank you Mr Speaker since I had very little time at my disposal. Thank you Government, and I thank you hon. Elioda Tumwesigye. (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Let us end this general debate. 

1.14
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank my colleague the Chairperson of HIV/AIDS committee. I have only three things actually to raise from this statement. 

One is about prioritisation of HIV/AIDS monies. Mr Speaker as you are aware, the Government of Uganda and some donors were committing a lot of funds to this sector. And we all know that as a country we had not been utilising these funds correctly. It is very unfortunate that most of the monies directed towards HIV/AIDS is spent on seminars, workshops setting caucuses everywhere, raising proposals from civil society organisations. 

If you move all round Uganda, you will find in every village or sub-county a CBO, a local NGO, an international NGO sourcing proposals to get money on HIV/AIDS. But Mr Speaker, all these agencies; all these people that are involved use this money to benefit them as individuals or institutions that they have set up. And I think as Parliament we should come out very clearly on how to control the flow and the usage of money on HIV/AIDS. 

I strongly believe that if we were spending the monies that we get correctly; if we were prioritising it well on counselling and testing, on acquisition of apparatus in our laboratories for testing and on direct sensitisation of the rural population, we would have reached some target. 

But unfortunately, we are not very kin on these funds, which we get. For instance, Government this year is going to spend Shs 60 billion on HIV/AIDS but what percentage will go on the actual needs of the victims, on ARVs? This is where Parliament should be proactive and take a drastic move and check through these funds. Otherwise we shall continue to look for funds all over the world with the good image that we have created on the fight against HIV/AIDS and yet the rural person or the real victim of HIV/AIDS will not benefit from it. And this is our problem. 

How I even wish government would have come out to explain how far they have followed the Global Fund because this is something that Parliament should take seriously. Corruption has destroyed our fight against HIV/AIDS.  

As the government of the country, if we do not make a clear position on this even those who are willing to support us in this sector may be scared and at the end of it all, the victims will be those who are already affected with this deadly virus. 

Secondly, I think we need to invest in health research. In this country we had an idea of setting up our own laboratory or a drug centre, which I think we are working on. But how much do we spend; how much do we inject in doing research and making our own drugs in Uganda? 

Apart from getting this money and buying ARVs from other countries and yet we have the capacity to do it here. Somebody raised a very important issue on scientific investment; how far have gone with this? I would ask my Government and MPs especially to consider prioritising of scientific research in this country especially on health which we are very poor at. 

And lastly, recently I was hearing about some sort of groups that are coming up on the issue of who should be tested and who should not be tested. The biggest problem now is becoming stigmatisation. Many people are getting so worried with even the new thinking that is being generated across the country. And many are getting worried that some of them are not going to be tested because they fear stigmatisation. 

Government should preach a lot about these attempts. I am told some laws and policies are coming up on this particular matter. But I think we should cater for the interests of the victims rather than putting laws or policies that will again scare them at the expense of their own health. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Really with this long Order Paper, I suggest we end. But maybe the minister in charge of schools should be heard. 

1.20
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Dear colleagues, I did not want to have this discussion come to an end without informing this august House that under the UPE and USE programmes, we in the Ministry of Education have taken it as our responsibility and duty to sensitise the young children between the age of six and 20 plus because as you would imagine, most of that cohort of the youth are in schools. 

As a directive of the President about four years back, we started a very vigorous programme whereby we have given instructions that every school in the country must once a week have an assembly whose objective is to sensitise children about HIV/AIDS. 

We have gone a step further to integrate relevant topics into the curriculum at primary and secondary levels and we are moving systematically to tertiary levels and universities. 

We realise that from the age of six to the age of 23 when one goes out of the university, one should have a rough idea on how AIDS is contracted, treated and the issue of stigma is being neutralised. 

And indeed I want this House to know that the President under his directive made it very clear that no Ugandan should leave school, or college without being able to answer at least five questions about HIV/AIDS.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and Madam Minister, for giving way. Sometimes as you drive around, there are big billboards on the streets and highways with photographs of young girls and underneath there are words to the effect that “Not even sugar daddies can distract her from her studies.” I want clarification from the minister whether in this sensitisation they are carrying out moves to indicate that actually AIDS is not got from sugar daddies only. The disease can be got from anybody – even school children. The idea these billboards tend to portray is that it is only sugar daddies who give these children AIDS and not themselves giving each other.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you my colleague for those observations. Well, we are grading the information we pass on to the children. The information we pass on to primary school children is at their level. What is AIDS? What causes it? Simple facts! But as we go to the teenagers, we are pointing out some of the most common areas where such a problem might occur. Normally at teenage, young people especially at the university are looking for some money; they want somebody to support them and indeed they fall prey to some of the sugar daddies. We are only pointing out some of the areas where this trouble is more. But we have told them all the causes and symptoms. But the message about sugar daddies is targeting a certain group. I thank you.

MR OKUMU: I just want to seek a very small clarification from the minister. She has really emphasised sugar daddies but we know very well that there are so many sugar mummies who even go to universities to get these young boys to keep them well. And we have seen victims. I think it would be better when we are talking about sugars daddies; we include both sugar daddies and mummies. (Laughter)

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much. Mummies, if I may say, are normally the first parents and they rarely get tempted into that area –(Interjections)-but anyway, I take the points forwarded by my colleagues and we are going to emphasise mummies and daddies. But the idea is that we target a group where the sugar daddies are the frequent visitors. I thank you.

1.26
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought we had exhausted this topic but just allow me to say two things. First of all, those billboards were actually talking about cross-generational sex and they were addressing a different topic. Cross-generational sex between young people who are looking for older people and yes, it can be women or men because they are looking for money but through that they catch HIV/AIDS. 

But secondly, HIV/AIDS presently has become a financial debate. When we started fighting HIV/AIDS during the late 80s and early 90s, the budget of Uganda was the less than what we have today. But we did a lot of work and we made a big impact and that is when HIV/AIDS in Uganda actually dropped from the 30 percent to six percent and we were not discussing money from donors. 

When we so much money coming for HIV/AIDS, that is when it became a financial topic to discuss ways of making more money and bringing in more and we just brought a lot of confusion to our population. That is when we started bringing confusing messages; that is when young people started looking for sugar daddies and sugar mummies because it really became a financial project so to speak.

I want to say to my colleagues that instead of mourning about HIV/AIDS, if all of us just went out to this country and did what we can do in our constituencies and really campaigned for our people to be aware that they can actually fight HIV/AIDS by not catching it at all before we talk about how treat it, we could actually defeat HIV/AIDS and that is the only way we will defeat it instead of looking for more and more money to treat those who will catch it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: This closes the debate on the statement made by the chairman of the committee. This is an appropriate time to break off for lunch for an hour. At 2.30 p.m. we should be back to handle other items. There is an item, which we dealt with a week or so ago, this was on Bat Valley. A report was read by hon. Okello-Okello but there was the issue of some exhibits, which we had on our file and we needed some clarification. I think we shall start there and then we conclude it and move to another item.
 
I know that there were statements to be given by ministers, one from the Minister of Lands and another one from the Minister of Energy. I hope you have got a copy of the statements and the contents have been appreciated. If necessary, study the contents of these statements so that in case they make the statements, it is easy for you to make your contribution. The proceedings are suspended until 2.30 p.m.   

(The proceedings were suspended at 1.31 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.00 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: There is the Bat Valley issue but apparently I do not see the chairperson here or the chairperson of the special legal committee. We adjourned because of the legal issues involved. Okay, I see the chairman; he is here. Let us dispose off that issue - it is a small one - and then we can proceed.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE PETITION BY PARENTS AND SCHOOL MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE OF BAT VALLEY PRIMARY SCHOOL ON THE OWNERSHIP OF THE SCHOOL

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Ben Wacha; maybe you can come to the front. (Laughter)

3.01
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): For the time being, that is too high for me. Mr Speaker, when this matter was brought before the House I was unfortunately out of the country and there seemed to be an impasse, based I hear on our report, that is the report of the ad hoc committee. I just want to clarify two or three small issues. 

Our report was based on facts, which were before us at that particular time. One of the basic facts was that when we were dealing with the issue raised by the main committee, that is the committee on social affairs, we noted that at that particular point there was no lease in place. There was no lease for the property. 

We noted that the trustees, that is, the former owners, had made some payments with a view to having a new lease issued in respect to the land. Although this might have created some contractual relationship with the owner of the property, when we were dealing with the matter there was still was no lease and this payment did not go far enough to create a proprietary right for the former owners. However, we did emphasise that although the land had reverted to the district land board, it was within their powers to issue a new lease to the former owners and this one, I think, did not come out very well. They have the right to issue a new lease. The issue of extending the lease did not arise because you cannot extend what is not there. At that particular point, the lease had already expired but it is within the right of the owners of the land, that is, Kampala District Land Board, based on the arrangement which was already in place, to decide whether to issue a new lease or not. 

Maybe I should also bring up another matter, which may need clarification. As of that time when we were writing the report, there was no lease offer; at least it was never brought to our attention. If there is one now, of course the situation would drastically change. Secondly, as at that time, there was still a subsisting caveat on the title of the property but the powers to issue a new lease reverted back to the district land board.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have heard the clarification from the chairperson of that committee that we set up to look into the legal matters. His clarification is clear. The question to ask now is: did the district land board offer another term to those trustees? I think that is now the issue, which we have to find out and solve this problem. Who will do it? I do not know. 

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, last time you guided well. You said that there were payments which were made, sanctioned by Kampala City Council for which receipts were issued. The committee is supposed to have commented on whether this will not lead to protracted litigation tomorrow. I have not heard hon. Ben Wacha commenting on this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what I pointed out from the report of the main committee was this letter, which the committee called Annexure 10 and at one time they called it Appendix 4. This letter is dated 31 July 2007 and it reads as follows: “Plot 110, William Street School Site. 
I refer to your application dated 30 October 2006 for renewal of a lease on the above plot. This is to inform you that Kampala Land Board, under minute KDLB 18/14 of 2006 of a meeting held on 13 November 2006 the following terms – Premium, Shs 200 million; ground rent, Shs 10 million; terms, 49 years - you are required to contact the Commissioner of Land Inspectorate to secure a formal lease offer and thereafter pay as follows: Premium payable to Kampala City Council Central Division, ground rent payable to Kampala  District Land Board, Room A-210. After effecting payment, please present copies of the receipt and lease offer from the Secretary Kampala District Land Board and take the original receipt to the Commissioner Land Inspectorate for preparation of documents”. It is signed by Bagonza, Ag. Secretary Kampala District Land Board and copied to the Commissioner of Land Inspectorate, Town Clerk Kampala Council and Director Finance.

This is the letter which came from the district land board. Subsequently, the committee gives us these receipts of payment, which they call Appendix 5. They give us another receipt from Kampala City council, whose dates are subsequent to the letter from the district land board. That is the evidence. 

It therefore means that you go and seek the minute, which they named in that meeting of November, and see what it says. So the terms can be corrected. If this is true, then an offer was made and accepted. Once that situation is there, anybody who is offended is free to enforce the contract by seeking a specific performance of the contract. That is contract law. I know that. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Without necessarily challenging your view, I beg to disagree. When you read the particulars of that communication, you can see that the offer is not absolute; it is conditional. It is conditioned on the “offeree” securing a formal lease offer. According to the evidence before us, which was tabled before the committee, no lease offer was secured. There is nothing recorded to show that these people secured a lease offer. So on what basis did they proceed to effect the payments when they had not complied with the condition?

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think then that you have to call these people and ask them under what basis they paid this? Why do we avoid a situation which may land us in litigation?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information. All these parties appeared before us - Kampala City Council and the land board – and they agreed that they wrongly gave this. When you look at the receipt, it only indicated Shs 10 million not Shs 200 million. 

Secondly, there is a caveat which is signed, among others, by Prof. Luboobi who is a parent on the executive of Bat Valley Primary School. So we called all these stakeholders –

THE SPEAKER: You mean a caveat was on the district land board? Caveats are registered in the land registry. Can you make a caveat to a district land board to exercise its powers, which are constitutional? I am sorry to come in but I am a lawyer. It was your duty to investigate with the district land board whether they made an offer. What does their minute say?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, this is what I was telling you; we called all these people. I get a bit unsettled when the legal committee of the institution of Parliament of Uganda recommended that we put up – and again you are disagreeing with this committee, Mr Speaker.

We did this having taken into account the scenario of other schools that have been evicted. We wanted to see that civil servants do have access to education as far as UPE is concerned. There is nothing in out rules of procedure that was used to set up an ad hoc committee. That means that parliamentary committees do not have powers to recommend.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairman of the committee, hon. Ben Wacha has told you that the powers of giving a new lease are vested in the district land board. You put these documents in your report and they are showing that there was some kind of communication between the district land board and these Asians. Now the question is under what circumstances they got this and the other. So, it may require further investigation of this particular fact. 

We should not be emotional; everybody is interested in seeing our city children getting a place to study. It should not mean that because we want that, we overlook over legal provisions and the rights of our people.  

3.14
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As hon. Wacha has said, Kampala District Land Board are the owners of this land. It is correctly said that these people applied for renewal of this lease. From the letter you have read, the district land board sat under the minute you have talked about and this lease was extended and these people were told to go to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to get a formal lease. 

With me here is a form from the minister. It is form 18 – 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, hon. Byandala is reading a document which he says is from the ministry. Before he proceeds to read that document, the question is: is he in order to proceed with a document, which was never tabled before the committee? It is not part and parcel of the record that we are debating today and he has not even bothered to give us notice that he will bring a certified copy. There is even a precedent to that effect. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what document he was reading but I think what we should not do is be evasive. We will not solve this problem by saying we do not want to see this and the other. The best thing for us to do is, if there is a document that was lacking but it has surfaced, let us investigate. That is how we can solve the problem. Evading it will not solve matters. Litigation is unnecessary. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I was saying, this is a Government of Uganda paper, Form 18, which clearly shows the plot that we are talking about. It is addressed to the registered trustees. I see stamps here of the ministry. On page 2 it says, “This offer is made on this day, 7 August 2007”. It is signed by Elisabeth Laker.

If I recall correctly, hon. Lukwago was saying these people never paid all the money. I have documents here showing payment of Shs 200 million - (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, can hon. Byandala guide us rightly as to which documents he is reading and which page. This is because I am not seeing them in our original report. Can we be clear and move together? Otherwise he could be privy to information that we do not have.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have it on the Table?

MR BYANDALA: Yes, I can give the documents.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is about the source of that document. I would like to know where hon. Byandala got that document because this document, as the chairman said, is not part of the record. We have never seen it. I participated in the proceedings personally and I have never seen it. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, if you recall correctly, when we left here on Friday, people were questioning missing documents and I took the initiative to look for these documents. This is because we want to get to the bottom of this matter. These are the documents I got and I can lay them on the Table. They can be checked.

THE SPEAKER: We can verify the authenticity of the documents.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I went very far to get these documents from the time that this thing was repossessed. There is a repossession certificate number, a letter written to the Ministry of Education that you were renting this thing from Kampala City Council and now it has been repossessed, letters asking for extension of lease. They are all here.

THE SPEAKER: Can we get the document please?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, the document that I am laying here is a letter of 1991 written by the acting Executive Secretary to Kampala City Council. It is written to the Town Clerk informing him about the repossession of this school. I also have a letter here addressed to the hon. deputy Minister of Education informing the ministry that they have been renting from the departed Asians Custodian Board but it has been repossessed. There is also a consent judgement; they had some disputes about members of management but they later agreed. 

I also have here an application for extension of lease, the letter you have just read from Kampala District Land Board, receipts of Shs 200 million paid, another receipt of Shs 10 million, Form 18 of the Land Act, Cap. 227 and the Land Regulations, 2004. I also have another receipt where they paid Uganda Revenue Authority. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: He is laying a document on the Table for us to examine. What is the point of order?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, there is a precedent in this House that whoever wishes to lay a document on the Table must first have it certified. I have seen this document at a distance and I have not seen any certification.

THE SPEAKER: I see what you are talking about. We are going to verify and find out whether what he has presented to us is real. We are not using it as evidence, no. He has laid these documents for us to go and verify and we know where to verify. Maybe we shall give you the duty of going and verifying these documents and you give us a report.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, as far as I can recall, hon. Nandala-Mafabi brought here a document in a similar manner and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, you should know how to distinguish cases. We are not saying this is evidence. We are simply getting all of it. I shall assign you the responsibility of going and verifying. We are not accepting it as proof. We are accepting it as a document that he has come across. I think you know how to differentiate.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have just a small matter of procedure. I think for record purposes, hon. Byandala should read the headings of each document that he is laying so that he is recorded correctly. He talked about a form something, for example; there must be a heading or caption indicating what it is for.

THE SPEAKER: Can you please come and read the headings of these documents?

MR BYANDALA: The heading of the letter by E.B. Batemyetto reads, “Repossession of property by the former owners dated 18th 1991.” There is another one also from Batemyetto, which reads, “Repossession of Plot N0. 109, William Street, Kampala, BAT Valley School by the registered trustees of Saree Saratanna.” It is addressed to the deputy Minister of Education. There is also one from that association to the Minister of State for Finance, the late hon. Moses Kintu. The heading is, “Plot Number 110, William Street, Kampala known as BAT Valley School.” 

There is another one, the Republic of Uganda in the High Court of Uganda at Kampala, civil suit Number 672 of 2000; the heading is “Consent Judgement.” There is another from that association signed by Mukesh Shukal to the Secretary, Kampala District Land Board: “Lease extension, freehold, full term 99 year primary/secondary school building project reminder.” There is also another from Pradip N. Karia to the chairman, Kampala District Land Board heading, “Plot 110, William Street, Kampala.” 

There is another from the Kampala District Land Board signed by the acting secretary, Jane Bagonza, to the registered trustees of the association. The heading is: “Plot 110 William Street, school site.” I also have a Kampala City Council receipt, Central division. It is a general receipt for the payment of Shs 200 million received from the registered trustees. There is also a Kampala City Council receipt received from the registered trustees of Shs 10 million. 

There is the Republic of Uganda Land Act cap 220, form 18. It is on plot 110, file volume 433, Folio 16: “Land at William Street, Kampala to the registered trustees of the association.” It is a lease offer signed by Elisabeth M. Laker. There is a Uganda Revenue Authority receipt of Shs 10,050,000. Those are the papers, Mr Speaker. 

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Could hon. Byandala tell us the date for the lease offer? I think there is one there.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I am now reading the form from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Under number seven it says, “Referring to the minute of Kampala District Land Board.” Below this it says, “This offer is made this 7th day of August year 2007.” 

MR KATUNTU: I am just seeking your clarification or guidance, Mr Speaker, on how we are going to proceed. We had the main report, which I would like to call the Kubeketerya report, read. We had the Ben Wacha report read. We now have a Byandala report. I do not know whether this is what it is.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Byandala is contributing the same way you are. He is just contributing. You remember last week when we handled this matter, we said we shall investigate to find out whether the district land board made an offer. As a result of his investigations, he is making a contribution. So he is doing the same thing that you are.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, this is the first time since I came here that we are having this sort of thing. If you can allow me to make my point because I was going to seek your guidance -

THE SPEAKER: Don’t demean your friend. He was just contributing like you.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I have no intentions of demeaning anybody. I am only seeking your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: My guidance is that let us get the facts. Last week we said we shall investigate and find out the truth and you were not present.

MR KATUNTU: Can I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker? Give me an opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, can you sit down please! You are seeking guidance and I am giving it to you. You were not present. The report was read by hon. Okello-Okello on behalf of hon. Ben Wacha. However, after reading it, we found out that there were documents in the main report, which were not commented on by the committee. We therefore wanted further investigation of these documents so that a comment can be made. That is why hon. Wacha has come up and said as a committee they did not say the district land board has no authority. The district land board can give any offer to any person. Therefore, what we have to find out is whether there was an offer.  I think that was his explanation.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. If the committee was to do further investigations, then was it tasked with the responsibility of investigating this matter and come up with the report? Was it for us individual Members of Parliament to go, do our own private investigations, come back and make a report? I am asking this because now documents have been laid on the Table, we have not had the opportunity to read them and yet we are continuing to debate.  From what basis are we going to continue? I am asking this in good faith because we have new documents laid. 

On the issue of authenticity, you guided the House by saying that you will task hon. Lukwago to authenticate them. When are we going to debate this issue? This is the guidance I am seeking. It is because I have noticed that we are proceeding in a manner which is very difficult for us to appreciate and not even under our ordinary rules of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, what would you advise in view of what hon. Byandala has tendered to us here? My view is that we have to verify the authenticity of those documents. After we have verified their authenticity then we will debate either with those documents in mind or not before we formulate a solution. I am saying this because what we are trying to find out is the legal ownership. Who is the legal owner? We know that we want these children to continue, but we also want to know who the landlord will be. Will it be the district land board? Will it be the city council? That is the issue. 

Once we establish who the legal owners are, then you can advise us on what to do with the grievances that have been expressed about the use of the school. If it is a huddle, for example, you tell somebody you want to reach there but there is this huddle. I think that is a better approach than advising while giving an impression that there is no huddle.

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your guidance. Hon. Byandala has presented receipts and so on, but there is something I want to ask about the Expropriated Property Act. Look at Section 5 of this Act about property in which the government wishes to participate. It says: “Where an application made under Section 4 relating to property or business in which the government wishes to participate, the minister shall notify the applicant accordingly and invite him or her to enter into negotiations for that purpose.”  

Secondly, it says, “… where the negotiations under section 1 are successfully concluded, a joint venture company shall be incorporated and the minister shall issue a certificate transferring the property of business to that company ….” I am only seeking guidance: after this lease had expired, the Asians went ahead to apply but when they applied – before they actually went - a letter was written to the Town Clerk by the Minister of Education. In this letter - I may not have an opportunity to read all the contents but let me just pick out one paragraph – it says: “It has become apparent that city council is losing schools to other organisations at a fast rate ….” The pertinent part reads: “I would like to appeal to the council not to sell or revert any plot of land used by educational institutions to any other bodies once the lease expires but it remains the property of the council ….”  

Mr Speaker, after the Town Clerk received this letter, she went ahead and wrote to the land board. In the letter she wrote to the land board, she said: “The Minister of State for Primary Education has raised concern about the rate at which Kampala City Council schools are being re-possessed and the instances at which some of these schools are turned into non-educational use. The minister has advised that Kampala City Council should not sell or revert land used for educational institutions to any other bodies once the lease expires ….”  

After all this communication and after the meetings held in city council of which minutes I may not present here now, it was clear that the land board should not have gone ahead to renew the lease.  

However, after the committee observed a number of things, members realised that there were some wrongs. The amount of money that was charged may have been wrongfully computed, so we advised that this money be refunded and city council was ready to refund this money. When the committee met His Excellency the President, he listened to all the issues and advised that in view of the fact that we needed to protect the school, we also needed to do something to see that the Asian organisation does not lose out in a way. The Minister will be in position to explain.  

There is one thing that is very important, and which I would beg this honourable House not to forget. The Asians, as we speak, are mobilising and informing parents to look for schools elsewhere. That is one important thing. 

Secondly, they are planning a lot of things – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, could you allow me to advise you on the issues you started with? First of all, you started by quoting the Expropriated Property Act, where you talked of the provisions dealing with a situation where Government gets interested in buying a certain property. That would come before the re-possession was issued. That was when Government would have said it should not be returned or government will jointly own it. There is a provision in the Expropriation Property Act dealing with that. Unfortunately, this provision was not applied in this particular case. 

City council has no land and it does not own the district land board. City council may participate in the formation of the district land board, but that board is an independent constitutional structure. The best the Ministry of Education could have done, if it had an inkling that somebody wanted to have a lease, was to write to the district land board saying that, “Government is interested in this land, the lease is about to expire so we would urge that you allocate that property to the city council.” That would be important because the city council has no property. This school or any other has to apply to get a title to this property. So let us not imagine that the city clerk did what not this year. The district land board is an independent body, which is free to take the decision it wants. 

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for that guidance and it is in that very spirit that I am raising this issue. 

In the first place, the reason why this very section does not apply is because the lease was still on and that is why government went ahead to advise that when the lease expires it should not be renewed.

THE SPEAKER: And the district land board disobeyed. If you believe these are true documents, it disobeyed. It has a right to.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Seninde, for giving way. The information I want to give is that we should not mix up these issues. The Expropriated Properties Act is not applicable in this matter and this point was made very clear by the Solicitor-General. The communication is part of the record. The reason is that this property has never been taken over by government under the expropriated properties laws. No. It has never vested this property in the Custodian Board and it is very clear. All the property that was confiscated by government was vested in the Custodian Board. Kampala City Council, which has been managing this school, has never been a tenant of the Custodian Board. So the laws regulating expropriated properties are not at all applicable here. The lease was not tampered with at all. It just expired naturally. It was never interrupted. So, this is the whole point I wanted to make. 

I also want to give further information about this issue you touched on of the change of user. I am telling you as area Member of Parliament, I am sure and I have information that the user is going to change immediately we allow this school to go. It is going to be turned into a shopping mall; the plans are already underway. It will cease to be a UPE school. 

This is the biggest UPE school that I have in Kampala Central now after the demolition of Shimoni Demonstration School. This is the only school left. Kampala City Council is already in negotiations with UTODA to demolish Nakivubo Blue Primary School, the other school left, and construct a park there. Nakivubo Blue is the second biggest school after Bat Valley in terms of UPE. So, where are we? I am wondering why the Front Bench here is quiet. Hon. Minister, Namirembe Bitamazire, why are you so quiet on this matter? So, this is the information I wanted to give hon. Seninde.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but I think for change of user, you must get permission from the city council. They cannot just change. The city council must accept for planning purposes. But I think let us sort out the ownership first; we are mixing up issues. We are mixing up emotions. We should deal with this particular property squarely on the law. 

MR WACHA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, you are right; the whole argument now hinges on who the owner is. I am particularly interested in one document, which has been laid on the Table. That is the document I think hon. Byandala says is a lease offer. If that lease offer is authentic, then the picture changes drastically. 

So I would go with your advice that we should find out the authenticity of this document. All the other documents, by the way, which he laid on the Table are with us except that lease offer. Now he says the lease offer was offered, it is dated 26th September - 

THE SPEAKER: The offer here is for 07 August 2007.

MR WACHA: 27th August?

THE SPEAKER: No. 7th. 

MR WACHA: 7th? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR WACHA: 07 August 2007. I think that is the most important document that we have. Now if we can establish the authenticity, then the debate will change. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. So, do you agree that we check on the authenticity of this? I can ask you to do so because you are not going to change it anyway and you are a prominent lawyer; you know how to search. I can offer it to you.

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your guidance on this. I do appreciate the fact that we definitely, at all cost, have to find the authenticity of that document because according to what our committee did and according to what hon. Ben Wacha’s committee has done, that lease was not in existence. But if it is and we are to establish the authenticity of that document, I am afraid it will not take a day. Even if it did take a day, I am afraid –

THE SPEAKER: Even now when you go to the registry you will be able to find this -

MRS SENINDE: Well, I would appreciate that -

THE SPEAKER: There is a general receipt number. The amount was paid and the date is there. So, what is the problem?

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, why I raise this, I am afraid that according to what is on the ground, if we end this Parliament today before this problem is resolved, I assure you the school is at stake. We need to do something. We need to do something honestly. We need to protect the children of the poor in this urban city -(Mr Lokeris rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, do you want to come in? Let the shadow minister finish and then you come in.

3.48
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It takes me a lot of pain to talk about Bat Valley Primary School right now because this matter has been with us for a very long time. 

In the committee one time I was told that I was racist because the issues I raised did not seem to go well with some people. I want us to realise that this Plot 110 is of strategic business interest to anybody in Kampala now and in the long run and nobody would want to part with this land. 

But what precedent are we setting? Indeed after discussing this issue and meeting people, going to the school, calling whoever dared to care about this property, finally we had to go to a committee sitting in State House in Entebbe over this matter because of the nature of this land, because of the business interests on this land, because of what is currently going on this land. The President indeed said that it would be prudent to find land elsewhere for the Asians and let the school sit where it is now because this is a school providing education for the children of Kampala’s urban poor and the civil servants. 

After that I thought that the Ministry of Education would have taken a different trend in discussing issues to do with Bat Valley Primary School knowing very well that there was already a commitment from the highest office of this land to say, “Let the school sit where it is now -(Interjection)– the hon. Minister was there. Possibly she did not brief you but you may need to get that briefing. 

Mr Speaker, where do we find Bat Valley Primary School? It is in Uganda. If our Asian brothers cared about human resource development in this country and if they claim they are Asian-Ugandans, why don’t they want to appreciate the fact that we are educating the Ugandan children on this land that is even Ugandan by its soil nature and not Asian or Indian? Why? These are the questions that we need to ask. And now as a nation, what precedent are we setting because most of our schools today were founded by religious organisations. There are Catholic-founded schools, Protestant-founded schools and Islamic-founded schools; what is unique about this Indian community trying to claim this piece of land? What if every religious institution – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have referred to a meeting with the President in Entebbe and the President said the school should be there, and to find an alternative. You can only find an alternative if the person for whom you are finding an alternative has a legal right to claim it. I think this is what we are trying to establish. We need to know whether he is the owner or not, and if he is the owner, what do we do with his claim? Do we compulsorily acquire it? Do we give him another alternative but you cannot reach that one unless you are satisfied that that person you are prepared to give compensation has a right. 

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, thank you for that legal guidance but there is a human face to every legal thing we do on earth, and I wanted us to look at the human face of this school and the legal ownership and who this person is that is interested in having this plot reclaimed. We had a meeting when he was still our chairman and these people told us that they are not committing this piece of land to anything else but education, and at the same time they want the school to revive its former glory. But then our government said, “We have a commitment to revive this school to whatever glorious state.” Now this gives me the question, where is the human face of this reclaim? Where is it because unless it is there, then we cannot talk about the legal dynamics of this -(Interruption) 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Shadow Minister. The information I wanted to give about this question of human face is that this matter is indeed very absurd. Mr Speaker, right now there are threats even against the people who are trying to put across this matter to save Bat Valley. I will just give you one. I have a teacher in Bat Valley and he is in the gallery here. He is Mr Mboizi Max. He is one of the people who have been championing this cause. But do you know what happened? One Rajin Kanti Taylor issued death threats to Mr Mboizi here. He sent an SMS message to him. He has the message, it can be transcribed. He said, “I am a cobra. Don’t dare play around with me. I am a cobra.” That is Rajin Kanti Taylor. So, if a person we are seeking to protect here with all these legalese that we are coming up with describes himself as a cobra and he is the person we are entrusting with a facility, a facility that is supposed to cater for the urban poor and for the civil servants as we were told here, are we really doing a service to this country? He has issued death threats even to the head teacher, ms Sarah Baziwe. So if that is the situation right now, where do we stand as Parliament? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, do you want this Parliament to reach a conclusion on the ownership? Don’t be emotional. You should be straight with whoever you advise. If there are hurdles, you should say there are hurdles. But to pretend that there are no hurdles when they are there will not be a proper service by Parliament. Let us find out the ownership. We can check from the registry to find out whether this document is authentic and if it is, what does it signify? What do you fear?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, the issue is two fold. Education has a policy and there is a question of ownership. But what is not in dispute is that the lease expired and the report brought out the matter clearly that what the land board purported to do was to renew the lease and that purported renewal was done illegally, and that fact came out clearly that what they ought to have done – 

THE SPEAKER: Now, who will decide whether it was done illegally? 

MR LUKWAGO: It was after the investigation of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: No, who will decide whether it was done illegally when on the face of it, it is indicated that they deliberated and decided that? I think we should be fair to all citizens. 

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, when you hear of the presence of cobras in our country as far as Bat Valley is concerned, then you understand the strategic importance of this land and the business interests in it. There is also a rumour going on that these people – the Asians – are compromising the people in KCC deliberately in order to acquire this land. We need a detailed investigation into this because you cannot have all other documents assembled, and we started discussing this issue last year and this very lease that has just been laid here was as effective last year. So what does this tell you? That the system within which these Asians are working, whether in KCC or in the Ministry of Lands, needs a thorough investigation because this is not a joke we are talking about here. 

Mr Speaker, a school of over 1,000 pupils should not just go away like that, just because the Asian community in that religious affiliation thinks that they can have it and run it. 

I have cases, for example in neighbouring Kenya here, where the Asians had owned land for ages and now it is a time bomb. And now in Uganda where we are trying to invest in our human resource, the Asian community is coming up in the names of their former ownership to say that they should have this school back, with a different format of investing in this land is very unfortunate. If we as a government take it up and defy the directive that His Excellency the President promised to the citizens of this country that an alternative would be found and this school would be retained where it is, for the children of the urban poor as a public school in promoting UPE at least in the city centres - unless we commit ourselves to doing this, my government which is in waiting, when it comes, we shall definitely get this school back. (Laughter) Ultimately, in whatever we do can we have a human face to all this legalistic jargons and things to do with education?

Finally, I pray that we respect what the President said. The First Lady is here, she can defy what I said because we were in partnership with her. In fact, on that very day when His Excellency announced in her presence –[ON. MEMBERS: “She is a Member of the committee”]- She is a Member of the committee, I am aware and I respect her totally. Indeed the honourable minister is here and unless these fundamental witnesses deny what the President had said even this legal document that was laid here as “something 2007” to me does not become valid. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I see, there is nobody who says the school should not be there. I think everybody is interested in that school. We are only solving one problem. Who is the legal owner of the property? That is all.

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mr Peter Lokeris): Mr Speaker, I am here because I am not really very settled. Since I went to that place to join hon. Bitamazire, letters have been coming to us which are claiming schools. Some of them are asking for school play grounds. They think those are not developed and yet children go to play there. Those areas are properly developed. So, there is threat on all schools in Kampala.

One of these is this Bat Valley. It is only the legal issues that we sort out and see what we can do next because in view of what has been brought and laid on Table here, there are letters which come even from Uganda Land Commission, in fact directing us to give certain schools out.  

I would like to beg this august House to prevail upon those officials, not to take schools as if they are a joke. These are sources of knowledge and we cannot compromise with knowledge. (Applause) The policy of UPE is that the schools should be near the place where the children are born. If we remove all of them to go away from the towns, how will the poor people take their children out to the school in view of the traffic jams that we have? We need schools near where the children are manufactured. (Applause)

We have lost this one, a mega project will come. We in the Ministry of Education would like to be given rest by those who are writing to us claiming these grounds of schools that they should stop. The future is there for everybody; individualism should be stopped.

So, Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter and when I see these letters I weep, because we value children. I have been outside Karamoja for a long time, where the schools are good and my children are well read and I would like others also to read, as a Minister of Primary Education. So thank you very much, Sir. I advise what you advise. I wish those schools remain for those children.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is only one issue. 

MRS MUSEVENI: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to confirm that indeed I am a Member of this committee and we did take a lot of time and we listened to all stakeholders and we took into account the fact that this school is an old school and it has educated generations of Ugandans and we appreciated that. We took into account the trauma that really traumatised all Ugandans; both the Asian community and also the local Ugandans.

But we discussed this with these investors and we said if we really have to choose one group that should keep this school now, who it should be? Because we wanted to do the right thing but we also wanted to do right. We did not just want to say because we want to serve the school community therefore it does not matter if we just throw out the investors - and I really regret the language my colleague is using here, because we even discussed that in the committee that we did not want to use a sectarian language, not even here in this Parliament.

So I believed that we made the recommendations as a committee after we had weighed everything and we said that if we allowed both this UPE school and this investor group to put a secondary school on the same compound, it will not be practical for both of them. That is when we recommended as a committee that the Ministry of Education gets an alternative piece of prime land for this group of investors so that they can put up their own private school at a different place so that this UPE school can remain where it is and we really came to that after we had agonized about this whole issue and discussed it with every stakeholder involved. However, when I hear what you are saying, Mr Speaker, I do not know whether the technical point you are bringing up whether it needs to be clarified before we conclude this or not. But I wanted to confirm that we discussed this at length and we honestly came to this conclusion that it was the best way out. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, I think everybody wants peace at that place and wants the children to be there. And when you talk about negotiations, that is a very good approach but you can start negotiating with those people if they have a right. If you dispute their right, there is no question of compensating them. So I think this is what you are trying to establish here; who is the owner? Once you have done that, then negotiations or compensating them, or acquisition, can start. Otherwise if people think that you forget about the issue of ownership, then you will not be able to compensate. I think that is the only issue; it is not about the school being there; everybody wants the school but the issue has cropped up, who is the owner? And I think we have to solve that one by looking at the law; by looking at various issues and that is all and once we solve it, then the Ministry of Education will go and start negotiations. 

But my other view is that since we have Members of Parliament who are ministers in charge of land where these documents seem to have come from, se ask them to help us to verify these and give us a report.

4.08
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion under rule 46 of our Rules of Procedure. The motion is that the document presented by hon. Byandala be authenticated now; and let no activities contrary to education activities be carried out on the said land and property until Parliament pronounces itself on this matter. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded; any objection?

HON. MEMBERS: Nay.

THE SPEAKER: Shall I put the question to her motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: So can we get that document, please? Let us agree that we are to give the document to the minister. Minister of Lands, where is he? Okay, hon. Kasirivu will take this and give us a report. Can we get the answer tomorrow? 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

THE SPEAKER: We want the statement on PRDP, the other one can come after. We want PRDP because people have been complaining that it is being pushed down all the time.

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA REHABILITATION (Mr David Wakikona): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me a chance today. You have heard statements concerning PRDP but I have to make a small statement in addition to that before we start the real debate on the paper.  

You will recall that His Excellence the President launched PRDP on 15 October 2007 and also closed the Joint Monitoring Committee (JMC) on that date. The JMC had been launched in June 2006 to address the deteriorating conditions in IDP camps. Because the design of PRDP was taking long and the situation on the ground warranted some immediate interventions, the government rolled out some of the 14 PRDP programmes ahead of others to respond to the IDP conditions. The government also rationalised the plan into three phases of emergency, stabilisation and development. 

Under the emergency phase, IDP emergency assistance programme under PRDP strategic objective II was rolled out and implemented during the JMC phase, that is, from June 2006 to July 2007. A lot of investments were made in IDP camps that led to significant improvement of the living conditions in the camps. The civilian protection was also greatly enhanced through establishment of 165 Police Posts and Police deployments. The Anti-Stock Theft Units (ASTU) were also made and enhanced. 

From July 2007 after the PRDP launch, the stabilisation investment phase was launched and the IDP return/resettlement programme under PRDP strategic objective No. II (SO2) that had been started under JMC was rolled out to date. Over 50 percent of IDPs have been resettled using the Government of Uganda funds allocated to the Office of the Prime Minister. To further facilitate the return of IDPs, the returnees have been provided with iron sheets on the ongoing process basis. Hydra form machines have been procured for the districts and some access roads have been remade and reopened and confidence building measure for the returnees. The office of the Prime Minister has embarked on the construction of houses for the traditional leaders in the return communities. 

Under PRDP strategic objective No. IV (SO4); mediation and reconciliation support programme (CMR) and Amnesty reintegration of ex-combatants (ARP), Amnesty Commission has already launched the Uganda Emergency Demobilisation and Reintegration Project which targets demobilisation and repatriation of reporters, their reinsertion, reintegration and promotion of dialogue and reconciliation. In the July-September financial year quarter of this year, Amnesty Commission launched distribution of resettlement kits in Gulu in September 2008 targeting 242 beneficiaries and out of whom 200 have so far benefited. 

In July/September this same quarter, the following progress has been recorded under strategic objective four: sixty-eight reporters were received from LRA and they have received amnesty certificates. Eighty LRA reporters were trained in life skills at Lalong sub-county and Agusku in Gulu. A media campaign on Amnesty Act resettlement and reintegration was carried out in Kitgum on Call FM Radio by the commission officials.

Under the development phase, which includes the bulk of PRDP programmes, the Office of the Prime Minister has already undertaken the following initiatives on pilot basis:

District interventions under the Government of Uganda support sector intervention of Uganda support, and there have been a number of NGOs, humanitarian agencies and special projects such as NUREP coordinated by the Office of the Prime Minister.

Pilot projects are being coordinated under Office of the Prime Minister using Government of Uganda funds and these are detailed later in paragraph five of this brief.

Furthermore, the Office of the Prime Minister is in the process of accessing the World Bank post-conflict fund, which will be used to pilot micro projects worth US $40,000 in each of the 10 selected districts and will reinforce the coordination and monitoring capacity of OPM.

Already, you have a set which was presented by hon. Adolf Mwesige, the Minister for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister on 02 September 2008. He gave a brief on the progress of Northern Uganda Peace Recovery and Development Plan to this House. If you look at the copies I have given you, I have attached a copy because last time many members said they had misplaced their copies.

PRDP Implementation Modalities

In order to minimise costs of service delivery, the implementation of PRDP is mainly being carried out through the existing decentralised and centralised government structures. The Office of the Prime Minister does not implement but coordinates the implementation of the plan using existing structures. Centralised programmes and strategic objective one and four are being implemented by the sector line ministries and agencies such as the Uganda Police Force, prisons services, Judiciary, auxiliary forces, Amnesty Commission. 

Decentralised programmes under strategic objective two and three and part of strategic objective four are implemented by the districts. Humanitarian activities and programme support are implemented by NGOs and CSOs. 

Support under special programmes under NUSAF II and NUREP will be implemented, and NUREP is implemented according to agreed implementation arrangements.

PRDP Financing Modalities

Government Contribution

The total cost of PRDP is Shs 1.1 trillion. Perhaps here we have to add that when His Excellency included the small industries and hydro power stations, this figure has increased by Shs 2.3 billion and the total now including those two items on 13 and 14 will come to Shs 3.3 trillion. Out of this, government is supposed to contribute 30 percent, and now I am talking about Shs 1.1 trillion, which translates to an average of Shs 120 billion annually for the three years.

During this Financial Year 2008/09, government has provided additional Shs 25.8 billion in the budget for the 40 districts through government grants to PRDP local governments. An additional Shs 2.8 billion and Shs 41.3 billion have been provided to the PRDP districts through NAADS programme for the purchase of tractors and through other programmes and projects funded through line ministries respectively. This total will be found through line ministries, and we have got 16 ministries handling the implementation of PRDP. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will allocate an additional Shs 170.1 billion to sector ministries and PRDP districts next financial year, 2009/2010. This figure will include the shortfall of Shs 50.1 billion which occurred this financial year. 

The balance of 70 percent of the expected money is to be mobilised from our development partners. The contributions are to be made through a special PRDP fund similar to the Poverty Action Fund controlled by the Ministry of Finance. The money is to be dispersed to the PRDP districts on a quarterly basis.

Special Project Support on Budget 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Office of the Prime Minister are concluding negotiations with development partners on providing financial support to PRDP. Most of this financial support will be disbursed next financial year. If you look at the table in the report, it shows the funds that are being committed to PRDP through budget special programmes and pledges. The first column is Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF II). It is a loan to be secured from the World Bank. You can look at that table.

Humanitarian Support

These funds are being channelled through humanitarian agencies, non governmental organisations and civil society organisations to support humanitarian activities in the region. 

It is also recommended that for the purpose of effective coordination and monitoring of PRDP interventions, all NGOs and CSOs are to sign memoranda of understanding with respective districts in their areas of operation and in the Office of the Prime Minister. We have done this purposely because in the past, in most of these interventions money would not be understood properly and even accountability was a problem.

PRDP Monitoring

A PRDP monitoring committee has been established as the overall policy and monitoring organ of PRDP implementation. It is chaired by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. His role is very critical in providing policy guidance related to financial mobilisation, supervision, mobilisation of communities for development and advocacy. The membership is as follows: ministers of key sector ministries, those are 16 ministries; development partners, 20; district chairpersons, 40; representatives of CSOs, 2; representatives of the private sector, 2; UN groups and World Bank, 8. 

Status of PRDP Progress

The Office of the Prime Minister is using Government of Uganda funds allocated to it to pilot the following investments to augment economic recovery in the region:

•	Support to the West Nile regional forum, MAYAK, for development projects in West Nile districts. 
•	Procurement of 14 tractors for Acholi, Bunyoro (Masindi and Buliisa) and Karamoja regions.
•	Part payment to Ministry of Works for construction of ferry services between Amolatar and Kamuli districts.
•	Part payment to Ministry of Works for construction of a ferry on Lake Bisina in Teso region.
•	Part payment made to UREA for electricity supply to Kaberamaido, Tororo and Oyam districts.
•	Purchase of 30 hydra-foam machines 
•	Support to Northern Uganda Data Centre; and
•	Construction of Northern Uganda Youth Development Centre in Gulu

We have challenges:

•	There is need to popularise the plan. We have done it but the advocacy has been challenged because people who have been called have not gone deep into the villages. 

•	Inadequate funding to finance PRDP programmes

•	Pledges from development partners have not been forthcoming as anticipated. 

Way Forward

•	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will publicise all the funds released to PRDP districts. 

•	Funds will be released to districts against work plans. 

•	Office of the Prime Minister is putting in place a clear monitoring and reporting mechanism, which will be used to periodically track the flow of resources to PRDP districts and implementation of programmes and submit reports to PMC, Parliament and the Cabinet.

I request that honourable MPs appreciate PRDP. It is a planning framework and not a project. Hon. Members should appreciate that ministries and districts are responsible for developing work plans that should have measurable performance indicators against which PRDP will be monitored. Honourable MPs should also note that the Office of the Prime Minister is streamlining institutional mechanisms to improve on its coordination and monitoring functions. Funds to districts are released to Chief Administrative Officers who then disburse them to the relevant beneficiary groups in accordance with their work plans. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Minister. 

4.30
MR REGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for a well crafted statement about PRDP. When we are talking about these things, let us be honest. As a representative of the people of the North who have suffered a lot, I get disturbed time and again when our people’s name and suffering is used to fundraise and at the end of the day they do not get anything!

Before I respond to this, I have just a few statements to make. I want to say that even currently as Members of Parliament, we are still investigating a matter where a top government official used NUSAF money to buy an official vehicle and we shall come back to this House. This is a serious matter. Our people want to get back home. Our people have been trying to get back on their own and they have been suffering without proper support to get them resettled. 

Going to page 1 of the minister’s statement, we appreciate the community police deployment although up to now their facilitation remains something government should not be proud of or even talk about in the House. These people have been recruited, vehicles have been got for every county and yet these vehicles are not available for those counties. The community police who were recruited continue to find difficulties in even getting their monthly salary. Although the initiative was a very good one, and it aided our people, it gave our people strength to return home, I think government needs to do more in that line. I know donors have had their contribution but government needs to come and add more.

On the same page in point 1.3, the minister talks about the percentage of people who have returned home and that the government of Uganda funds allocated to the Office of the Prime Minister facilitated them. I wish that the Minister could come to this House and tell us what government has done in specific terms. Apart from the police presence, which I have mentioned, I wish government could come and specifically tell us and say, “This is what we have done to facilitate the return of the people back home.” As far as I know, at least in my constituency, I appreciate the contribution of government in as far as the community police are concerned but in as far as aiding our people to get resettled, I have not seen anything. 

The hydra-foam machines have just arrived and the people are being trained. Where will the common man find money to buy cement to make these bricks? This is just going to benefit the well to do.

MS BEATRICE LAGADA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I want to inform the House that the question he is raising about the use of hydra-foam is critical. In my district of Oyam, the hydra-foam machines were bought in August 2007. The hydra-foam machines stayed at the district headquarters for one year and when there was a lot of pressure, they gave them to the sub-counties and they are still lying idle. Nobody knows how they are supposed to use these hydra-foam machines; nobody has used them before. We are happy that hydra-foam machines have been bought but have we got a well thought-out policy on how they are going to be used effectively to benefit the people? Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, this therefore raises concern as to whether that was a priority, whether the people were consulted or whether a proper needs assessment was done as to what the common man needed to get out of the camps and resettle home.

On page 2 of the minister’s statement, he talks about the other programmes which involved the returnees. There are two categories of returnees - there are the formerly abducted, some of them returned as child mothers, and then there those hardcore rebels who have returned. At least as far as I know, some of these hardcore rebels who were officers in the LRA are actually benefiting more than these people who were abducted. They continue to live a very good life and these ordinary people who were abducted continue to live in misery. So, what criteria do you have when you talk about resettlement of former rebels? Which rebels are you talking about? Are you talking about the formerly abducted or you are talking about the hardcore rebels who have returned?

On page 3, under the implementation modalities, -

THE SPEAKER: Would there be a difference between those who were kidnapped and are returning back and others?

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, there is a difference when it comes to resettlement of these people. There are those who are young and they were abducted and they are returning with even more burdens, like child mothers. There are those hard core rebel leaders who were commanders in the bush who, to the best of my knowledge, now as I speak are being given more facilitation to resettle than the ordinary ones. 

On page 3, the minister talks about implementation modalities; I wish that the Minister of Finance was around as we are talking. We have also carried out our own research and there are findings that there is also a problem with the Ministry of Finance. I want the Minister to tell us what structure he has in place? To say, Prime Minister’s Office, is too flat. To the best of our knowledge, we know two commissioners for PRDP have been appointed. What are they going to do, on what terms, under whose office and under whose structure? I am also told that they are supposed to structure themselves. Are they going to be a secretariat? Is there going to be a commission within the Prime Minister’s Office? 

I am reliably told that government intends to implement part of the Juba Peace Accord, especially the economic one, even without the signing by the LRA leader. I am reliably told that in that accord, there is the element of the commission to rehabilitate northern Uganda. Where is the commission going to be? When will the commission be set up if you now say you want to implement them through line ministries? We thought that PRDP was going to be an addition to the normal government contribution. 

On government contribution; I wish government could itemise these things instead of just saying that government is going to contribute 30 percent of the 1.6 trillion. Why don’t you itemise them for us? I say this because an assessment was done and I think Parliament needs to know the areas you have arrived at. 

I do not know whether the Office of the Prime Minister considers that Members of Parliament can be members of the PMC and that they can play a role. I see the category of leaders and Members of Parliament are not there. So, where are the Members of Parliament? Where do you want them to play a role? Some of us have been critical and we still remain critical in lobbying for PRDP funding. Do you want us now to lobby directly to our districts? What do you want us to do? You do not want to involve us at the level of monitoring and yet that is our responsibility as Members of Parliament. Why do you want us to plead to be part and parcel of this process? Is it a deliberate effort to ignore Members of Parliament so that you can deal with the districts? 

I know that at parliamentary level there is a lot of information and sometimes maybe it is convenient for you to use the districts because information is limited and therefore they would not be able to question you on a number of things. We request that Members of Parliament be included as Members of the PMC to add value on behalf of the people. 

On the status of PRDP, it is laughable; No.2 says: “Procurement of 14 tractors for Acholi, Bunyoro and Karamoja region”; which category of people are you targeting? Are you now not targeting the well-to-do? Are you targeting the ordinary people who are returning home? I have heard of Amoro Progressive Farmers reaching out to the President to ask for some support and the President made a pledge.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, there are many of your friends who also want to contribute.

MR OKUMU: I am concluding, Mr Speaker. I want the Minister to tell us how these tractors are going to be distributed? Which group are they going to target? You know, some people are here making noise just for nothing. It is also laughable to say – I think the Youth MP is also here – to say the construction of Northern Uganda Youth Centre is now also part of the status progress report of PRDP. 

Many of us know that this youth centre was open. I will leave it to the Youth Member of Parliament for Northern Uganda – it was opened during CHOGM, it was a Commonwealth contribution, and I do not think it has anything to do with Northern Uganda. It is a notional project except it was put in Northern Uganda. I don’t think everything taking place in Northern Uganda is part of PRDP. 

We the leaders from Northern Uganda want to separate PRDP. If you look at the first minister’s statement, it said that this is going to be an addition to normal government programmes. So how do we now separate the normal programmes if you fuse everything together? We demand that PRDP must be an entity where we can monitor, evaluate and see the impact.

Lastly, I want to know what government contribution is based on, in this budget. What about the specific policy initiates? We the people of Northern Uganda would rather support specific policy initiative, even if you tell us that there is no money. 

We want government to come up with a policy. For example, let them declare Northern Uganda a tax free zone for investors in specific areas. You must give incentives to investors; you cannot just grab peoples land as the incentive. Let Government come up with a policy that is acceptable. What investors need are incentives, and these incentives should be in policy form. 

So I want to challenge government that the time is now for government to come out with clear demarcation for investors who what to establish in Northern Uganda, that investors who want to set up industries in the North will get incentives a, b, c and d, so that it is left to the investors. And let government put up the infrastructures for the investments in place. 

Mr Speaker, as I said earlier, this document was well crafted for window-dressing but it does not address the core issues of PRDP. Thank you.

4.46
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The people of Northern Uganda and the people of Acholi sub-region have very high hope in the PRDP. They thought that this PRDP will come in to save them. At the beginning of this year, some of them even told us on radio when we were on a radio talk show to take this animal PRDP away because it looks like a tool for exploitation. 

So, the honourable minister and the Prime Minister should make sure the money is released, and tell us how the releases are going to be made in order for us also to give confidence to our people. Otherwise, when you give programmes on top of others – like now we are talking of PRDP but NAADS is also already part of PRDP, NUSAF is PRDP, NURAP is PRDP, NGOs are PRDP – who are you going to harmonise in this time frame? 

I know that NUSAF’s time frame is five years, and PRDP time frame is three years. When you talk about NAADS being part of PRDP, NAADS is not in the municipality. How are you going to handle the municipal people? Let me not focus much on that but otherwise we are very disappointed on PRDP.

When it comes to the monitoring organs of PRDP, we the women do not see any thing yet over 80 percent of the people who have suffered most in the camps are women. But we do not surface at all. Look at the top most political organ of PRDP, the PMC; where are the women. 

One time somebody asked me that, “When the men were campaigning to become chairperson, where were the women?” I think people should just go back to the Constitution and look at Article 32. We have affirmative action; there must be deliberate action to include women. If the women are not there and the poorest of the poor are women; let the minister tell us today were the women are in all this, otherwise we are disappointed. 

We hear there is also an organ called NPC: Northern Uganda Policy Committee. We have to know this NPC; and we want to know the composition of the committee. Who are the members of this NPC?

Mr Speaker, if we go to the original document of PRDP – I have not carried it today but it says 2007 to 2010. But today that is very silent. We have been told that PRDP take effect from 01 July 2008. This means that if it is going to be a three-year programme, are we going to extend it to 2011? That is not very silent. 

Hon. Reagan Okumu talked about police recruitment. This police recruitment was done last year. We are very happy with that programme. In fact we are very happy with the programmes of PRDP – the four objectives of PRDP and its activities. But I think it is very confusing. You know how Uganda is very corrupt. And it looks like things are being done intentionally to mix them up. We have vehicles on the ground –

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I raise on a point of clarification. I would like hon. Ocan to clarify to me. She has said that Ugandans are very corrupt. I was wondering whether she is also part of the corrupt people since she is a Ugandan. To what extent is she part and parcel of this?

MS AOL: Thank you, hon. Member for that clarification. Unless you have been sleeping all this time, I think it is common knowledge that we are not doing well in the area of corruption especially regarding the government. 

MR BARTILLE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am wondering whether the honourable member holding the Floor understands that we are in Parliament. Is she in order to refer to an hon. Member of Parliament that he has been sleeping? We don’t come here to sleep but to debate. Is she in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Is your reference to the honourable member intended to say that he is sleeping and therefore he cannot see? Is that what you meant?

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This sleeping is in context. Who does not know what has been going on in Uganda? If we may highlight the Temangalo issue, who does not know about it? Its not that he has been sleeping in the House but that - even NUSAF, which was a very good programme was eaten up by corruption so much so that our people, who should have benefited did not. It is only the rich that benefited. 

About the tractors, I already heard that some tractors are going to Amuru. I don’t know how our women are going to benefit from those tractors. How about the population and the funding? If the funding of PRDP is going to be channelled to the district- I remember with NUSAF, the criterion used was population. They completely closed their eyes on the intensity of problems on the ground. Sometimes we have too many problems -(Interruption)

MR OYET: Thank you, hon. Aol. The information I want to give you regards the beneficiaries of the tractor project. One of the beneficiaries is the girlfriend to Salim Saleh, Harriet Aber. She is the only woman who benefited from this project. She is called Mrs Saleh Harriet Aber from Amuru. Thank you.

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleague for that information. If we care so much about the majority of the people who are suffering - at one time when we discussed NAADS I said it should not focus on tractors but rather on ox cultivation. In this way at least we would be able to distribute fairly and some of the women would be able to get something. 

We do not have a lot of things that concern building the people of the North. When you see some of us aggressive, it is not just for nothing. It is because of the trauma of seeing our people suffering so much. It is about trying to see how we can make ends meet. When you see people killing each other or men murdering women, it is because of the humanness, which we have lost. 

We need a lot of psychosocial support. This support is not seen in PRDP yet we need it so much. When we talk about increasing household incomes, this is supposed be a reality but we see the funding going to well-to-do people. I think this is unfair. We will also begin to tell our people to distance themselves. 

The Commonwealth Youth Programme was brought in, NAADS was brought in and NUREP was brought in. Then what is PRDP? You say it is planned. Planned? Then remove the plan so that we remain with NUREP, NAADS and the Commonwealth Youth Programme instead of just bringing air. We call it air when you bring nothing and you begin to put them under programmes, which already exist. Mr Minister, you are bringing air to Northerners. You need to improve on that so that we don’t believe in air. 

Also, improve on women welfare and information. This is because as I talk, I am not very clear on what PRDP is exactly. How do I touch PRDP? It is not very easy to touch. I am able to touch NAADS, NUSAF, NUREP but PRDP is difficult to touch. It is also mixed up. When we had funding for resettlement last year, about Shs 18.6 billion was used for some other things. On the ground, however, it is already being talked about as PRDP. 

I attended some meetings of NGOs and they were saying every time we have to bring in something. CARE was coordinating that meeting and ACORD was part of it. They were saying, “You have to bring information about your activities so that we put it under PRDP”. Are we really being fair to the people? I thought PRDP was here to try and fill in the gap. 

Even as regards funding of PRDP, in his presentation the hon. Minister of Finance should have told us how PRDP funding stands. Sometimes you find that it is so difficult. It has been put as, “Something minus something plus something is equals to work.” Why do you confuse us like that? I wish I could get it. The existing funding minus the gap is equal to PRDP. You know, we are not all accountants and we want things done the way - when you sell local government funding, we should be able to see very clearly that this or that is going to handle say Functional Adult Learning (FAL). We know this is a conditional grant but PRDP it is not very much known. 

The women of the North demand that you give them proper information, which should apply to all the women of Uganda because when women from the North are suffering, all the women are suffering. When women are okay, the whole nation is okay because they have to provide of the people. 

On education, I would like to say that we also need to see the funding to the education sector streamlined. We are really over burdened by our people who keep coming to us crying for fees yet in most cases we cannot meet such expenses. Once in a while you can meet the demands of those who are completely desperate yet we keep hearing that PRDP is planned. 

Mr Minister, this plan has to have a budget. That budget has to be very clear; it has to benefit the rural poor and not the progressive farmers. Forget the progressive farmers for the time being. If you are taking about four tractors, take them to different sub-counties; not one sub-county and make sure the women are represented on the committee that has to work with those tractors. Women have to be fairly represented in all the committees that look at PRDP. I thank you very much.

5.01
MS AMONGI LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement. I would like to begin by saying that if Parliament had debated this PRDP much earlier, we would not be where we are this afternoon. You can see that my colleague, hon. Betty Anywar, the Woman Member of Parliament for Gulu representing so many people who are the beneficiaries of PRDP has definitely not understood what PRDP is all about. 

I am not insulting but from her contribution - and it is not only her but very many people including myself possibly - have not understood what PRDP is all about. Maybe I can say that I am little better because about two weeks ago I was in a retreat where PRDP was properly unpacked. And I have kept on saying that this document is big; it needed to be unpacked right from the beginning. I am saying this because you cannot have legislators who are leaders of the people not understanding something like PRDP yet they are supposed to sensitise the population about it; it is incredible!

I agree with the presentation that PRDP is not on the ground; it has not been understood. A lot of things are happening in the community - and I will say that things are happening in the community because I always hear that NURP is doing this and that; it is building a primary school in Opuki, in Minakul. 

The other time I saw somebody commissioning classrooms somewhere in Moroto constituency in Lira District, but do the people know this is PRDP? They do not know. They say it is NURP, which is doing it; it is UNICEF that is doing it. The people have not owned PRDP. There is nothing to show that the local people have owned it. That is my big quarrel with PRDP. We started it up side down. Instead of making the population understand it, appreciate and own it, we started with other people doing things for them. This has kept the local people a distance from the program.

My appeal to the Office of the Prime Minister is to let them disseminate information about PRDP. I know that there has been so many meetings, seminars and workshops in Hotel Africana and so forth, but when these chairpersons get back home they sit with the information. How does such information help the population? How can things remain hanging at the district headquarters instead of percolating down to the grassroots?

I am going to concentrate on two aspects of PRDP. The first one is the question of trauma. I have said in many fora before, that from what I see, PRDP is concentrating on – at least most of the development partners who are executing this project are concentrating on things like schools, roads, health centres, which is very good. I also understand why they are doing that. It is because they can easily show that they have built 50 classroom blocks, made 100 kilometres of roads, drilled so many water boreholes, but I want us to remember that the beneficiaries have suffered terrible trauma for all these years. 

Therefore, to me much as all these activities are going on - the situation in the North is like a computer. The implementers of the programme are concentrating on what they see on the table, the hardware, but the software, which is the population, is not being touched. 

Mr Speaker, on Friday evening my brother-in-law, a primary school teacher at Alokulum Camp, went to Gulu and got his salary. He later bought a bicycle and a new phone before returning to the camp. But as he was heading to his home, a woman ran out of her hut and hit his new bicycle with a stick before hitting the man down. Her husband came, joined her and the two murdered my brother-in-law. What was the reason? The man had bought a new bicycle. The information I got later on was that that woman is a returnee; she is an LRA ex-combatant. But we are here busy saying that Amnesty is resettling people.

What I am saying is that as far as I am concerned PRDP is not doing sufficient resettlement. Giving packages to people who have come back from the bush does not constitute resettlement and integration. My brother-in-law, Mr Ochera is dead because we have not made a programme to thoroughly address the trauma among the population. 

So, how many of such people do we want to see die before we wake up to a very rude fact that those people we are talking about are far from normal people? We have heard stories of children who returned from the bush and have gone through GUSCO, but when they go back to their villages there is no proper way of following them up. The rehabilitation centres do not have the capacity to trace these children and continue monitoring them. The children get back to their villages and murder their siblings and other people. 

So as government, what is the over all plan for rehabilitating the minds of these people? How can we leave it only to NGOs? Where are the social workers that government has trained? They should by now be at parish levels because we knew that these people would be going back to their homes, but with major social problems.

The Mental Ward in Gulu Referral Hospital had, three weeks ago, registered 9,000 patients and those are the ones that have been able to reach the hospital. That tells a story. Doesn’t it? And so my challenge is let us not talk of – I really want to see a well-thought out programme; something which I can sit here while knowing that in my parish of Lulyang in Amuru, if somebody breaks down, there is so and so who knows what to do. Or that there is a community development person based there and is telling the population that when you see a person breaking down; take him to such and such place.

The other day I read in the newspapers stories saying that Northern Uganda has got the highest number of drunkards in Uganda – both men and women. We have broken the record. At the same time we are the poorest in the nation. What does that tell us? Where are the Alcoholics Anonymous treatment centres to help these drunkards because they have drunk for the past ten years? When they were in the camps, they were doing nothing but drinking lira lira. They do not know anything else. Where are the centres to rehabilitate them?

And so, even as we are talking about PRDP, I want efforts, which are more concerted. This one looks to me as if it is hit and go. Have we sat down and identified the problems and said that if NOREP is handling health, how many health centres are going to be put up in Oyam? 

Tell me, “I am going to build 10 health centres in one, two, three, or four places,” so that I can go and tell my people. If so and so is handling roads, tell me so that I know you are responsible for this. But as we are now, we are in trouble and capital trouble. 

I cannot sit down without talking about the lack of involvement of the women. From 21st to 23rd September this year, Uganda Women Parliamentarians Association sat down and analysed PRDP with women activists from the civil society. We have a document which we have called, “A Call to Action on PRDP,” which I would like to lay on the Table at the end because I would like the Office of the Prime Minister to take this document seriously as the voice of the women of Uganda in as far as the PRDP is concerned.

We looked at the PRDP and concluded that it is a gender blind document and we would like the guidelines of PRDP to be engendered. We say this because women constitute over 50 percent of the conflict affected population. Eighty percent of the Internal Displaced Persons are women and children and we would like to see specific action addressing the issues of the women. So we are saying that the Minister of Finance must immediately clarify funding arrangements and present a budget that makes explicit, all of PRDP activities. 

We are also saying that we want to see the women represented on the monitoring committee. How can district chairmen be part of the monitoring committee when they are the implementers? (Applause) How can they monitor themselves? 

Mr Speaker, let me give you a literal example. The other day I went to Oyam and I was interested in the police post they are building. I took trouble to go to the DPC and guess what I found? All the monies meant for that building are there and the building, which is to house both the office and the police quarters, was supposed to have been completed by April 2008. I was there in October 2008 and the contractor who had been contracted by police headquarters had abandoned Oyam and not appeared for very many months. The work was nowhere near complete. Isn’t the chairman, who is a monitor, there? Where do I, the MP, come in? What if I had not been inquisitive?

So we demand, in this document of ours, that at least five women from the PRDP districts, one from each of the sub-regions of West Nile: Lango, Acholi, Teso and Elgon, be incorporated in the joint monitoring committee. Instead of putting so many chairmen, take some out and put others so that we can know what they are doing.

We are also saying that the PRDP must be re-aligned with the principles of international, regional and national legislation instruments to protect and promote gender equity and equality. There are many other things but I cannot go through them. Therefore, I beg to lay this document on the Table and pray that the Prime Minister’s Office looks at it seriously and incorporates the voice of the women.

I see that iron sheets were given. I know the Prime Minister and I have been having conversations about this. I pray that today as the minister is responding, he will tell me that the iron sheets of Oyam have been delivered or are being delivered or are being delivered in two days’ time or three days’ time. I thank you, hon. Speaker.

Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table, this document which is a call to action on the PRDP and which is an output of the workshop hosted by the Uganda Women Parliamentarians Association and the Initiative for Inclusive Security, which was held at Jinja from September 21st to 23rd 2008. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. 

5.14
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In debating the Peace Recovery and Development Plan for Northern Uganda, I would like to speak as a victim as well as a survivor of the war, and therefore one of those who should also benefit under this plan -(Interjections)- on behalf of the people. Yes.

When this plan was launched, we leaders of Northern Uganda, and Uganda in general, viewed it as a commitment by the Government of Uganda, with the overarching goal of transforming the lives of our people in Northern Uganda. Before I even proceed to go through the minister’s statement, I want to ask about three fundamental policy questions in line with the four strategic objectives of PRDP. 

May I ask the honourable minister: what is the relationship between PRDP and the national budget? 

Secondly, what is the relationship between PRDP, the UN Consolidated Appeal and other international programmes for Northern Uganda? 

Thirdly, and finally, what is the relationship between PRDP and ongoing Government programmes for Northern Uganda? 

I ask this because PRDP is acting like you have beans there and you have rice; in fact it is like katogo if I am to say. We must know the relationship between PRDP and all those programmes because we saw it as an affirmative action.

In the minister’s statement, I know the minister is committed. Hon. David Wakikona is a very committed minister. Each and every time you find him in West Nile, in Acholi, in Lango, in Karamoja; we must commend him. He is a Member of Parliament and he has a constituency but he devotes his time to the region. 

The other question is about police. It took us time to convince our young people in Amuka, in Frontier Guards and the Arrow Boys, to be integrated into the Police under PRDP. The special name given to them is the Anti-Stock Theft Unit, which is now under PRDP. Each person under Anti-Stock Theft Unit is paid 100,000. It is reflected here. On page 5, the Netherlands Supported Police Enhancement Programme committed US $8.1 million, already spent under the GMC for police civilian protection. 

The Anti-Stock Theft Unit have not been paid their salaries of 100,000 per person from August, September, October including November that has just ended and these are people who are holding guns and taking charge of the security of the civilians and taking charge of the security of the borders of this sub region; and it falls under this programme. The money is already committed but they have not got their money -(Interruption)

MR BARTILLE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you very much colleague for this opportunity to give you information on the point that you are raising. 

On the issue of payment of the ASTU, the Anti-Stock Theft Unit, I have just come from my constituency and one of the issues I was addressing was the high rate of desertion of ASTU because for the last four months, they have not been paid their salary. This is Kongasis constituency. And so if it is happening elsewhere, I think it is a serious matter which must be handled as soon as possible.  

I wonder on which payroll these ASTUs are. Are they on the payroll of the police or are they paid when there is money? I think this must be cleared. I thank you. 

MR OLENY: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. The information that I would like to give this House is that on the basis of the information raised by hon. Obua, indeed I stand here to confirm that in Usuk County, which I represent, quite a huge number of ASTUs have deserted due to nothing else but non-payment of their salaries and this issue has been coming up and again in this House. We could ask ourselves, salary is a basic right for anybody who works for Government but unfortunately, the situation is as has been articulated by my honourable colleague. Thank you. 

DR ARAPKISSA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance and I thank hon. Obua for giving way. The information I want to give about payment of the ASTUs is that when I met those in Kapchorwa District two months ago, some of them had not been paid for over eight months and as a way of surviving, they were now doing casual jobs like harvesting rice to earn a living. So you can see how the situation is. I just rang the DPC about five minutes ago; he says the other option still stands. Thank you.  

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and hon. Obua. Yesterday I was in Kapelebyong for a fundraising drive to build the house of God. Ten ASTUs - all from Lango sub region - came to me and they told me that they were going to desert the work because they had not been paid for six months. I advised them not to do so until we hear from this PRDP. They were doing badly. I had to became the government and I gave them Shs 1,000 each -(Laughter)- of what I had. 

You can now see the state in which these people are. If they could get even Shs 1,000 because coming from Lango and they are now in Kapelebyong, they told me that there was no way they could cope. If they were near home they could be better off. So maybe in future something needs to be done to help this situation. Otherwise it is very pathetic. 

MR OKUPA: When we were looking at the policy statement of the Minister of Internal Affairs, it came to our notice that there was a shortfall of salaries to the tune of Shs 550 million. We did bring this to the attention of the Minister of Finance that at least if you cannot afford to provide any other thing, provide salaries. But the Minister of Finance did not listen to us. 

I am not surprised. What we are hearing today is a product of the Minister of Finance being adamant. So we should be ready to experience more desertions and more complaints because the Minister of Finance did not listen to the advice given by the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. 

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, I just want to thank honourable members and conclude my submission on ASTU. On page 6 under the status of PRDP progress, No.8 is the construction of the Northern Uganda Development Youth Centre. 

As far as I know, the Northern Uganda Youth Development Centre was constructed by the Commonwealth in partnership with the Government of Uganda. But I think it has now been baptised as one of the items under the status of PRDP progress. But the fact remains that the first phase on construction of the structures is over. What remains a big challenge is how the young people throughout the region will access training that should be provided by this centre. If there can be funds under PRDP to run the centre, I would be happy. 

As I speak, there is overwhelming demand of young people from West Nile, Acholi, Lango, Karamoja and Teso. Everywhere I travel, leaders of young people keep asking me, “We hear about the Northern Uganda Youth Development Centre; what is happening there?” I think the faster we move to make sure that this centre is functional, the better for our young people, most of who are traumatised. 

That marks the end of my submission on that particular subject matter. Instead of just leaving it as a white elephant, I think we must make the centre functional. It is the biggest centre under the Commonwealth and it is going to be a centre of excellence in the entire region of Africa under the Commonwealth. So, we must make it functional. If at all the funds under PRDP are there, let us make the centre functional.  

I also want to give the opinion of the people we represent in this Parliament on PRDP. No.1, from day one, information about PRDP has been distorted right from the national level to the grass root. When you as a leader go on radio and are explaining PRDP, from their opinion, the people tell you that they thought that this is a plan where money will be brought and distributed from door to door and definitely Northern Uganda will also prosper like other regions. 

This is the opinion of the people because the information was distorted from day one. Even some honourable ministers have been giving distorted information. Some are saying that this programme is already on, others go to the North and say, “The programme is not yet on, we have just launched; implementation is not yet there…” so, the whole thing is distorted and people are still waiting. 

Secondly, the question of the ugly past of NUSAF, in fact our people are worried. Now that this thing is going in line ministries the people were saying this seems to be a project for the laptop warriors. Of course, the lap top warriors will sit on their laptops and work. And definitely at the end of the day because of the ugly past of NUSAF Phase I, their fear is that this huge amount of money will not benefit them.

Above all, even you can hear from submission of honourable members. Even us honourable members, we are not involved in the management structure of PRDP and yet this money is supposed to be passed through Parliament. But we do not appear anywhere. How do you expect us now to explain to the people?

I think something must be done. If Members of Parliament who are national leaders do not even know enough information about PRDP, how do you expect that last man in my village in Abako sub-county in Lira district to understand PRDP? Even me as a Member of Parliament, I do not have all the tips about PRDP. I am not involved, where is my oversight role as a Member of Parliament?

As I conclude, I want to say that if PRDP is really meant to bridge the gap between Northern Uganda and other regions, in my opinion as a young leader because I see the face of poverty in Uganda very young and youthful. 

In my opinion, I would think PRDP would move into activities that would empower our people through productive ventures to make them self-reliant. That is my opinion as a young leader because the face of poverty is extremely youthful. I thank you for the opportunity and I beg to submit.

5.29
MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this brief, but I need some clarification. On page 2, I see that in July to September in financial year 2008/2009 Amnesty Commission launched distribution of settlement kits; and when you look at this figure 242 beneficiaries out of whom 200 have so far benefited I would like to know: 242 out of how many? 

When you look at these figures, you see this is very good, 242. Out of that, 200 have benefited. But how many were to benefit? So, I want us to come out with things which are clear that out of the many, so many have benefited so that we feel the impact.

On the same page, section 1.6, you are telling us that there has been a number of NGOs and humanitarian agencies, which are doing work in the North. But I want you to give us the impact. Which activities are these NGO or humanitarian agency having in this region? Which specific districts are these NGOs? 

We always find these NGOs and some of the agencies duplicating activities in one area. Everybody is running there; if it is sensitisation, everybody is running in the same area for sensitisation and money is being wasted. When you go to the ground there is no impact. I think to be fair to this government what ever we do there must be impact felt on the ground, without which you find so many questions being raised. 

The same issue comes on page 3. The minister is telling us about the World Bank grant which will be used to pilot micro projects. What is the duration of those micro projects? And you are telling us the project is worth US$40,000 in each of the 10 selected districts. Which are these districts? 

We would also like to know those pilot micro projects in these districts so that we know that there is no duplication and if we are going to assess the value for money we shall be able to assess and find out about the impact on the ground. But these are things, which are being said in the brief but we do not know even how you are going to monitor or to evaluate these projects.

In addition, on page 4, under NAADS, you are telling us of purchasing of tractors in the districts. Which districts and how many tractors? Because you find here in this very paper here you are saying under NAADS programme they are going to purchase tractors in districts. I would like to know: which are those districts where you find the same tractors are being talked of? On page 6, you talk about procurement of 14 tractors for Acholi, Bunyoro, Karamoja regions. You can imagine how big are those regions? How many districts are in each region? And now you are going only to purchase 14 tractors, what impact are these tractors going to make? 

These are issues, which must come out properly in this document. Many people have talked about PRDP Monitoring Committee where you find that the chairpersons of the districts are the implementers, they are the ones going to come out with plans and then they are going to monitor themselves; is it possible?

Where are the RDCs? Maybe the RDCs should be on this committee of monitoring because they are not on the implementing stage, and the Members of Parliament, because that is our oversight role, but we are no where to be seen here. 

I remember Mr Minister, when we had the workshop in Entebbe, we raised this issue and we were promised that amendments are going to be made. I am surprised that what I saw in Entebbe is the same thing I am seeing now.

On the same page, when you look at these hydra-foam machines, you are telling us 30 so where are they going; to which district? They are 30 in total, which are going to be purchased. So I want us to come out with impact to see that whatever we do there is an impact. When somebody moves he finds something in place, so that we do not - otherwise if we do things like this that is why you find people talking with suspicion that money is going to be taken. Otherwise, if these machines are not enough, you will find that individuals are using them and benefiting individuals instead of benefiting communities. I thank you very much.

5.36
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the minister so much for this opportunity that at long last you have thought of bringing this report that has been on the Order Paper for some good time. And this afternoon we were in fact ambushed; we were not prepared for the PRDP debate but that will not deter us. 

I begin on the issue of the ASTU; I am not surprised. I remember in August last year I brought up the issue of money for Arrow Boys’ payments, which money was swindled by the big army pay officers. And now you are talking about the money for the ASTU that is being kept. I do not know whether it is being kept deliberately or that is not the issue. 

My greatest issue at this point is the cost of administration. Mr Speaker, we are reliably informed that the commissioners are being paid Shs 16 million. A Member of Parliament with all the responsibilities and the burdens of the constituency cannot get that money and you can imagine what a commissioner is getting. And all these monies go to cost of administration. Is government being serious in thinking about those who so much suffered and is government really interested in making these people live a decent and good life that they one time lived? Government is not doing something; it has started doing something but I think it was not prepared for what it is trying to do.

This brings me to page 4 of the minister’s report. I was in Isingiro District less than a week ago. On my way to Isingiro I saw very many NAADS posters and signposts. I do not know what came first; whether NAADS came before PRDP or PRDP is coming before NAADS, I am completely lost. 

If you are talking about the internally displaced people and the most afflicted people of this country and you tell me that a national programme like NAADS that is in Northern Uganda; it is in Eastern Uganda; it is in Central; it is in Western and you come and tell me this is under PRDP! Leader of Government Business, you have a big question to answer here. We do not see any reason why you amalgamate NAADS and bring it into the PRDP project.  At the end of the day you say that it is a plan. MPs should know that this is a plan and it is not whatever you meant it to be. Are you having these innocent people who suffered at heart? Is it intentional or were you prepared for them?

This brings me to page 5; I look at the European Union commitment in releasing this much money to Ministry of Works for post flood roads. I am on record in this House for having been following the issue of the poor roads especially after the disastrous effects of the floods.

Many of you who have gone to Eastern Uganda or Soroti through Aoja you can bear witness to this. Very many months – it is now one year because the floods hit that region around September last year up to date and you tell me the money for floods even the 20 billion that was initially released could not cater for the floods affected roads!

The bridges I have in the constituency that I represent; we have Aoja Bridge that is not under my jurisdiction but at least it is the road I follow en route home. We have Omunyale Bridge, Oliana Bridge, Omabo Bridge and all of them are in so sorry a state. Where is the money for PRDP? And you come here and you are giving a commissioner Shs 16 million per month and you think you are doing it for the good of the people? This should be a fallacy and nothing that you intended to resettle of these areas. 

This bring me to page 6 of the report of the minister -(Interruption)

THE LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Commissioners are being paid Ugshs 1.4 million per month and they are being paid as Presidential Advisors and this matter has been confirmed to me by my PS who is here. So, please do not give false information.

MS EKWAU: Mr Speaker, I thank the hon. Leader of Government Business for the information. Commissioners are moving in free cars, free fuel and all the allowances; four wheel drive moreover the big ones not these small one you can think about. (Laughter) So on this point I would kindly request that possibly you bring for us a breakdown. That is why we are saying that we were ambushed this afternoon; we were not ready to debate this PRDP; we request at the same time that your office avails us with a breakdown of the administration costs of PRDP. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekwau, you say that you were ambushed; you were not prepared? So what do we do? Do you want to postpone this debate, because at the end I am going to suggest to you whether you can sacrifice your other Monday on 08 December 2008 because it is a serious matter as you have said? 

You go and study the document and collect whatever you have so that we come next week on Monday, 08 December 2008 prepared and concentrate on this and finish because we expect a reply from the Prime Minister, or the minister who introduced the subject. This will help us to exhaustively deal with the subject and help the situation but it is up to you.

MS EKWAU: I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hold on for a while Member for Kaberamaido.

5.44
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I agree with you that this thing cannot be concluded today. We can proceed with the debate and Members who have information can debate today but it cannot be concluded today. It has to be carried forward such that when we come back, we continue debating this matter. It is very sensitive; it is a very important matter to the people from the affected areas and to the country as a whole and we want something that can bring fruits and development to the country and the region.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, what we can do is to start at 10.00 a.m. on Monday and go with this debate to exhaust whatever issues are and end at 1.00 p.m. when we go for break and then other issues can come after that one. I think that will be sufficient time if you to get prepared. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, maybe it would be important that even if you push it to next Monday to help that debate, the Prime Minister comes with the breakdown of all the PRDP releases. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

MR OKUMU: We want a breakdown of what has been released on PRDP other than the normal government programmes so that we are able to know what is taking place? Even these flooded roads, they should be able to come with a breakdown and say we worked on this and that and we intend to work on these bridges like this. I think this should help us. 

But also the structure of the PRDP; we understand there are two commissioners. Now these two commissioners how are they structured? You should be able to bring us how PRDP will be delivered from there to down because that will help us a long way in understanding this programme. 

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: No. I think we are just agreeing that on Monday we come to start with this issue and give it two or three hours. I think that will be sufficient time for us to air out our views and also for the Office of the Prime Minister, the Prime Minister himself and his minister to respond. Do you have an alternative? Have agreed on Monday? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA REHABILITATION (Mr David Wakikona): In fact what you have said is quite correct. We had hoped that we would start early in the morning. Even today we thought that we would start around 10.00 a.m. but we had that problem which we slept over but if we had enough time most of the things even the details they are asking for are very easy. It is just a matter of handing it over. 

But for debates, it is good so that eventually when we also come to clarify on some things, then people will understand. This is the first time that we are debating PRDP in the House. So, those things come up but I thank the hon. colleagues for being frank and saying what they are saying and Sir, let us continue as you propose and that will be very good for us.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Now can we allow her to wind up?

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was on the verge of looking at page 6:4.2, the PMC membership. Members have said much about the monitors and those who should be closely brought to follow up this “animal” called PRDP and I would urge that the Office of the Prime Minister to include the Greater North Parliamentary Association to be part of this because we saw what happened with NUSAF. 

When funds for NUSAF were being released, MPs and politicians generally were told hands off and then when all the monies got misappropriated is when people began asking what went wrong. And yet the issue was lack of supervision and closely giving guidance.

On the same page, item No.5: UREA electricity supply to Kaberamaido; I am interested in knowing how much money was released because I was at the center of this following it up closely. So I want to know how much money is being talked about here since it is going to take power half way and it will not even reach the district headquarters.  

Under 8, construction of Northern Uganda Youth Center; even the Bible says that no one will be given stones when they ask for bread to eat. I am surprised; I get to see it here. Good enough the Member for Youth Northern has said the construction of this center was not made using PRDP funds. But if it were the case, I would have really said something must be wrong. I was told the funds for PRDP did not –(Interruption) 

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, honourable member. I thought on No.8 just for information so that it does not happen the way it is happening - for the construction of the Northern Uganda Youth Center, the Commonwealth paid 0.5 million pounds but it could not do much. The Government of Uganda decided to put Shs 1.5 billion to even buy that extra land and continue with the work it did and that is why even the commissioning [MS EKWAU: “Under PRDP?”] Yeah; under PRDP. 

You know, first of all the clarification I want to make also is that PRDP is something we ended up with after complaints that money to Northern Uganda was going but the benefits were not seen. So it was decided by Government that we must have a plan so that whatever goes to Northern Uganda even under ministries should go under that plan. In fact PRDP in short is that PEAP for Northern Uganda to come up to that level. I thought that I should inform you here. Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I just want to give additional information. The information I want to give is that yes, the Government of Uganda has contributed but the Northern Uganda Youth Center was a project of the Commonwealth that was even decided before the PRDP ideas were conceived here. It was decided when Uganda was to host the Commonwealth and the idea was that it should be built such that by the time Uganda hosts the Commonwealth it would be opened at the same time. So, the government contribution is there but it is not under a PRDP programme. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is confusion between ongoing programmes in Northern Uganda and PRDP. When I attended a workshop on PRDP some few weeks ago, I was told that PRDP is a planning framework which came about because there was confusion in Northern Uganda. There was NUSAF, NUREP and so many NGOs doing the same job at the same time. 

Government in its wisdom decided to come up with a planning framework called PRDP. Isn’t it then procedurally right for the Government of Uganda to go back on the drawing board, come up with a status report of all projects in Northern Uganda, table them to Parliament and then we see when PRDP came in, which programmes it found on the ground, and which programmes have been incorporated in the PRDP? If we do not do this, you may not be able draw a line and you may find it difficult to explain what PRDP is vis-à-vis other programmes which have been on-going. Isn’t it procedurally right to do that?

THE SPEAKER: I think the guidance to this is that in the period between now and Monday, these details can come as the minister has promised. But let us prepare for Monday and I think the order will be as I had indicated. 

MS EKWAU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I give the Biblical allusion of one asking for bread and you are given stones, this is in reference to the meeting which we had in Gulu between 18th and 20th of June this year where we came up with a document called a blueprint specifically for education. We urged government and requested that if we were given education and it thrived as it was in the good old days, our life would change a lot. We wanted infrastructure, teachers’ houses, more classroom blocks not just streams of classes but blocks and what we call schools. If this was given to us, we would be so much appreciative. 

But when you come and tell us that part of the PRDP money went to the construction of Northern Uganda youth centre - I request that government at some point learns to listen to what people request for other than going ahead to do what people are not interested in. You cannot build a youth centre when people are sleeping hungry; people are studying and sleeping under trees and you come and tell me you are building a youth centre.

As I conclude, Karamoja is part of the greater North and these trillions of monies under PRDP should be able to transform Karamoja just for this once. By the time the funds are exploited, we expect some water to be in Karamoja, more children to have gone to school and lives to have changed. At this point, I urge government not to be like the bourbons who learnt nothing and completely forgot nothing. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we now keep on hold this subject until Monday. I said we will give you three hours to debate this subject. 

There was a statement on Energy by the minister and you have copies already. Can we give him some ten minutes? -(Interjections)- Monday is okay? It seems you are tired. Because you sacrificed your Monday and you have been here since morning and you have agreed to give me next Monday, I think let me allow you to go and have a break. The minister will give his statement on Monday. 

This brings us to the end of today’s, and this week’s business because I said tomorrow EALA will be here. But I am grateful that we have agreed on Monday when we shall resume and do some work. The House is adjourned until Monday, 08 December 2008 at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 5.58 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 8 December 2008 at 10.00 a.m.)


