Tuesday, 7th December 2004

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I would like to begin by apologizing for the delay of 25 minutes. This was due to a break down in the public address system, but I would like you to join me in welcoming the GRC Councillors from Makerere University Business School; they are here to listen to the debate. (Applause).  You are very welcome to the Parliament.  

I would also like you to join me in welcoming and introducing to you the leaders from Busia District Council led by Mr Steven Oundo Wanyana, the chairperson. (Applause). I believe they are here at the invitation of hon. Munyira, hon. Mayende and hon. Awori. (Applause). You are very welcome to this House.  

Now, honourable Members, my communication will come in two parts. The second one and major one will come when we are considering item 4 of the Order Paper, but for now I would like us to proceed to receive a statement from the Minister of Defence on a matter which he undertook to bring to Parliament last week.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.51
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for allowing me to make a statement on the Acholibur incident of 22nd November 2004 involving UPDF soldiers and four hon. Members of this House, which was widely reported in the local media and externally. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed hon. Minister. But I would like to welcome hon. Katuntu who has been on a mission of the Pan African Parliament in Dafur for the last three weeks. You are welcome back, and you are nicely dressed. (Laughter)

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, whereas the intensity and speed at which the Sudanese are known to convert people is known, in the case of hon. Katuntu, there was no need for conversion –(Interruption)- Madam Speaker, on the 22nd November 2004 - I was not sure that he has not turned Arab.  (Laughter)

On 22nd November 2004, there was an incident at Acholibur Trading Centre in Pader District involving UPDF soldiers of the 35th Battalion based at Acholibur and four Members of Parliament namely: hon. Odonga Otto of Aruu County, hon. Ogenga Latigo of Agago, hon. Reagan Okumu of Aswa and hon. Michael Ocula of Kilak County. 

Following the allegations by the MPs that they had been beaten by soldiers of UPDF, His Excellency Yoweri Museveni, the President and Commander in-Chief instructed Brig. Kale Kaihura, the Chief Political Commissar of Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, assisted by the Deputy Director of Legal Services, Capt. Kagoro to conduct an investigation and establish what actually happened and who was responsible. The team visited the scene of the incident at Acholibur Trading Centre and other relevant places in Pader District. They held interviews and took statements from UPDF and other security officers, local leaders as well as members of the public who had information on the incident and other related incidents.

Madam Speaker, they have now produced a report, which I would like to lay on the Table for the benefit of this august House, in full. My statement today is simply a summary of their findings.  First, I would like to cover the background to this incident, the consultative programme of these Members of Parliament.

To appreciate what happened in Acholibur, it is necessary to understand that it was part of a joint consultative programme on the White Paper in Pader and Gulu districts by the four Members of Parliament. Indeed, contrary to the impression created in the press reports, it was not an isolated occurrence, because it happened in the course of the tour of the Members of Parliament after they had held rallies in a number of places in Pader District.  

Their programme started on Friday, 19th November, and they held a rally at Kalongo, then Saturday, 20th, at Lira Palwo and Adilang, Sunday, 21st at Pajule. The meeting at Acholibur was planned for Monday, 22nd when the unfortunate incident happened.  There was no prior notice to the military or security authorities in Pader and Gulu districts, and according to the findings of this investigation, this was the first anomaly because the norm, especially in military operational areas, is that notice is given to the military or the authorities in the area before such activities are held out. In this case, the four MPs chose not to notify either the military authorities or the leaders of Pader and Gulu districts of their tour programme. This is not so that the MPs are given permission to carry on their work in their constituencies. The MPs do not need such permission. Rather it is, first of all, to ensure their security as well as the security of their constituencies during meetings and other activities.  Secondly, it is to guard against their programmes conflicting with other activities organized by the district authorities in their respective constituencies or districts, and particularly where you have got military operational activities.

The fact that the programme was region wide, it was even more incumbent on the MPs to notify and closely coordinate with UPDF and other authorities in the respective districts, particularly that they chose to do their consultation during the delicate period of the cease-fire.

I may remind you that the ceasefire was announced on 15th November 2004 and the MPs’ programme started on 19th November. Note also that while other MPs had made their consultations on the White Paper during the recess of Parliament between 28th October and 16th November, these MPs did not. It is indeed interesting that they chose to do so during the seven-day ceasefire period.  

In fact, the Division Commander, Col. Etyang, was not informed of the MPs’ political programme. He only learnt of it on Saturday, 20th November when the tour was already under way. By that time, meetings had already taken place in Kalongo, Patongo, Adilang and Lira Palwo. Indeed, he complained to the investigating team that ordinarily MPs, including hon. Prof. Latigo, inform him when they are visiting their constituencies and he provides them with security. That is the normal routine management of this process in that area. He was therefore surprised that this time they did not inform him.

Further, the L.C.5 Chairman of Pader District himself got information accidentally from the L.C.3 Chairman of Parabong County by phone after the MPs’ meeting in Kalongo. On his part, the RDC was informed by the District Police Commander, Pader District, who on Thursday, 18th November, had been alerted by the Regional Police Commander, Northern, by telephone who in turn had got it from Col. Otema, the overall intelligence officer for Northern Uganda. Col. Otema had got it from concerned persons who had heard it aired on Mega FM. This is corroborated by the MPs in their statements to Police, saying their programme was aired on Mega FM Radio in Gulu from the 18th of November.

It is, however, interesting that their radio announcement on Mega FM is dated 19th November.  Indeed, the persons were concerned because the programme violated the ceasefire arrangements that Col. Otema had announced on the 15th of November on Mega FM when announcing the beginning of the ceasefire, which included suspension of political meetings in the ceasefire zone as well as peace corridors. Peace corridors are the areas earmarked for LRA rebels to approach and enter the ceasefire zone. I have attached to my statement a map of that area with clear indications. (Interjections) I think the delivery is a bit slow, but I urge patience because I am sure they will arrive in time. Thank you for your patience.

The map is attached to the documents and that shows peace corridors, which were supposed to be used by LRA. Because, remember that there was an area which was gazetted, which is in white here, that is the area where LRA rebels were supposed to assemble.  But there were corridors so that they would not be attacked on their way into the zone, which were named and were public.

So, in order not to interrupt the flow of the rebels into the area, in order not to cause any problem to these efforts to bring these rebels into dialogue, suspension was announced of political meetings in the ceasefire zone.

This departure by the MPs from normal practice of giving prior notification to the UPDF and closely coordinating with the Army in their movements created a basis for suspicion as to their motives, setting the stage for the kind of confrontation that took place at Acholibur.  

Evasive conduct of the MPs.  
Furthermore, in their itinerary, the MPs behaved in a manner that showed they did not want the presence of the district leaders and security authorities at their rallies. When eventually the authorities caught up with them on Saturday, 20th November 2004 at Lira Palwo, the MPs were evasive about their programme and kept deceiving them as to where and when they would go next. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order Members!

MR MBABAZI: For instance, after the rally at Lira Palwo, the L.C.5 Chairman, Pader District asked hon. Prof. Latigo where and when their next rally would take place. He was told that it would be at Adilang the next day, Sunday, 21st November. To the Chairman’s surprise, the rally was held at Adilang the evening of that same day.

Further, on Sunday 21st November, they had said they would hold a rally at Pader District Headquarters, instead the rally was held at Pajule. Naturally, this reinforced further the suspicions about the motives of the MPs. 

Noteworthy at the same time, the UPDF commanders on the ground were concerned that nothing is done to undermine or disturb the peace initiative of Mrs Betty Bigombe particularly in the ceasefire zone and the peace corridors. In fact, the MPs’ rallies such as in Pajule and Acholibur were in the peace corridors on the eastern edge of the ceasefire zone. It is therefore, understandable that the commanders were apprehensive about these rallies and endeavoured to have them stopped.

In fact, the MPs ignored and could even be interpreted as having held in contempt the security arrangements for the ceasefire zone and peace corridors as announced by Col. Otema on Mega FM on the 15th of November 2004. Otherwise, why not consult and coordinate with the authorities on the ground at this sensitive time of the ceasefire with LRA!

Provocation and incitement by the MPs.

In fact, the suspicions of the UPDF commanders among others were further justified by the utterances of the MPs in the various rallies they held. Indeed, this team has gathered substantial evidence showing that at different rallies the MPs made statements that could have had the effect of undermining the ceasefire process. They also made statements that were derogatory and provocative of UPDF.

Below, let me give examples to hon. Aggrey Awori, of such statements:

At Kalongo on 19th November 2004, a public rally was addressed by hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo, hon. Michael Ocula and hon. Reagan Okumu.  Hon. Latigo said - and I quote, “Government in the White Paper has the aim of selling all the Acholi land”. [Hon. members: Shame! Shame!] That, and I quote again, “Government has formed the opinion that people now in camps should not go back to the villages because the Government will use the investors to buy all the land in Acholi land”.  

At the same rally, hon. Michael Ocula said that, and I quote: “The Government of Uganda has taken over the Acholi land and the responsibility is now in your hands”. 

Similar statements are reported to have been made in Lira Palwo. For instance, one old man who attended that meeting was heard to say, I quote, “If that is the case, that they are going to take our land, I see no reason why I shouldn’t get armed to fight”.  

Other statements uttered by the MPs at different rallies include the following: 

a) That the Government intended to keep them (the population) in camps and turn the camps into urban centres, that Government did not intend to allow them to return to their homes. 
b) -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order honourable members! Lets have some order.

MR MBABAZI: That hon. Reagan Okumu and hon. Ocula at the Pajule rally said that the people should inform the rebels that those who cannot make it to the gazetted zone of assembly could remain where they are. They should then inform the MPs who would then contact the World Food Programme and other NGOs to get them food and clothing.

c) That the rebels were still free to report to the Government at their convenience since the Amnesty Law was still in place.

d) That the security roads being opened up were in fact preparations to survey the Acholi land and make it accessible to buyers/developers. (Laughter)

e) That they should join the FDC since this was now a strong party, which has been joined by strong personalities including a former Army Commander of UPDF. (Interjections)

f) That Prof. Latigo at Adilanga called the UPDF “dogi, dogi”, translated to mean that UPDF was dustbin material, rubbish. “Dogi, dogi” is a luo word meaning useless, non-germinating groundnut seeds.  (Interjections)

Clearly hon. Members – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR MBABAZI: Clearly, these utterances were not only incorrect but they were an attempt to incite the population against the Government.  Indeed, the investigating team got reports that people were incited into anger against the Government especially in response to the lies that were told about the land in Acholi.  

Further, the statement could have the effect of derailing the ceasefire process, undermine the morale of UPDF soldiers as well as the harmonious relationship between the UPDF and the people of Acholi. In fact, except in Acholibur, the UPDF soldiers exercised utmost restraint in the face of gross provocation, incitement and arrogance. This is brought out most clearly at the Pajule rally when on realizing the violent hostility of the MPs, the 509 Brigade Commander ordered that soldiers who had been sent to stop the meeting at the trading centre withdraw and leave the MPs continue with their programme.  

The Acholibur incident.

As noted earlier, Acholibur is within one of the peace corridors and on the eastern edge of the ceasefire zone. It was essential therefore, that political activity such as rallies in this area had to be closely coordinated with UPDF. This was to ensure that the movement of the rebels into the ceasefire zone is not disturbed and the ceasefire process not undermined by contingencies between UPDF and the LRA. 

Indeed, it is in this context that the violent reaction of the soldiers of the 35 Battalion to the intransigence and aggressiveness of the MPs must be understood. Remember that by that time the provocation and incitement that the Members of Parliament had uttered in earlier rallies were common knowledge.  

So, what happened at Acholibur?  

The team established that indeed, an incident between the MPs and the soldiers of the 35 Battalion took place on 22nd November. The MPs were advised by the Unit Commander not to hold the rally and the MPs resisted. In fact, Capt Yiga who was at the time the acting 35 Battalion Commanding Officer instructed the PC 35 Battalion 2nd Lt Oburi to go with 12 soldiers to Acholibur trading centre and stop a planned rally by the Members of Parliament. The MPs were on their way from Pajule where they had held a rally the previous day. At that point, people were only beginning to together at the trading centre. 

A scuffle between the messenger of the PC of 35 Battalion, 2nd Lt Oburi and hon. Odonga Otto took place. (Laughter) Hon Odonga Otto held the officer by the collar, pushed him down in angry and violent reaction against the officer’s advice that the MPs should not hold a rally at Acholibur in the absence of the district officials. 

Four soldiers who were with the 2nd Lt told the team that when they saw their leaders being manhandled they went to his rescue. Indeed, the team established that the soldiers beat up the Members of Parliament with sticks. I must correct the record however, on the number of soldiers that were involved in this unfortunate act.  

In his statement to the Police, hon Regan Okumu, who incidentally remained in one of the vehicles throughout the incident says, 30 soldiers were involved in the beating. This is not true, the evidence collected suggests that they were four soldiers as the rest of the section, in other words the 12, were on guard duty around the trading centre.  

When he got information on what was taking place in Acholibur, the 509 Brigade Commanding Officer Lt sent Major Nyero the 65 Battalion commanding officer to handle the situation. Unfortunately Major Nyero reached late at the scene and found the Members of Parliament already in their vehicles.  He cooled the situation; he went with hon Odonga Otto and hon Michael Ocula to 35 battalion barracks in Acholi Bur to find out what went wrong.  Thereafter, the whole saga came to an end. 

Who then is responsible for this incident?  

On the actual beating of the Members of Parliament clearly, there is no dispute that the 35 Battalion, 509 Brigade commander and soldiers involved must explain. Indeed, the special investigation branch is building on the findings of brigadier Kare Kaihura’s team to bring to book soldiers implicated. However, at the same time, in determining responsibility, we should not lose focus of the chain of the events leading to the unfortunate incident in Acholibur. We are convinced that if the Members of Parliament had conducted themselves responsibly and honourably as befits their title, this incident would have been avoided. By acting dishonourably, the Members of Parliament particularly hon. Odonga Otto put himself at risk, hon Otto acted dishonourably in engaging in a scuffle with a second lieutenant and privates.  

Noteworthy, on the morning of Sunday, 21st November, at his brigade headquarters, the 509 Brigade Commander had told hon. Otto that political meetings in the area had been suspended for the duration of the ceasefire and advised him that they should not go ahead with their programme. The MPs chose to enter into confrontation with the commanders on the ground. Instead of engaging in confrontation with soldiers, they should have suspended their programme, which clearly was justifiably suspect, and lodged a complaint with me or the Army Commander. By opting for confrontation with second lieutenants and privates, the MPs put themselves at risk.

Madam Speaker, the investigating team has recommended that a court martial be convened at Acholibur as quickly as possible to try all the culprits in the beating of the MPs.

As the UPDF leadership disciplines soldiers that were involved in this incident, we request that utterances of the four Members of Parliament during their tour as well as their misconduct be equally addressed as it amounted to gross irresponsibility, arrogance and even subversion.

I would like, Madam Speaker, also to urge my colleagues whose constituencies fall in military operational areas to always notify, especially the UPDF commanders and closely coordinate with them to avoid such unfortunate incidents as took place at Acholibur. This is especially critical for those areas in or near the ceasefire zone and peace corridors. I thank you.

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much hon minister.  Now, honourable members, I think we will give this matter 45 minutes.

3.23
MR OKUMU REAGAN(Aswa County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I have listened and gone through the minister’s statement and I was not surprised. This matter has been publicly debated from day 1 on talk shows and newspapers that the statements which some of the callers were making on the FM stations as appeared to be something which was cooking somewhere and it has appeared in this statement. 

Madam Speaker, we made our statement in this House; we are average Members of Parliament, we went to school; in age, we are average.  On average we hold degrees, not only one, and therefore, we should not just be looked at as people who would wake up one day and cook up anything.  

Madam Speaker, when we brought this statement here and when we took the various steps, we were responding and seeking the hand of the state. But after reading this statement, Madam Speaker, the state has not acted; the politicians have hijacked the state. Therefore, about the assault, Madam Speaker, we can make the judgement in this House; the people who got injured, people who got traumatized, people who got humiliated and caused worries to their families, constituencies, et cetera, will find the appropriate place to address this matter. 

As to who is telling the truth, whether it is a political truth or not, it is between God and the Acholi people in those places where we addressed the rally. Therefore, those who would be seeking political offices, it is not far, the results will be decided down there, not here.

Madam Speaker, I also want to make this statement: Nobody should pretend and to think that he feels more for the Acholi people than the Acholi leaders.  I have been in Parliament, this is my second time, and my people have elected me. Nobody should really turn round and think that he sympathizes more for the suffering of my own people, the dying of my own people for these many years. This statement has been made a number of times and this is what divides a nation. I want to assure you, this is what divides a nation.  

In the 6th Parliament, when the Acholi Parliamentary Group met the then Minister of State for Defence who is now the full Minister for Defence, I remember I gave him an  incident in one of my constituency, in Paicho. I told him that, “Mr Minister, people are complaining that whenever they report about rebel presence, the Army does not respond quickly.” I told him about one incident where a local councillor saw some smoke and went there and found the rebels cooking. So he went to the Army detach and told them about it. But the Army told him to go back and check if the rebels were still there. This man went and checked, came back and told them that the rebels were still there. But the Army said, “Okay, you wait, we are preparing.” They later said, “Now we are ready, you go and check if they are still there”. When that man went back the rebels got him and killed him. 

I narrated this statement to the then Minister of State for Defence. What was his reply! He said, “We are aware of that, but that is also a way of luring UPDF into a rebel ambush”. In other words, my people were not to be trusted; but that gentleman suffered his fate, and when I read this kind of statement! The suffering of the Acholi people for the last 18 years has been great, but like any other people all over the world who have recovered from war, our people shall also rise from the dust.  

I want to assure this country and this Parliament in particular, that we shall not be shy to offer leadership to our people. We are not going to shy away, whatever intimidation, whatever harassment, whatever humiliation, whatever painting they will paint us; we are not going to be shy to offer leadership to our people. (Applause)

What has been our past experience? I have been in Parliament for eight years, I have worked with the UPDF, I have visited, addressed rallies in my constituency and I want to inform this House that always there are two scenarios: When the situation is extremely bad, no vehicle will be allowed to travel. The UPDF will always advise people, allow them to move in convoys or get escorts before moving from one spot to another, and we have always done that. The UPDF always puts roadblocks; no vehicle passes. When there is a lull, and there is somehow free movement, what the UPDF does is very simple; they stop all vehicles from moving from early morning to 9.00 or 10.00 a.m. and after patrolling the road and deployed all over, they then allow civilian vehicles and other people to move between that time up to 6.00 p.m. When they pull out after 6.00 p.m., they then block the roads again because of the fear that the people might be killed, and this is the situation now. We are in a lull in Acholi sub-region and when I go to my Constituency - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu Reagan, I want to give opportunity to your friends, try to wind up.

MR OKUMU: Yes, Madam Speaker, but I am party to this and this touched me. But I want to say very clearly that this situation was strange. Our concern is - because we when called the ministers of Defence they said they were not aware of any order. Was there no better way of informing a Member of Parliament? 

I encountered an incident in Pararo where I went. I was even escorted by soldiers, but as I was about to start addressing a rally, the commander of the local detach there sent his aide to Local Council to call me. I went to him, we sat somewhere in the house, and he said, “Reagan, you see, I cannot allow this rally to go on because we have intelligence reports that the rebels are around here; it will cause problems. I advise that you go and tell the people that the rally will be organized another day,” and we stopped there. I went and stopped our people; we have even dealt in critical situations. So, really it is not about painting things.  

Lastly, Madam Speaker, on the land issue, I want to be clear; I did not know this matter was going to be brought here today, especially, after we had met His Excellence, the President and discussed a number of things. When we discussed this matter with the President, we were informed of a different angle from what is here.  

The land issue is a serious matter, there is a document called “Security and Production Programme”.  Madam Speaker, tomorrow I will bring and lay it on the Table. Security and Production Programme would like to cultivate for the Acholi people but in order to cultivate they would like to get the land title for those lands, and this is a document which the Minister is aware of; it is within the Ministry of Defence. When the report came out, I was asked by General Saleh to give my views on this matter and I wrote it, I copied my letter to you the Deputy Speaker and the Speaker of this House, the President, the ministers and to the Prime Minister and we raised a concern about the element of urbanization of camps in the Acholi sub-region; we do not like this. I want to assure people, our people are in camps temporarily for protection; they will have to go back home.  Nobody, and I want to say this lastly; nobody should ever dare and think that our people will remain in the camp and the camp will become their home as the means of developing the Acholi sub-region. That is not how urbanization takes place. We have gone to school; put the infrastructures.  

So, the issue of land is a serious matter and I want to repeat it in this House, it is a serious matter. We reject the element of urbanization in the camps and if that is the issue that is causing us problems, let any amount of problems come. I want to assure you; no amount of intimation will divert us or coerce us to join any political system. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.34
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  First of all, I want to be on record that I condemn this act. (Interruption). I condemn the act of beating the Members of Parliament.  

Secondly, I must express the fact that nobody, unless he was there, can give us a true picture of what was there. (Laughter). I mean we got the statement from hon. Latigo Ogenga and now the statement from the Army. So these are two people who – the hon. Latigo was a victim, the other one could be defending his organization.  

Madam Chair – (Interjections)- they all mean the same really. Madam Speaker, sorry, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member it is not the same. (Interjections). Hon. Member, when I am sitting here I am the Speaker, when I am sitting there I am the chairperson. So, there is a difference.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you for that information.  Madam Speaker, when I read this statement, if it is true that MPs engaged soldiers in confrontation and they are still alive, we should thank God that we have an Army which respects human rights. Madam Speaker, I am saying this because up to now I still have scars from soldiers who used to kick us at roadblocks and that time I was even a religious man, I was not a politician. I was a Brother doing missionary work, but I would be kicked at the roadblock –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon. Members.

MR MUTULUUZA: So, Madam Speaker, I say that we must thank our Army for being disciplined and actually human rights observers (Laughter). Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I just want to seek clarification from hon. Mutuluuza. He has just told us that we must thank the UPDF for having not killed these Members. He has also given us his experience that he was not killed; he only has scars. Could he also thank those armies because they did not kill him, they also respected human rights? Why are you not thanking them?

MR MUTULUUZA: Thanking them for what? Because they beat me? (Laughter) Madam Speaker, let me wind up –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to be brief but the Members are interrupting me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, proceed and conclude.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, on page 6, paragraph 2, Provocation and incitement by the Members of Parliament: Madam speaker, if you watch WBS and see what Odonga Otto says on the fact that the war will not end in the North and then you read this –(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament are very clear on matters of discussing the conduct of Members of Parliament. Is it in order for an hon. Member of this House to discuss the conduct of a Member without a substantive motion? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But it is only the Speaker. Hon. Wandera, can I know which rule you are relying on?

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, rule 53(5) of the Rules of Procedure, which I beg to read verbatim, states as follows: “The conduct of the Speaker, Members, the Chief Justice, Judges of Courts of Judicature, shall not be raised, except upon substantive motion, and, in any amendment, question to a Member or remarks in a debate on a motion…” 

So, what we are debating Madam Speaker, is not a substantive motion and I do not think hon. Mutuluuza is, therefore, in order to discuss what my hon. colleague does on WBS.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I do not know about WBS. What I am concerned about is what came in the report as reported by the Minister.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you Madam Speaker. I am giving a reason why these soldiers suspected that the Members of Parliament were against the end of the war, because if one says the war in the North will not end and he is a Member of Parliament, I think we have to check. We are leaders; we should always be mindful of what we say. It is always aired on the WBS news bytes, Madam Speaker, everybody has seen it; there is no doubt about that.

Lastly, Madam Speaker - but before I end, Madam Speaker, I ask myself; if I was the one in the bush for 18 years and an Member of Parliament goes to the television and says there will be no end to the war in the North, I have been suffering for 18 years, what do you expect that young man to do? (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, you have ruled on this issue of bringing the issue of WBS; it is not mentioned anywhere in this report; not even that the war will not end referring to the Members of Parliament who are named in this report. Is the Member in order to continue in that line?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, focus on the statement made by the Minister.

MR MUTULUUZA: Lastly, Madam speaker –(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thanks very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification and I want to tell my colleague that I have been here and I am a senior legislator; I know what I am doing. Madam Speaker, whereas somebody is entitled to respond to this report, am I limited to use the only words that are in this report? For instance, Madam Speaker, if the Member is talking about the behaviour of an hon. Member and he wants to bid his points using different vocabularies and different examples from different areas; is he limited to use only the words that are in this report? I am seeking clarification from the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR KIBALE WAMBI: Madam speaker, I am raising a point of order for hon. Bakkabulindi to the type of dressing he is attired in.  I would like to know if hon. Bakkabulindi is dressed for a disco –(Laughter)- or he is dressed to come and conduct business of this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, under rule 62 gentlemen are expected to wear a pair of trousers with a jacket, shirt and tie, a Kanzu and jacket or safari suit. So, hon. Bakkabulindi, I think you are not properly dressed. (Laughter)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking your guidance as to how this debate is going to be conducted.  

THE SPEAKER: Yes, please. 

PROF. KAGONYERA: The central theme of the report by the minister is about the conduct of two parties: the UPDF and some Members of this House. So, if anybody rules that we cannot talk about the conduct of Members of Parliament using examples, I seek your guidance as to whether we must exclude the conduct of Members of Parliament and therefore exclude debating of the report. And, Madam, we are not going to allow to be shut down. (Interjections). Yes, we must be allowed to debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know how far you want to stretch the question of conduct; whether you want to discuss what somebody did on the 30th June in a nightclub or in a market, in relation this incident. No, let us discuss in relation to the statement the minister has brought.  I have no record in this House of what transpired on WBS. If you had laid them on the Table, I would say, yes. I have not seen them, so, let us discuss in the context of what transpired in Acholibur.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  But there is even an incident, which took place here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Fine.

MR MUTULUUZA: Therefore if we quote such incidents here in the house, where hon. Odonga Otto was –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have no problem with what took place in the House, because I watched from my office. I have no problem with that.

MR MUTULUUZA: Lastly, Madam Speaker, I want to support the recommendations of the minister. That an investigating team be convened to establish what happened at Acholibur. Secondly, that even Members of Parliament who were there should be equally investigated.

Lastly, I would propose that this House, as an independent organ, also institutes a committee to investigate what took place in Acholibur, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much.

3.48
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by expressing my shock on what the minister stated on page 3 regarding consultations on the White Paper.  My belief is that consultations on the White Paper is an on-going process and I would like to remind the Minister that consultations did not stop on the 16th of November as he has stated in this report. I hope you will not deny the people of Kinkizi West more information and sharing with you on the White Paper.  

So, in my opinion, even when the debate on the White Paper recommendations starts, Members of this august House still have the constitutional duty to keep consulting their constituents. 

Therefore, my colleagues, the four MPs on whom this report touches, were really right to continue with the consultations. You are even aware that not all of us have the same capacities at the same time and those four Members of Parliament, you are aware, were not beneficiaries of the facilitation. Therefore while others were consulting at that time because they had been facilitated, these ones were busy looking around for ways of consulting their constituents. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the issues of army deployments during or after consultations, I think, are not limited to Acholi region alone. As the Minister concluded his report, he advised that all Members of Parliament whose constituencies fall within military operational zones ought to consult with the UPDF commanders on the ground before they do consultations. 

I represent Ngora county constituency, a very safe place. From 27th of last month up to 30th, I was also busy with consultations in my constituency.  But alas, on the 3rd of this month a very strong military deployment was sent to Ngora and as we speak now everybody is bewildered. What is going on? 

I would like to inform this august House that actually this afternoon when I called the chairperson of the Security committee of Kumi, who happens to be the RDC, to tell me what insecurity threats have arisen in Ngora that would warrant a deployment, he said he did not know anything.  (Interjection) Let me first develop this point, you will give me information. I will take the information, but let me finish the point.

He referred me to the DISO. The DISO said, “Look, I am not sure but I think the request for deployment came from the LC III chairman.” I asked the LC III chairman; he is also as ill informed as to what is going on. Everybody is wondering, even the chairman is wondering why the deployment, but instead they are saying the request came from him. But the phone calls and all the messages that I keep getting are that they are worried about how the people are reacting to the White Paper consultations. Now, what is the problem? 

Really I would like to first of all express my sympathies to my colleagues who ended up in that kind of scuffle, who ended up being tortured, much as my colleague, hon. Mutuluuza, says the UPDF should be congratulated for sparing their lives. I would like to seriously observe that issues about how to handle a wrong should not be met by a similar approach. If the Members of Parliament were wrong, the approach used by the military should not just be condoned. I would not want to say they should be congratulated; I would not want to be a party to congratulating somebody who has molested someone. In my opinion, it is becoming a little bit out of hand; this militaristic approach of handling political issues, I think should not work. 

I am happy that the Army Commander today is in this House -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you my hon. colleague for yielding the floor. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the august House that my hon. colleague on the floor is a very modest person. He himself has not talked about his personal experience with a senior Army officer in the name of Brig. Hashaka (Laughter). I would like to thank him for his modesty and encourage him to continue being modest.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Awori, I want to correct the record. I think I was in this Chair when the hon. Epetait actually made a personal statement about that incident. So, I do not want problems with the Hansard, it is on record, he did make a statement, so do not confuse us.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank you for your information, in any case. Yes, my modesty is tested.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Dr Epetait, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I want to give is to emphasize the modesty of a person holding the floor right now. I traveled with him all the way from Namibia via Entebbe Airport and I saw him physically being tortured and beaten up by that Brig. Hashaka. What a modest man!

CAPT. BASALIZA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Lukyamuzi to bring something that was settled? Hon. Epetait is my friend and he forgave the Brigadier and everything was settled.  Now, is it in order for the hon. Lukyamuzi to bring it back while we are discussing something different?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is out of order. Please conclude, hon. Epetait.

DR EPETAIT: So, Madam Speaker, what I was trying to raise here is that, there is dire need for – I hope my colleague, the Army Commander, is getting the point. There is dire need for the Army to exercise maximum restraint and maximum control on its institution at a time when we are dealing with constitutional matters. In any case, the discussion on the White Paper is not binding, we are just collecting views of the people to be debated on the floor, but the way the Army seems to be conducting itself - I do not know whether it is due to wrong orders or otherwise, there is dire need for the Army to exercise maximum restraint when the politicians are busy doing their work. In my opinion, there is something going amiss, once we turn politics militaristic, we might get the wrong point. I thank you Madam Speaker.

3.57
MR BIRIMUMAASO MULINDWA (Bukoto County West, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I condemn the acts of the soldiers who were involved in beating up honourable Members of Parliament.  Madam Speaker, we are experiencing an insurgency in Northern Uganda and as I know, war is the physical expression of political dissent. Madam Speaker, I am not against war as such, but I think all of us who are politically pro or against this Government have one thing in common as regards to this war: that this war must stop by all means, it is no longer a good war.

Madam Speaker, it is out of that realization that all parties involved in this problem are agreeing to talk, and despite our political differences, we should have a minimum to enable us end this war. Therefore, I find it a problem that whereas most leaders from Northern Uganda had requested Government to declare the whole North a ceasefire zone and Government just declared what is outlined here in this map, I would expect everyone, politician or otherwise, pro-government or otherwise, to have a minimum observance to allow the peace process to proceed undisturbed. (Applause) It is not fair for the rebels who are fighting against this Government and more so for the people of Uganda to get our leaders at this particular moment inciting the rebels and the people themselves to join the rebels. It is not fair, and this is what I see here.

So, Madam Speaker, much as I said I condemn soldiers, I also condemn the behaviour of the Members of Parliament to pursue their selfish, political gains at the expense of the ceasefire. (Applause) And one time I said that this war is going to be very costly, not now, but in 20 years to come.  Whereas in some parts of Uganda children are comfortably going to school, here children are not going to school and in 20 years both children will be lining up to look for jobs and some people will be educated, others will not be educated, and some leaders do not seem to see it. That is why I feel it is unfortunate.  

Therefore, irrespective of our political inclinations, let us give Uganda a chance. The whole of Northern Uganda should have been declared a ceasefire and all political activities should have ceased. So I find it questionable. I participated in the Defence Committee of the 6th Parliament and I may not be surprised by the behavior of some of these people. But I want to request them that Uganda belongs to all of us and we need peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.03
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not want to stand here and debate what was said. We went out to consult our people honestly, incidences occurred that we put in our document and we are getting a response from Government. I can only point out facts, because even on the day that I made a statement here, one of our colleagues who was not here in the House came, looked around where I normally sit, he did not see me and hon. Mwandha was contributing and saying that, “The fact that soldiers are beating all Members of Parliament is very bad” and the hon. Lady who is the whole Commissioner of this Parliament said they deserved it. Therefore when statements are written reporting what hon. Ogenga Latigo said in his own village, in his own home, and without even may be asking as to whether what I said is true or false and you expect me to debate it whether it is right or wrong, it becomes very unfortunate. Because, if those who were in those meetings were to be asked, they will tell you that in my own home, I never talked about the White Paper. I introduced my colleagues and told my people that they will hear from them. 

In all the meetings in my constituency, I never talked about the White Paper. In Adilang I talked about the fact that it took so long for me to go there and I apologized to the people. But there are things written here that Latigo said and there are guys who are prepared to look at me with my bald head and still believe that what the Army says is more true than what Latigo can ever say. It is very unfortunate. There are many things that have been said.

MR MALINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the whole of this report, there have been fingers pointing at Prof. Latigo and hon. Otto. I have three questions I want to find out. One, there is a claim that people were not informed about the programme.  We would like to get clarification from hon. Latigo, how did you inform the people of Pader and Kitgum and such that only the people heard your programme and the Army did not? 

I also want to find out from you as an elder; what is it that hon. Otto did? What is it that annoyed hon. Otto to beat a soldier? According to your statement, after Otto beat a soldier, they beat you instead.  What happened? (Laughter)  

Madam Speaker, I am also mixed up, because these were four hon. Members of Parliament, I do not know what happened to hon. Ocula. I think he disappeared because I only saw that he was beaten but there is nothing, apart from stating that he was there. I do not know whether he was just an observer.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to find out from my colleagues, if it would be a good idea for us as Members of Parliament to propose that an independent Committee of Parliament is set up to go and carry out the investigation.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the Minister, in his statement, on page 4, says, “their programme violated the ceasefire arrangement that Col. Otema announced on 15th November”. I would like to know from the hon. Members whether Col. Otema sent you that programme suspending political meetings in the ceasefire zone and which areas. Because the Minister is quoting that Col. Otema announced it and may be later the Minister will inform us whether it is Otema who gives these instructions without the Minister knowing.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the issues that my colleague raised would be better answered by Parliament. I can only tell this House, repeat some of the facts because I think our report was not fully circulated. I saw the Minister disputing the date when the announcement on Mega Radio was. If they went back and read that statement, we said we sent announcement on Radio Uganda. That is the radio we used. It is only when we reached Lira Paluo, we asked people and they said “No, most of the time people listen to FMs”.  Then I called the FM Station in Gulu and outlined, because I wanted the national radio station to carry something that even the people in Kampala can hear and you can check the record of Radio Uganda, you will find that a formal announcement, signed by me was submitted.

As to why or whether we did not inform the Army, in my statement I said, a week before I called Col. Etyang, the phone rang, he switched off and I did call him again. The Friday we were going, I called him on both his numbers, his phone was off. I called his aide on his number - I have those three numbers - the phone was off. So, to suggest that we did not do these things and to try and paint us as having some motive for going there, is incredible!

Then they talk about us going without escorts. If hon. Nankabirwa was here, in July, I went home; I got a military escort. On my way back I was escorted from Patongo to Pader District headquarters.  When I reached there the Army said they did not have fuel and I drove - and people must know this. I drove alone from Pader using the Gulu-Moroto Road via Opit up to Gulu because there was no escort. I came and told hon. Nankabirwa. Hon. Nankabirwa can give to this Parliament a letter I wrote requesting for escorts. After that I went home, this particular trip was the third time. On the previous two occasions I went without escorts to home and came back. Each time, I make consultations not only with the military but also with the Internal Security Organisation. Once they assure us – because the only reason why we are asking for these escorts is for security and once we believe that security is okay, we can travel, and right now everybody travels without escorts.

Now, this report says that we went there and after the Lira Palwo we even dodged the district leaders.  I made, in that announcement, and I am prepared to bring that – I did not know that this was going to be discussed. In the copy of the statement announcing our visits, we gave the responsibility for organizing meetings to the LC III chairmen. We asked all the district councillors and all the other LCs to be present and they were present in most of our meetings.

In Lira Palwo these guys who say that we dodged them, the LC V Chairman, Mr E. Y. Komakech, are the people behind this statement here, and I would like to let you know that when even Brig. Kaihura went there, all the meetings were being held in the home of E.Y. Komakech, the district chairman, not in office.  

In the meeting in Lira Palwo, the chairman LC V was there, DISO Sylvester Opiira was there, RDC, DISO Emmanuel Adoi was there. That day they had scheduled a meeting to go to Adilanga. At the end of the lira Palwo meeting we said let us go together to Adilanga. What the chairman LCV told me was that they did not have enough fuel which was very ridiculous because the district headquarters – (Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: First of all, I sympathize with you. But at the beginning you said, just as you have been telling this august House, one Member of Parliament asserted that you deserved it, you explained and you are still explaining. Could you throw some more light on this? Why am I saying this? Already hon. Mutuluuza said one time he suffered at the hands of the military and nobody seemed to have been bothered. Our colleagues are suffering the same, and nobody seems to have been bothered. Madam Speaker, it made me recall one of the writers of the Exodus before the holocaust of the Nazis, where Hitler meted it out with the communists and people were not bothered. It was meted out with the trade unionists, nobody bothered, but when it came to the writer himself, that is when he knew. I know we are bothered but some people may take it lightly. It may reach Matembe as she is complaining here, can you throw some light on who said that you deserve that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ogenga, I am sorry to interrupt you but you see the more I listen to you and to the Members, it is very clear that this matter cannot end on this Floor. People like Mr. Komakech cannot come here, those other soldiers who are not in this House cannot come here. It seems to me we should be addressing the way forward; because we will say these things, and they will remain here; those fellows will not be able to speak about it.  Can we look at the way forward?

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, you see it was so important to brief those who never saw my report because I gave the report for circulation and it was not circulated. The things I am saying are the things in that report. You could hear the debate. Those who actually did not hear me speak here were debating like we were some bunch of criminals, and it was important to bring this.

The other method that I wanted to bring out is the suggestion that we chose the ceasefire time to go and hold our meetings. Fortunately my colleague; hon. Santa Okot will speak after me, it is a fact that on the day the ceasefire was declared, we went with hon. Jessica Eriyo to Laguti, her home place to celebrate her degree and Jessica’s. Even that time because she was at home she called me and said, “Bring for me a copy of your White Paper –” (Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, we received this report from the hon. Member and we have the report from his side. Now he is repeating the same things, which we actually have in his report that he presented here. Can you, Madam Speaker, accord us some time, because we have his report.  

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  So, I returned from Laguti and left my colleague hon. Santa after the ceasefire was declared to go and consult.  She told me – she has not returned the copy of my White Paper. The following day she had her consultation meeting at Laguti, Laguti Sub County is a ceasefire zone. The next day she was supposed to have her consultation meeting, which I believe she did in Acholibur where we were beaten – (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.

PROF. LATIGO: Give me time and let me finish, it will not help anybody. So, basically when people – unfortunately hon. Amama Mbabazi has not been around, they compiled this report, I believe, for him to read. He was just even reading my report. 

So, when you go to this case about hon. Otto Odonga jumping on some 2nd Lieutenant and throwing him down, the only thing I can say, Mr Army Commander and Madam Speaker, is that the Army Commander is in trouble, because he gets informed with lies.

At the end of September when people were arrested in my constituency, I went home. When I came back and told him what happened. They said, “No, they are collaborators there”. We were seated together with the Army Commander; he told me that I planted groundnuts in my farm somewhere in Pader and left it for the LRA to feed on.  I told him, “Army commander, I do not have anything there”. Later, I was even told this same information was passed to the President.  

When I came back from the trip that day, I talked to the Army Commander. The next day hon. Santa asked me, “What did you do at home?”  I said, “What?” She said, “You see, Col. Otema called me and said that you went home, chased away all the movement supporters from the hospital and replaced them with FDC.”  So, when you hear people saying- hon Santa is here- so when you get these things in the newspapers and you allow a whole Minister of Defence to ridicule himself, it is very unfortunate. I know that the state is very serious about the programme to undermine democracy.  

This afternoon, I took my driver to the Rt hon. Speaker. On Saturday night after I had a function in Kyambogo University, a vehicle, a Toyota Corona with a foreign No. VH266Z followed us.  I went to Ntinda where hon. Zachary Olum has a small place where we normally meet -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter.  I went there, and because there was a big traffic jam I told my driver to park on this side of the road where we normally sit to have a drink and eat pork. So- (Laughter)- yes- so, Madam Speaker, the same vehicle came and parked next to my car.  Now when they came to the vehicle, the driver said- he calls me Daddy, he is a young man-  “Daddy, there is a vehicle which we passed up there. The same vehicle has come and parked here.”  I asked him, “Which road did it take? He said, “It took the road which we normally take.”  So, I said, “Let us follow that road because I think if they are after us they want us to take a wrong route.”  

We come home, the driver drops me. After parking the vehicle, just two hundred meters away - this is how it was reported yesterday – on Sunday morning the driver did not turn up.  In the afternoon my wife goes where my driver stays. She comes and says, “Sam did not report home yesterday. They have tried his phone, it is off; they have called, he friends is not there.”  So, I called the Police to report that my driver was missing.  

Now yesterday in the evening, the Police in Jinja called me and said, “Honourable, were you looking for your driver? I said, “Yes. They said, “The driver has reported here.”  Now what happened?  When the driver left home, just about 200 meters, the same vehicle came screeching. They stopped, two young guys jumped out with pistols and said, “If you run we will shoot you.”  They pushed him in the vehicle.  They drove to some place. They passed a number of humps; the door which was open was a steel door.  

They tied him on a seat and then they removed the handkerchief from the face and when they did that, they showed a bright light and they started interrogating him. They said, “You tell us where honourable holds his secret meetings.  The young man said, “I don’t know anything. When we go to Parliament I stay in the vehicle.  When he goes on radio, I remain in the vehicle.”  

Then they put him down, he says on the road, they tied his legs and arms.  He stayed there overnight.  The following day they came again and removed him and tied him back on the chair.  All he says he was seeing a small light like a torch and then he started feeling pain on the chest. Many members saw him out here; they burnt him with electrical rod all over the chest; eventually they again left him there tied. 

My driver says these people came after two days; he had not even drunk water. When he asked for water, he was given water to drink.  Then they started discussing whether to kill him and dispose him off; they agreed not to kill him. Eventually they carried him; he says they drove for five minutes only.  But we believe that he must have been doused with chloroform because after five minutes they left the tarmac and then they got him out. They held him and walked him down a slope and then they made him lie down facing the grass.  They removed the bandages, they removed the strings that tied him and they told him, “If you look up we will shoot you dead.”  So the young man stayed believing that these guys were on him yet they had already left.  

Eventually he got up and came towards the road. What does he see, the signpost of Kakira sugar works.  He had been damped in the sugar plantation in Kakira.  From there a good Samaritan took him to the Police.  He gave my phone number to the Police. The Police said, “No, this is security matter.”  Nobody was ready to call me. They said they would trace the person who informed me.  I was called at 4.30pm. The young man came burnt and when people sit here and say, “yes, Latigo went there and said this, it is very unfortunate.”  

But this is the reality that we have seen before; and like I said, one time the reality of what has happened and what is happening is that those who perpetuate it will be the victims of the same thing.  You can laugh because Latigo comes from the north, but one day in your own primaries as NRM-O members you will kill each other and these same guys you have now allowed to abuse the dignity of Parliamentarians will come for you. It is very unfortunate, Madam Speaker, that we are even debating the statement of the Minister.  

I would advise since you asked for a way forward that the minister withdraw this statement and investigate the matter. If you want we can have a committee; you will find that it is a very unfortunate thing. There are some small guys who think that if they do what they imagine is Government’s bidding by soiling the name of Latigo, Odonga Otto or Reagan- (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I am quite really touched by the honourable colleague’s statement. But I don’t agree when he says that the minister withdraws his statement. It cannot solve the problem when we are looking for the way forward.  According to this statement and the incidences which have been happening, he should really tell us whether there are some facts that we can prove the best way forward, because this country cannot be led in the same way as we are going through a transition period.   I feel that if there are some facts which need to be dealt with, he should tell us and maybe make the best solution of this.  

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to seek clarification from my honourable colleague.  There is a general impression that all that has been said is not what is there to be said.  There seems to be more that has not been said which, Madam Speaker, yourself you did hint on that according to what you are hearing we cannot arrive at a conclusion on this issue.  The honourable colleague is proposing the honourable Minister to withdraw the statement.  Don’t you think even if they are to set up a committee, the honourable Minister’s statement would constitute part of the documents which will be part of the record of this Parliament?  I want to seek clarification.  
4
MR OMARA ATUBO: Motion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Omara Atubo.

MR OMARA ATUBO: For the way forward, I think we have heard a seven-paged statement from Prof. Ogenga Latigo and we have heard a 13-paged statement from the Minister.  You have rightly said the way forward, and hon. Ogenga Latigo thought the way forward is for the Minister to withdraw his statement, which is already on record and for the same Minister or the same Executive to proceed with the inquiry. I do not think that is the way forward.  I have a way forward by way of motion here, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Omara Atubo, I do not know- last week hon. Santa Okot was very anxious to say something about this and I had already given her an opportunity.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  She can speak after my motion; it can be part of the motion.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think let us hear from –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Okay, right.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because she is from that place.  Please wind up. I will go to hon. Santa Okot.  We shall come to your motion.  

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  When I was saying that let the honourable Minister withdraw the statement, I was saying it actually in good spirit because I know that when the committee goes on the ground, the actual finding will be so embarrassing. I just wanted to save him.  But if a committee is going to be formed and the Minister says that this is their position, it is well and good.  The other issue that hon. Kakooza raised, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, the Minister is a very smart lawyer, you know that.  When you say the court martial will try these people and you have already painted very clear evidence that they are actually not guilty, we are guilty, then what do you try these people for, just to let the world know that we are very disciplined when our people do things we try them?  That is how they misjudge some of us. I did not become a Professor for nothing- (Laughter)-seriously, so this kind of thing really must end.  I thank you very much.

4.37
MRS OKOT SANTA (Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for allowing me to discuss this report which is brought to the Parliament by the Minister concerning the four Members of Parliament.  I am called Okot Santa, a Woman Representative of Pader District, and therefore, this means I am the Member of Parliament of the two honourable members here, hon. Otto Odonga and hon. Ogenga Latigo. Therefore, because I am a mother of Pader District, I am going to say what I heard because I was not with them during their consultation.  So many stories came in and so many questions including, “Why don’t they beat Santa Okot but beat us, is it because she is NRM-O or not?”  Several members asked me the same questions.

Madam Speaker, before the 15th November when the ceasefire was announced by the Col. Otema, I had already made arrangements to go to celebrate my graduation at home in my own sub-county and we combined two functions because that is a new sub-county which was given to us.  I wrote a physical letter as I always do before I even think of going to Pader District. I informed the security, possibly it is because we have been On the list of the Lord Resistance Army (LRA).  You are very much aware that I am on the list to be abducted.  You are very much aware that the Members of Parliament who support the Movement is being suspected by the Lords Resistance Army and every time wanted.   

Sometime back, the Lords Resistance Army (LRA) announced they want the head of hon. Betty Aketch, this one you are aware and the Lords Resistance Army (LRA) behaves in such a way that if you do not like this Government, then they become your friend but once you show that you are connected to the Government they will always follow you.  So, for that matter for me as Santa Okot I cannot even think of going to Pader before security gives me a go ahead.  

Two weeks before the 15th November when they announced the ceasefire, it is indeed true that I wrote a letter to the Division Commander, the Brigade Commander, the Resident District Commissioner (RDC), all the security personnel up to the GISO of the sub-county where I was going to hold the party because I had organized a disco for two nights for my people.  

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members.

MRS OKOT: Madam Speaker, I invited the two Members of Parliament when security had already replied to me. They replied to me on the 13th November and the ceasefire was announced on the 15th  November.  When they replied to me, I invited the two Members of Parliament. The copies of the letters, which I wrote are there.  I went with them together with my colleague with whom I graduated together in the same University to the celebration.  As we reached there the detach Commander told us that since we were going to have a disco there and the announcement for the ceasefire was announced that very day, the people who were already inside were not supposed to cross a certain valley which is near that sub-county, both sides of the road because it was on Gulu-Kitgum road and we celebrated without any problem.  

Before we went to the cerebration area, we were given a full lorry of escorts to take us there.  We reached there, the escort waited for the Members of Parliament and the paramount chief. I waved them off because I was going to remain with the people. I also had the idea of consulting them on the White Paper; there was no problem.  

But as I was coming back, I really had another programme, which was organized by the leadership of Pajule and Lapul sub-county where the first incident of beating started.  The Members of Parliament were beaten on Monday, I condemned the act together with my people because if the MPs were in the wrong- I wish this Lieutenant had reported the Members of Parliament to the Police or to some higher authorities than beating them from there. 

I also do not deny when the statement was read that hon. Otto started the attack because we also follow history and the behaviour of somebody –(Laughter)- If they had read in the report that hon. Professor started we would have put a question mark because it has always not been his behaviour in doing such kind of things. 

On the 23th November I was in Pajule, the beating took place on Monday, we had organized a consultative meeting.  Madam Speaker, I only had the consultative meeting with the LC 1 up to LC 5, the religious leaders, the cultural leaders and everybody.  The Army told me we were not going to have the consultation at that public place and therefore we were given a school far away from a trading centre, which was guarded by the soldiers.  

Madam Speaker, there are many ways in which we pass information to the people, I do not mean that my colleagues failed to pass information to the people- the Minister read that it was a rally in the report.  But this was supposed to be a consultation, but I heard the announcements: 9.00 O’clock somewhere, mid-day somewhere, at 2.00 p.m. we would be somewhere, at 4.00 p.m. somewhere.  Then I said, was this a consultation or it was a rally or a kind of dictation. I did not bother about that but for me I went on with my programme. 

On reaching Pajule even before I stopped, people came to me and said, “Hon. Santa our Members of Parliament were beaten yesterday; we were also beaten in Pajule.”  I asked them, “What happened?” They said, “The first meeting which was convened was dispersed by the Army.” They told them that they were not supposed to have a consultative meeting there because of the peace talks which were on the ground.  Then I asked them, “How come you were beaten?” They said, “In the first meeting we were told by the leaders of Pajule not to have a meeting and the leaders also went away. But when the honourable members came they called the people again.” At that place they did not beat the MPs, but the villagers who had gathered there, those who refused to leave the place, were beaten by soldiers.  When I reached there I told the people that I have not known the reason why this scuffle is happening.  But they asked me, “What are you going to do in this case?”  I assured them that I would come back and find out from this very House or from Government why these MPs are beaten. Today as we discuss this issue the people of Pader District are waiting for the reasons why the MPs were beaten.  

Now back to the consultation, Madam Speaker, the main issue on this consultation of my colleagues were centred on the land issue. The honourable Members of Parliament told the people in every sub-county where they had gone to do their consultation that Government has got a very huge plan to remove the land of the Acholi people.  This even if you go and ask a child who is 15 years old will tell you.  I told the people, “First wait, if the MPs have stated like that we are going to find out”. I do not believe in that, but if the MPs have told you then I would go back and find out from the Government.”  They told me, “If our land is going to be taken by this Government, we shall fight this Government with anything we shall come across.”  Madam Speaker, the issue is so high that even people are going to match from Pader up to here in Kampala –(An hon. Member rose_ )- time is not there let me finish and then you give the information.  

Madam Speaker, that was the issue because my people in Acholi say they are remaining with two wealth, one is the land the other is the children they have got.  If I may recall when the attack took place in Balonyo, the President invited Acholi and Lango Parliamentary group. They are all here in this Parliament. I am not saying that the land is going to be taken because I also value the land. I only want the proof to be laid on the Table, which shows that Government is going to remove our land, I will resign from this Parliament and go back home to wait for this Government.  

Madam Speaker –(Interjection)- I am not going to get information, I will have to finish.  Madam Speaker –(An hon. Member rose_)- can you allow me to finish, commissioner.  When we were in Okwang when the President invited us, I remember very well we were all there. The honourable ministers who represent Acholi and Lango were also there. In that discussion, hon. Prof. Latigo shot up and told the President, “Mr President I have an idea that for me according to the way I have seen my people in Pader district –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I may have said anything but once she starts saying something, quoting me that I shot up in the meeting and said, “Mr President I have an idea- and it is not true then it is my right to challenge that.  Is it in order for my honourable colleague to misrepresent me on what I said and how I said it?  I know that hon. – unless you will give me an opportunity to say- because many of my colleagues who where there are here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is really difficult for me to rule on that matter. I was not in Okwang and I have not seen the minutes of that meeting.  So, I am not in a position to say whether you shot up or you stood gracefully.

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Madam Speaker, I rise up on this point of information.  One, first and foremost, I am also a representative of the people of Kitgum district and a stakeholder.  Secondly, I am saved and I want to speak the truth.  On the day we meet the President at Okwang it was hon. Ogenga Latigo who stood up and said, “Mr President, Sir, we could use this opportunity and this could be a blessing in disguise for the people in the camps and we open up the land for production.”  It was not only once, early last month we had a meeting of a few Members of Parliament with officials of the US Embassy at Mamba Point, and he still repeated the same point.  Hon. Amuriat refuted, you know he gave him a rebuttal, “Do not talk about land.” 

On land issues, Madam Speaker, for my people I will stand firm and even leave this Parliament if the issue of land is tampered with. But the truth is, Prof.Ogenga as contrary to what has been reported here, gave his views to the President and even to the officials of the American Embassy including USAID, that to his own understanding as an agriculturalist the people staying in camps should be given opportunity for land to be used maximally.  

MRS SANTA OKOT:  Madam Speaker, I was surprised if it was the same hon. Prof. Ogenga who turns round after giving a wrong advice to the President to make the scams and turn around and say that Government now wants to take the land of the Acholi people –[Hon Members:Shame, shame!]

On the issue of the White Paper, I read the White Paper and even gave it to a youth to read it. What is in the White Paper is a Government proposal, it is not a conclusion, because the statement which is in the White Paper is that where Government does not accept, it indicates that Government does not accept, but with the reason.  So, I do not know where they get this conclusion, but we want the clarification on the Table.

Madam Speaker, these are honourable members from northern region.  Hon. Okumu Reagan has just said in this House that nobody should think that he thinks about the Acholi people more than him.  This I dispute because all Members of Parliament here have gone to Acholi region several times.  Even Parliament declared the Northern Region to be a disaster area.

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal in that meeting in Okwang was the first person to begin quarreling with Prof. Latigo.  So, I want this issue displayed on the Table and we scrutinize it and that is the reason, which sparked all the fire.  I am telling you from the bottom of my heart, my colleagues did not go to consult in good faith.  They just went to poison the minds of the Acholi people because of the issue of the land. I want to get the reply and take it back to the Acholi people, because people will demonstrate and come to Kampala here.  This is briefly what I want to say about what took place in the Northern Region.  The beating of the Members of Parliament is not correct.  They should have taken them under another law, but not beating them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, honourable members, I have really listened very carefully, hon. Ogenga in his first statement introduced one dimension, the minister has introduced a second dimension, hon. Santa has introduced a third dimension.  In my view, this is a matter, which requires investigation. However much we continue talking about it here, it will not be solved.  So can we ask our Committee on Defense to investigate this matter –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO:  Madam Speaker, Committee on Defense is responsible for UPDF. The people who are involved in this saga are UPDF and Members of Parliament. We form an independent Committee of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I have no problem with that.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Motion, motion –(Interruption)

4.52
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Madam speaker, before a motion comes in, I have been a subject of contention, and by the fact that I still have 50 more years to live in this world –(Laughter)- by the fact that I am to live longest in this House, I have to make a submission in line with what would appear in the Hansard and for posterity.  

Madam Speaker, hon. Odonga Otto is the MP for Aruu County and one of the things I fear most is my courage.  I never lie in my life and that explains the ordeals I go through.  On the 22nd November in my constituency where I am the area Member of Parliament, in the eyes of 6000 people in the IDPs, their Member of Parliament and four others were subjected to cattle discipline by members of the Uganda Peoples Defense Forces.  Cattle discipline, of course, if you beat a professor what other action do you expect?  He has now reached the epitome of knowledge; you would not induce any sense into him by beating –(Laughter).  

Madam Speaker, one important thing happened in Acholi Bur that the whole country has to know.  I went to the Army barracks with hon. Ocula because I felt the manner in which we were beaten was not right and I felt the Army was still responsible.  From the time my car stopped in the center to the time we were beaten and pushed out, the whole incident took four minutes and 50 seconds.  We were just ordered to get back into the car that it was under order that we should not step on the ground.  In my home area even if I went home to sleep it was a standard order.  

I went to the barracks and met one professional Captain and he asked, “Is it true the 2nd  lieutenant beat you?”  Then we showed him the injuries and the blood that was pouring out of honourable Ocula’s neck.  Then the Captain ordered three Kadogos to go and bring that 2nd Lieutenant.  I was with him at the university; he could not believe MPs were beaten.  He said, “Hon. Otto, I just asked this 2nd Lieutenant to stop the rally.”  Now when these soldiers started running from the barracks to bring that 2nd Lieutenant, the only excuse he had in mind to save him from being beaten in the Army detach was that hon. Otto pushed him to the ground, and then the Kadogos acted. 

From now to the time, I am no longer a citizen of this earth.  I did not push or even touch that 2nd lieutenant of the UPDF.  I was not even the first to be beaten.  When I saw soldiers carrying sticks, I run to the 2nd Lieutenant and called him. I said, “Please come.”  Then we went and stood 20 meters away.  I said. “Now save my visitors from being harassed because it is going to create a very bad impression of the kind of respect I have in the village.”  As I was still talking they started beating Prof. Latigo. 

It is unfortunate if a whole system of Government with intelligence and counter intelligence would bring such information to the Minister of Defence. The President now has a different point of view on this very story.  When we met the President, he said, “ You Acholi warriors, why are you beating my soldiers?”  But when we left the meeting, the President said, “I think this cannot be true.” I asked the President, “Mr President, through the Speaker of Parliament, can you stop the statement being presented in Parliament until your investigation is complete?“ It is a very big surprise, I hear today the Minister of Defence was even told the same thing, but he has gone ahead.  So, he has told a lie in front of this Parliament.

Now, Madam Speaker, I would say this, if anyone ever goes to Acholibur- I even requested the President, I said, “Mr President, can we go and address a rally together, because I now look a fool in that area.”  They would have killed me, because I refused to run.  How can I run in front of people who voted for me? (Laughter)  

Madam Speaker, I did not touch, beat or even insult any UPDF soldier.  As I talk now, I have an injury in the left eye and sooner than later I will be going for an eye operation in Germany, courtesy of this UPDF soldier who is being exonerated.  Now as I sit, I say, “we shall not be the last.  Of all of us here, I do not think I will be the first for my casket to be brought to this House.  There are many who will be on the list.

4.59
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke county, Lira): Madam Speaker, in view of what has transpired in this House since the statement by hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo and the debate by Members of Parliament, as well as now the statement of the Minister of Defence, which has been described as a lie by the four victims, it is vitally important for this House that the truth must be established.  It is also vitally important for the country at large that we must arrive at the truth.  The truth is not going to come now from an institution, which is implicated.  The Members of Parliament are from us, the Army is from the Executive, it is therefore absolutely necessary that we find an independent, impartial body to investigate this matter and come with the truth.   

Motion for a Resolution of Parliament for appointment of a Judicial inquiry into the Acholibur incident of the 22 November 2004, involving UPDF soldiers and the four Members of Parliament;  

Whereas four Members of Parliament were beaten by UPDF soldiers on the 22 November 2004 at Acholi Bur; 

And Whereas the Members of Parliament and the Minister of Defence have made statement conflicting as they are to Parliament on the incident; 

Noting that the incident seriously impacts and affects the relationship and institutions of the Executive, Parliament and the Army, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

1.That a Judicial inquiry headed by a Judge of the Court of Appeal be appointed to inquire into the full circumstances regarding the Acholibur incident of the 22 November 2004, which led to the beating of the four Members of Parliament by the UPDF soldiers and to authenticate the contents of the two statements made to Parliament by the Members of Parliament and Minister of Defence; 

2. That a Judge do report to Parliament within 60 days of its findings and recommendations. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now hon. Omara Atubo, in principle I now have a problem with a Judicial Commission of Inquiry.  However, we are in a very active period when members will continuously require to move back and forth in their constituencies, I do not know who will fund that Commission of Inquiry, I do not know how long they are going to take, they may report in 2007.  I do not want us to lose control of this process and time is of the essence.  I would rather we have a hand in the process.

MR ATUBO: Madam Speaker, my motion is subject to amendment to the wisdom of the House.  The most important point is that we have an inquiry, an independent inquiry; and in my own wisdom, I thought that since there is this conflicting information from the Members of Parliament as Members from this institution of Parliament, and from the Executive represented by the Minister of Defence, you cannot have any one of them inquiring into the matter again. So, in my wisdom I thought we get an independent outsider to do this.

Furthermore, Madam Speaker, while you are debating other matters in all this, let us bear in mind that this is not the first time for Parliament to appoint this inquiry, we had the Ogola Commission of Inquiry into the UCB, so, it is not something new.

MRS MUKWAYA:  Madam Speaker, while I agree that there must be an inquiry, but I think we have appeared before court and we have established that we are an independent arm of the State, and we should regulate our things.  So, if now we set a precedent of calling in the Judiciary to regulate us, how shall we get out of another arm of State managing our affairs.  So, I want to move an amendment in view of separation of powers and as a Member of Parliament I would want to see an independent inquiry done by a Select Committee of this House.

MS ALASO:  Madam Speaker, I appreciate the proposal by the hon. Minister of Justice.  The clarification I want to obtain is to do with the other Select Committee we put in place to investigate the beating of some of the Members of this House, which occurred in Jinja, I wonder when it comes?  Because my fear is, if we just put it on, and then we do not have a report at the end of the day, it will not help us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, honourable member, yesterday I had the chair of that Committee in my Office, he showed me the first draft of the report, it will be before this House next week, that one I have been assured.  

Concerning Election Violence, it is on the Order paper; yes it is.  Let us address this matter, you leave PAFO and Violence, they are already catered for, they have been indicated since last week as business to follow and they will come.

5.02
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank my colleague hon. Omara Atubo for his motion and I appreciate the amendment proposed by hon. Janet Mukwaya. I want to second and support the amendment by hon. Janet Mukwaya, because as she rightly pointed out, we have separation of powers.  This Parliament has capacity to investigate anything, even matters involving Parliaments, objectively, clearly and without any prejudice.  This will not be the first one to be conducted.  As a matter of fact, as you know, Madam Speaker, we have our own committee of discipline; we have the capacity even to discipline ourselves. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that we go ahead with the appointment of a Select Committee, because what we heard this afternoon, to me was very embarrassing.  Statements given by the Minister were so contradictory.  The Minister said the report he received was that one Member of Parliament beat up a soldier and then he turns out that it was a different Member of Parliament who was beaten and you have a problem of reconciling why the soldier did not beat the person who beat him and rather beat a different Member of Parliament.  So, there are all sorts of contradictions, which have got to be put right.  Therefore, I support the proposal that we set up the Select Committee.  Thank you.

5.07
MR EMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the amendment by hon. Minister.  This hon. House has independent Members of Parliament who can conduct an investigation and give a credible report to this House in case we have doubts about what hon. Ogenga Latigo or honourable Minister has said before us.  

Madam Speaker, we would have a problem, like the Minister did say, of managing an exercise which will not be within the precincts of this Parliament and within the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament.  Creating up a Judicial Commission, Madam Speaker, will be restricted by the budget, by the time constraint and the only way we can move and have an effective inquiry is when we take into time factor and time consideration.

Madam Speaker, first of all, given what has been said, it is painful.  We would have loved to continue with the debate so that we make certain statements independent as Members of Parliament.  But having a committee within Parliament will also create a better opportunity for us as, Members of Parliament, to give a credible opinion, observation of what the law should say and also create and reconcile positions that could have strayed this House apart. 

Madam Speaker, I want to second the amendment that we set up a Select Committee of this House that should be given a specific terms of reference and the specific timeframe within which to report and we beg that resources must be put at its disposal so that this exercise can expeditiously be done so that the integrity of this House and Members of Parliament can be protected.  Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think no one has spoken against further investigation of this matter.  So can I put the question?  I put the question – (Interruption) 

MR ATUBO: Madam Speaker, I want to concede.  He is aware I moved a motion and the Minister of Justice did come out with a wise amendment.  It is only prudent and supported by esteemed members like hon. Dombo. It is only proper that I respond by honourably conceding to the amendment, and since I have honourably conceded to the amendment, it is now up to you, Madam Speaker, to put the question.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I want to put the question.  I put the question that the motion as moved by hon. Omara Atubo and amended by hon. Janat Mukwaya be approved by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, we shall name the committee very shortly.

Honourable members, I indicated that my communication today will come into parts, I want now to deal with the second part of my communication, and this relates to the Referendum and Other Provisions Bill, which has been under consideration.  

On Thursday, last week, the hon. Member for Rukiga, hon. Sabiiti, raised objection to the Referendum and Other Provisions Bill, and his objection was raised as a away of guidance. He wanted guidance on the question whether Article 74 of the Constitution had been declared as good as dead by the Constitutional Court.  Hon. Sabiiti relied on the Constitutional Petition No.5 of 2002 and Constitutional Petition No.7 of 2002.  

The parties in Constitutional Petition No.5 of 2002 were Mr Paul K. Ssemogerere, hon. Kasiano Wadri, hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, hon. Winnie Byanyima, Mr Sam K. Njuba and hon. Reagan Okumu.

The following Judges handled the Petition:
Justice Galdino Okello, Justice Mpagi Bahigaine, Justice G. Ingwawo, Justice Amos Twinomujuni and Justice Christine Kitumba.

The following were the issues framed and agreed by the court as matters on which they required adjudication:

1.Whether or not Section 18 and 19 of the Political Parties Organizations Act imposed unjustifiable restrictions or limitations on the activities of Political Parties and Organizations.

2.Whether or not Section 18 and 19 of the Political Parties and Organizations Act rendered Political Parties and Organizations non-functional and inoperative.  

3.Whether Section 18 and 19 of that same Act were inconsistent with Article 75 of the Constitution and established one party state, namely, the Movement.

4.Whether or not Section 18 and 19 of that Act were inconsistent with the following Articles:  Article 20, Article 29 1(a), 29(b), 29(d) and 29(e); also Article 29, Sub-article 2(a); Article 43, Sub-article 1, 43 2(c); Article 71; Article 73, Sub-article 2 and Article 286 of the Constitution. 

5.Whether the same Section 18 and 19 of the Political Parties and Organizations Act contravene the International Human Rights Conventions mentioned in the petition and if so, whether that rendered the sections un constitutional.

6.Whether or not the Act was discriminatory contrary to Article 21 of the Constitution.  

Honourable members, in this petition, those were the six issues framed by the Council for both sides together with the court. 

Having heard from both parties, the court held as follows:

1.That Section 18 and 19 of that Act imposed unjustifiable restrictions and limitations on the activities of Political Parties and Organizations contrary to Article 73(2) of the Constitution.

2.That Section 18 and 19 of that Act did render Political Parties and Organizations non functional and inoperative.

3.That Section 18 and 19 of that Act in effect establishes a one party state in favour of the Movement Political Organization contrary to Article 75 of the Constitution.  That Section 18 and 19 of the Act were inconsistent with Articles 20 Sub Article 2, 29 Sub Article 1(d) and 29 Sub Article 1(e) as well as Article 43 Sub Article 1, Article 43 Sub Article 2(c).  

They however ruled that those two provisions, Section 18 and 19 of that Act, were not inconsistent with Article 20 Sub Article 1, Article 29 Sub Article (a) and (b) and Article 29, Sub Article 2(a) of the Constitution. 

The International Human Rights conventions mentioned in the petition were ruled as not being part of the Constitution of Uganda.  Therefore, that provision of an Act of Parliament could not be interpreted against them.  In the view of the court that issue was misconceived.  It would appear counsel actually abandoned issue No. 5 and the court said, “we have not been addressed on the unconstitutionality of the entire Act; we, therefore, make no finding on that issue.”

The effect of these findings is that punitive acts, Section 18 and 19 of the Political Parties and Organizations Act contravene the Constitution and accordingly the petition was allowed in course in favour of the petitioners.  Justice Gardena Okello read the lead judgment in that petition on behalf of the entire court on 21 March 2003.  

Honourable members, will note there was never the issue of Article 74 either being presented for adjudication nor was any finding made in respect of it. I repeat in the case cited by hon. Sabiiti, there was never an issue of Article 74 being considered or being adjudicated upon.  

However, in the course of arguments in court, the Judges observed that the actions and deeds of the Movement system were similar to those of a political party, but there was no specific finding to the effect that the Movement system had either expired or been outlawed.  The court did not pronounce itself on that matter; they just said they have got conduct, which is like that of a political party.

The second case on which hon. Sabiiti relied was constitutional petition No. 7 of 2002.  There the parties were Dr James Rwanyarare, Haji Badru Wegulo, hon. Yusuf Nsambu, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, Mr James Garuga Musinguzi, Maj. Rubaramira Ruranga, Mr Chapa Karuhanga, Mr Hussein Kyenjo and Dr John Jean Barya.  That petition was heard by the following quorum of Judges: Justice Mpagi Bahigaine, Justice Engawo, Justice Tinomujuni, Justice Christine Kitumba and Justice Constance Byamugisha.

The following were the issues framed and agreed upon by the counsel and the court:

1. Whether a definition of a political organization under Section 2, Sub Section 1 and 2 of the Political Parties and Organizations Act is inconsistent with and contravenes Article 21 and 75 of the Constitution and is null and void.

2. Whether Section 6, Sub Section 2 and 3 and Sub Section 4 of the Political Parties and Organizations Act is inconsistent with and contravenes Article 20, Article 21, Article 29(1)(a), (b), (d) and (e) and also contravenes Article 38, Article 270 of the Constitution and its null and void.

3. Whether Section 5, sub Section 1(c) and 4 of the same Act were inconsistent with and contravened Article 20, Article 21 Sub Article 1 and 2 and 4(c), Article 29(1), Sub Article (a), (b) and (d) and (e), Article 38, Article 43, Article 75 and Article 270 of the Constitution and were therefore also null and void.

4. Whether Section 8 of the Political Parties and Organization is inconsistent with and contravenes Article 20, Article 21, Article 29 Sub Article 1(a)(b) and (c), Article 38, Article 43, Article 270 of the Constitution and its therefore null and void.

5. Whether Section 10 of the same Act is inconsistent with and contravenes Article 1, Article 20, Article 21 Sub Article 1, Sub Article 4, Article 29(1) Sub Article (a), (b), (d) and (e), Article 29 Sub Article 2, Article 38, Article 43, Article 71(c) and 75 and 270 of the Constitution and is also null and void.  

6. Whether Section 10 of the Political Parties and Organizations Act is inconsistent with and contravenes Article 1, Article 20, Article 21(1) and 21(3), 21(4)(c), Article 21(a), (b) and (d) and Sub Article 1,2,3 and 4.

7. Whether Section 13(b) of that Act was inconsistent with and contravened Article 1(4) of the Constitution, Article 20, Article 21, Article 29(1)(a), (b), (d) and (e).  Article 29 Sub Article 2, Article 29(b), Article 38, Article 43, Article 71(c) and Article 270 of the Constitution. 

Among the arguments raised in this petition was of the view that the Movement, which was set up by the Movement Act 1997, had attributes of a political party so that the Political Parties and Organizations Act should also bind it.  

After arguments were presented, the court held as follows:

• That the petition failed on issue number 1, number 2, number 3 and number 4.  

• The petition succeeded on issues No. 5, 6 and 7.  Consequently, a number of sections were nullified, including sections 18 and 19, section 10 as well and the order which had been given previously in respect of Section 6, Sub section 3 and 4 of that Act were also vacated, because Article 269 to which they related expired as soon as the Act was enacted.

• Section 18 and 19 had already been nullified under Constitutional petition No. 5 of 2002, therefore there was no need for court to consider them; they were no longer there.

The restrictions imposed under Section 10(4), (8) and (9) and (13) were also nullified in that petition and the parties were ordered to register. 

Hon. Members, again no finding was made with regard to Article 74 of the Constitution as alleged by hon. Sabiiti. So even in that second judgment upon which the hon. Member relied there was no issue relating to Article 74 of the Constitution and there was never therefore any adjudication in relation to Article 74 of the Constitution.  As far as we are concerned no court has made a ruling on that Article 74; it has not been touched by any court.  

Furthermore, the issue of whether there is no political system was settled by the Supreme Court in constitutional Appeal No.3 of 2004; that appeal was by the Attorney General v. P.K. Semwogerere and Zachary Olum. The corum in that court was the Chief Justice, Justice Odoki, Justice Oder, Justice Tsekoko, Justice Karakora, Justice Mulenga, Justice Kanyeihamba and Justice Ogoola.  In the judgment of the court, this is what the court said- and I am quoting verbatim. The Chief Justice, Justice Odoki, wrote the lead judgment. I quote:

“We have considered if in the absence of the valid law passed pursuant to Article 271(4) of the Constitution the referendum can be construed as validly held on authority of Article 269 and 271 sub article 3.  Article 69 generally entrenches the right of the people of Uganda to adopt the political system of their choice.  While Article 271(3) fixes the period in mandatory terms as to when the people would for the first time exercise their right to a referendum” 

He continues.  

“In our view, it could be so construed if the referendum was free and fair in compliance with the stipulation in Article 69. The constitutional court found that because of the legal regime prevailing at the material time, political parties were not free to canvass for the multi-party political system to which they subscribed and concluded that referendum held on 29 June 2000 could not have been free and fair as required by Article 69.  While we would not fault that finding as a postulate, we hold that it was not a proper basis for granting the relief of the declaration sought.  

Notwithstanding the uncontradicted evidence of hon. Zachary Olum to the effect that he and other members of the DP were on a number of occasions and in diverse places prevented by the police from holding public meetings.  The actual conduct of the referendum and the results thereof were not challenged nor inquired into to, to determine whether it was or not free and fair.  As a consequence of a referendum, the movement political system was retained in place and the affairs of State have been conducted on that basis for over four years.  To declare the referendum a nullity would have far reaching consequences.  

In our view these were compelling circumstances in respect of which the constitutional court ought to have exercised its discretion to decline granting the second declaration.”  

So in the circumstances, hon. Members, the judgment of Supreme Court still stands, the judgment is dated September 2004 and it says that there is a political system which was decided upon in a referendum by the population not withstanding the methods by which it came.  

Secondly, I would just like for the record to inform the Members that even though no appeals have been made against petition No.5 of 2002 and No.7 of 2002, the law of precedence dictates that the binding judgment of the country today is that of Supreme Court which was handed down in September this year.  Therefore, even if no appeal has been referred, the law is that as stated by the Supreme Court.  So in the circumstances, hon. Members, I will not appoint a committee to look into this matter because Article 74 has never been adjudicated upon, and in my view it will be an exercise in futility.  I, therefore, rule that we proceed with the Referendum and Other Provisions Bill.  Thank you.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on a matter of procedure.  Notwithstanding what you have read to us in substance, I do not want to dispute it, but I am seeking your guidance on the matter of the Rule 65 of our Rules of procedure. 

Madam Speaker, it is well known and it is established in the Rules of Procedure that once a Speaker has made a ruling on any matter, it shall stand firm and the only way you can reverse it, is to come up with a substantive motion with notice to unravel it.  As rightly I can read it, Madam Speaker, the last relevant section: “The Speaker or the Chairperson of a committee shall be responsible for the observance of the Rules or order in the House and committees respectively and his or her decision upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House except upon a substantive motion made after notice.”  So that seems to me that the Government has made an appeal.  You have made, Madam Speaker, a decision to differ this matter and refer this matter to a select committee.  So the only way –I am just reading a rule and I am seeking guidance from the Speaker- (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let me just give you the guidance.  This is what the rule says. “The Speaker or the Chairperson of the committee shall be responsible for the observance of rules or order in the House and committee respectively and his or her decision upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House except upon a substantive motion made after notice.”  I am the Speaker; I am not the House.  It was my decision and I have reviewed it myself- (Interruption)- Yes, I am the Speaker and not the House.  Hon. Matembe –(Interruption)

MR AWORI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance; you are the Speaker.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: When I find that a member has misled this House to say that Article 74 was adjudicated and declared null and void and I read the judgments of all those courts and I find it was not done, I cannot proceed on that premise. 

MRS MATEMBE: Of course, for me I am not here to challenge the Speaker but I am the Vice chairperson of the Rules and Privileges Committee; and in this House, we follow and we are guided by these rules and even the Speaker is guided by these rules.  Now, last time, when we were about to complete this law, an hon. Member raised an issue which we discussed and finally, the hon. Speaker made a ruling that in fact, the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs backed up by some hon. Members whom she was going to appoint will study the judgments in relation to the Referendum Bill and then on Thursday, they will report to us as to whether there is substance in that matter which had arisen.   Now when we sat here, it appears to me that, Madam Speaker, you are the one now who have studied the judgment –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes.

MRS MATEMBE:  Madam Speaker, you are hearing me –(Laughter)- some people are disorderly, they do not know the rules.  So, Madam Speaker, it appears to me that instead of going on with the decision which you took with us here in this House- yes, you have gone and studied the judgments and you are now reporting to us but the Rules which I hold, which I am charged with- yes as the Vice Chairperson of Committee on Rules and Privileges, I am supposed to give guidance.  They tell me, on this very Rule, which we have read to you, Madam Speaker, and it says, “Speaker or Chairperson.”  Speaker, when you are sitting as the Speaker of the House or Chairperson when you are sitting as the chair of the Committee.  That day when you made the decision you were sitting as the Speaker of the House and this point says that “The Speaker,” -you, Madam Speaker, that time or the Chairperson of the Committee but you were the Speaker- “shall be responsible for the observance of rules or order in the House and Committee respectively and his/her decision upon any matter shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House except upon a substantive motion made after notice.” 

My interpretation of this rule is that the ruling which you made cannot be reversed, yes, cannot be appealed against, cannot be reviewed even by the House unless a substantive motion is brought here after notice.  This is what these rules tell me.  Now I would like to know  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Matembe, listen. Last week, the case hon. Sabiiti made was that we were dealing with Article 74, which had been declared null and void in two judgments.  In order for me to give instructions to the Committee, I needed to read the judgments first, instruct them what to investigate. When I read the judgments there is nothing –  Hon. Matembe, I do not think it is fair to waste the time of the Parliament on things which are not true; the judgments are here.  Hon. Matembe please, the judgments are here, Article 74 has not been adjudicated upon.  I think it will be a waste of time to investigate something the court has not decided, yes-  (Applause) Hon. Members, that is why I read the issues raised in the judgments and the holding of the court in detail, I had a reason for reading them.  

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I just want to support the Chair, much as it is not my job but the people should not take other people for granted.  I stood on this Floor and stated exactly what you have read.  Yes, and senior lawyers like hon. Ben Wacha stood up –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Once again we go back to the rules, once a Speaker has made a ruling on the matter, there shall be no further debates.  We have accepted your ruling on the matter and I think we proceed according to your direction but no further debates.  

Madam Speaker, in the light of my observations, is my hon. colleague in charge of constitutional affairs in order to continue with the topic on which you have ruled?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No she is not.  

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REFERENDUM AND OTHER PROVISIONS BILL, 2004

Clause 3

5.41
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Chairperson, we were on Clause (3), (4) and (5).  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What do you have to say about Clause (3), (4) and (5)?  

MRS MUKWAYA: We stood over Clause (3), (4) as in the Bill and Clause (5) on page 2 of the report, which is item (5) for just the vote; we have debated but because there was no quorum we are going straight to voting.  

CAPT. GUMA: I am standing up to put up a proposal whether it is in order to proceed when we have no quorum?

THE DDEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We take a count; it is okay.  Hon. Members, there are 81 Members in the Chamber, so let us resume the House and ring the bell.  

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.43
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you ring the bell for 5 minutes?

(The Bell was rung)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are now 70 Members in the Chamber.  So on that note let us adjourn to tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow afternoon.

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8 December 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)


  

